THE WORKS OF WILLIAM PALEY, D.D.
Public domain. Scanned from the Internet Archive copy (https://archive.org/details/workswilliampal04palegoog): complete in one volume (Philadelphia: J. J. Woodward, 1831), printed verbatim from the original editions. Contains the Life, Principles of Moral and Political Philosophy, Evidences of Christianity, Natural Theology, Tracts, Horae Paulinae, the Clergyman's Companion, and Sermons.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

THB


WORKS


OF


WILLIAM PALEY,  D.D.


II

ARCHDEACON  OF  CARLISLE.

COlfTAIiniCG


HIS  LIFE,  MORAL  AND  POLITICAL  PHILOSOPHY,  EVIDENCES  OF  CHRISTIANITY
NATURAL  THEOLOGY,  TRACTS,  HOILE  PAULUUE,  CLERGYMAN'S
COMPANION,  AND  SERMONS,


PRINTED  VERBATIM  FROM  THE  ORIGINAL  EDITIONS.


COMPLETE  IN  ONE  VOLUME


PHILADELPHIA:
PUBLISHED  BY  J.  J.  WOODWARD,  No.  18  MINOR  STREET.

STEREOTYPED  BY  L.  JO&MBON.

1681.


M


CONTENTS.


LOT  OF  TOE  AUTHOR


f<C


MOBAL  AND  POLITICAL  FHIL0eOFH7.


tlSttCB


, X3d
.  lxiil


BOOK  I.

L  SefaUtaB  and  Use  of  the  Sdence
IL  The  Law  of  Honoor

III.  The  Law  of  the  Land

IV.  The

▼i

VH.  Vina*


97
lb.
98
ib.
lb.


book  a


GOAT.  I.  Tin  Question,  WTm  mn  I  oMgU  to  ft*?

sssiesitf  7  considered ....  SB
IL  Whet  we  mean  to  say  when  a  Man  is

•k&g ti  to  do  a  thing ....  37
m.  TheQaeetion,  WkymmlMigoiUUtf
«T  wdt  rammea .  Ik

IV.  The  Witt  of  God 36

V.  The  Divine  Benevolence .  ib.

VI.  Utihty .30

VfLTtefecessity  of  General  Rales .  jfc
Till.  The  Consideration  of  General  Con-

sesnences  pursued • • • •  49

H-onufht 4i

X  The  Iftiston  of  Rights  ....  49

XL  Thi  Geneve*  Rigjte  of  Mnaldmd  . .  49


BOOK  11L


PAMTL
<T  aWefiei  Dm&g  wkuk  are  dsCirsrfasls.

^AP-LOfftwerty 49

IL  The  Use  of  the  Institution  of  Property IK
JL  The  History  of  Property ... 49

VLODntraets ...... 91

▼JI.  Contracts  of  Sale ....  lb.

VOL  Oeutraeto  of  Hazard  . . . . a

IX  Contracts  of  landing  of  inconsumable
Property 93

X.  Contracts  learning  the  lending  of


CHAP.  XI.  Contracts  of  Labour— Service  fw

XII.  Ctontraet*  of  Labour— Commissions 99

XIII.  Contracts  of  Labour— Partnership 97

XIV.  Contracts  of  Labour— Oflkes .

XV.  Lies

XVL  Oaths

XVII.  Oath  to  Evidence . . .
XVUI.  Oath  of  Allegiance  . .

XIX.  Oath  against  Bribery  in  the  Election
of  Members  of  Parliament .

XX.  Oath  against  Simony
XXL  Oaths  to  observe  Local  Statutes
XXII.  Subscription  to  Articles  of  Religion
XXIIL  Wills ....


is.


91
lb.


•h.
94


BOOK  III.

PART  It

0/ Jgrfsdt*  DuUm  tasisn  art  ■■sVrmfaess.

CHAP.L  Charity . .  . . . .99

IL  Charity— The  Treatment  of  ou  Pusses

tics  and  Dependants ....  lb.

m.  Slavery • . .  ib.

IV.  Charity— Professional  Asststlnre .  97

V.  Charity— Pecuniary  Bounty  ...  98

VL  Resentment 70

VII.  Anger 71

VIIL  Revenge is,

IX.  Duelling 79

X  Litigation 73

XL  Gratitude 74

XIL  Slander 73


BOOK  III.

PAMTUL

Qf  Hifnrtm  D*tj*  wkick  neatt  fnm  tts  msitflssiis  0/
fastest.


CHAF.  L  Of  the  PoUto  Use  of

tions

H.  Fornication

ITL  Seduction

IV.  Adultery

V.  Incest

VI.  Polygamy

VII.  Of  Divorce
Vin.  Marriage
IX.  Of  the  Duty  of  Parents
X  The  Bights  of  Parents
XL  m  Duty  of  Children


BOOK  IV.

DUCTS  TO  OURSSLTBI*

CHAP.  I.  The  Rights  of  Salf-bemnca
IL  Drunkenness  •
IIL  Suicide . .


Initltn-


78
79
T7
18
79
89

ii

88

ib.


99

91


CONTENTS.


BOOK  V.


CHAP.  I.  Division  of  time  Duties  . . .  ^4

XL  Ofthe  Duty  ud  of  ti»  Efficacy  of  Prayer,
so  far  as  the  Mine  appear  from  the

Light  of  Nature 05

III.  Of  the  Duty  and  Efflcaey  of  Prayer,  as

represented  in  Scripture  . . 86

TV.  OfPrivate  Prayer,  Family  Prayer,  and

Public  Worabip 07

V.  Of  Forms  of  mjaer  in  Public  Worship  00
VT.  Of  the  Use  of  Sabbatical  Institutions  101
VH.  Of  the  Scripture  Account  of  Sabbatical

Institutions 108

Vm.  By  what  Acts  and  Omissions  the
Duties  of  the  Christian  Sabbath  is

violated 105

IX.  Of  Reverencing  the  Deity .  .100


BOOK  VL

axnmm  or  political  kmowuemc

CHAP.  L  Of  the  Origin  of  Civil  Government .  %
IL  How  Subjection  to  Civil  Government  is

maintained 110

m.  The  Duty  of  Submission  to  Civil  Go-
vernment explained  .ill

IV.  The  Duty  ef  Civil  Obedience,  as
in  the  Christian  Scriptures  .

V.  Of  Civil  Liberty ....

VI.  Of  different  Forms  of  Government

VII.  Of  the  British  Constitution

VIII.  Of  the  Administration  of  Justice

IX.  Of  Crimes  and  Punishments

X.  Of  religious  Establishments  and  of

leiation
XL  Of  Population  and  Provision ;  and

Agriculture  and  Commerce,

vient  thereto
Xn.  Of  War.  and  of  Military


.  11*
.  117
.  110
.  1»
.  1»
.  130
To-
.  148
of


159
100


HORiE  PAULINA:

THE  TRUTH  OF  THE  SCRIPTURE  HISTORY  OF  OT.  PAUL  EVINCED.


CHAP.  I.  Exposition  of  the  Argument  .
II.  The  Bnistle  to  the  Romans  .
m.  The  First  Epistle  to  the  Corinthians


109
170


IV.  Second  Bnistle  to  the  Corinthians .  181

V.  The  Epistle  to  the  Galatians


VI.  The  Epistle  to  the  Ephesia

VII.  The  Epistle  to  the  Philippiana
vm.  The  Epistle  to  the  Coloeaians


CHAP.  IX.  The  First  Epistle  to  the  Tbessakntfa&sSU
X.  Second  Epistle  to  the  Thessaloniane  .  814
XL  The  First  Epistle  to  Timothy  .810

XII.  The  Second  Epistle  to  Timothy  . .  818

XIII.  The  Epistle  to  Titus  .  . .881
XTV.  The  Epistle  to  Philemon .  .883

XV.  The  Subscriptions  of  the  Epistles .894

XVI.  The  Conclusion 880


THE  CLERGYMAN'S  COMPANION  IN  VISITING  THE  SICK.


PujM

SECT.  I.  The  Assistance  that  is  to  be  given  to  Sick

and  Dying  Persons  by  the  Minii*»ry  of  the  Clergy  834
SECT.  It  Rules  for  the  Manner  of  visiting  the  Sick  ib.
SECT.  Bl.  Of  Instructing  the  Sick  Man  in  the  Na-
ture of  Repentance,  end  Confession  of  his  Sins 835
Arguments  and  Exhortations  to  move  the  Sick

Man  to  Repentance  andConfession  of  his  Sins  ib.
Arguments  and  general  Head*  of  Discourse,  by
way  of  Consideration,  to  awaken  a  stupid
Conscience,  and  the  careless  Sinner • .837
SECT.  IV.  Of  applying  spiritual  Remedies  to  the
unreasonable  Fears  ana  Dejections  of  the  Sick 838
Considerations  to  be  offered  to  Persons  under

Religious  Melancholy 839

*  An  Exercise  against  Despair ....  840

SECT.'V.  Considerations  against  Presumption .  841

The  Order  for  the  Visitation  of  the  Sick  . .  848

The  Communion  of  the  Sick  .  844

Proper  Collects  that  may  be  used  with  any  of

the  Prayers  for  the  Sick 847


mutto  rot  too  not,  VIS.

A  general  Prayer  for  the  Acceptance  of  our  Devo-
tions for  the  Sick . . . T . . .848


Particular  Prayers  for  the  Sick
A  larger  Form  of  Prayer  for  the  Sick
Proper  Psalms  for  the  Sick
A  Declaration  of  Forgiveness  .


.848
.840


OCCASIOIUL  MLAYmi  FOE  TBS  SICK,  VIS.

A  Prayer  for  a  Person  in  the  beginning  of  his  Sick-
ness ....... .890

For  Thankfulness  in  Sickness  .  ib.

For  a  blessing  on  the  Means  used  for  a  Sick  Par-
son's Recovery ib.

For  a  Bick  Person,  when  there  appears  some  Hope
of  Recovery 251

In  behalf  of  the  Sick  Person,  when  he  finds  any
Abatement  of  his  Distemper . .  .  ib.

For  one  who  is  dangerously  ill  •  ib.

Fur  a  Sick  Person  when  Sickness  continues  long
upon  him ik.

For  the  Grace  of  Patience,  and  a  suitable  Behaviour
in  a  Sick  Person  to  Friends  and  Attendants .  858

For  Spiritual  Improvement  by  Sickness  .  ib.

For  a  Sick  Person  who  is  about  to  make  his  Will ib.

For  a  Stck  Penitent ».

For  a  Sick  Person  who  intends  to  receive  the  blessed
Sacrament 853

For  a  Sick  Person  that  wants  Sleep . . .  in.


CONTENTS.


T»  ilwwitha  Danger  in  appwhefiaan  bycices*
manes 254

Ttxtfmoa^inciiMeiMibki  on  a  Sickbed . ,  ib.

rw  em  vino  hath  been  a  notoriously  wicked  Liver  ib.

Iter  one  who  is  hardened  and  impenitent  .  855

far  &8kk  Woman  that  la  with  GhUd .  .  ib.

For  a  Womaa  in  the  Time  of  her  Travail  .  ib,

Fbr  a  Woman  who  cannot  be  delivered  without
Mealty  and  Hazard S56

Per  Grace  and  Assistance  lor  a  Woman  after  De-
fivery,  hot  still  in  Danger ib.

FwamckCmki ib.

For  a  Puses  who.  from  a  stale  of  Health,  is  sud-
denly sezsed  with  the  Symptoms  of  Death . ,257

For  a  Sick  Person,  when  there  appeareth  snail
JiossofSeoovery is.

A  general  Prayer  for  Preparation  and  Readiness
to  «• ib.

Accmawndatory  Prayer  for  a  Bkk  Person  at  the
noma  of  Departure 258

Albany  fbr  a  Bickr>!r»on  at  the  Uma  of  Departure  ib.

Pormef  recommending  the  Soul  to  God,  in  her  De-
parture from  the  Body ib.

A  eoamlatory  Form  of  Devotion  that  may  be  used
vrnh  the  FrieiidsoT  Relation  of  the  Deceased .SB


ssvasnmun  »  sYT&M>nni*jjtY  anus.

A  Prayer  for  a  Person  whose  Dlnets  is  chiefly
hraegm  os  aim  by  some  calamitous  Disaster  or
Lames  of  Estate,  Relations,  or  Friends,  Ac. .960

Per  a  Person  who,  by  any  ealamitons  Disaster,  bath
anAmuyoflns  Bones,  cr  is  very  ninch  braised
aai  hart  in  his  body ib.


For  a  Person  that  to  aflncm*  wim  grievous  Pains
of  hie  Body feu

For  one  who  is  troubled  with  acute  Pains  of  the
Goat,  Stone,  Cbolic,  or  any  other  bodily  Dis-
temper em

For  a  Person  in  the  Small- Pox,  or  any  rack-like
raging  infectious  Disease ib.

For  a  Person  in  a  Consumption,  or  any  lingering
Disease ft.

For  a  Person  who  is  lame  In  hie  Sickness  .  lb.

For  one  that  is  Bed-ridden 903

For  a  Person  troubled  in  Mind,  or  in  Conscience  .  ib.

Another  for  the  same,  or  for  one  under  deep  Melan-
choly and  Dejection  of  Spirit  .  ib.

For  the  earns ib.

For  one  under  fears  and  Doubts  concerning  Me  spi-
ritual Condition,  or  under  perplexing  Thoughts
and  Scruples  about  his  Duty  .  983

For  one  who  ie  disturbed  with  wicked  and  blas-
phemous Thoughts ib.

For  one  who  is  afflicted  with  a  profane  Mistrust  of
Divine  Truths  and  blasphemous  Thoughts  . .  ib.

For  one  under  the  dread  of  God's  Wrath  and  ever-
lasting Damnation tb.

For  a  Lunatic ie.

For  natural  Fools  or  Madmen 964

Proper  Psalms  for  a  Sick  Person  at  Sea  .  .  ib.

A  Prayer  for  a  Sick  Seaman ib.

For  a  Sick  Soldier  or  Seaman 965

A  Prayer  to  be  used  by  a  Person  afflicted  with  a
Distemper  of  long  continuance  .  ib,

A  Prayer  to  be  ua*d  on  the  Death  of  a  Friend .900

A  Prayer  to  be  used  by  a  Person  troubled  in  Mind ib*

A  Prayer  to  be  used  by  an  Old  Parson  .  ib.

For  a  Person  condemned  to  die  • • . ib.

A  Prayer  of  Preparation  for  Death 907

The  Ministration  of  Public  Baptism  of  Infants,  to
be  used  in  Churches lb.

The  Ministration  of  Private  Baptism  of  Cbildmn


A  VIEW  OP  THE  EVIDENCES  OP  CHRISTIANITY.


i*71


PARTL


MlSlVhMOAL  SVTOKlfCS  07  OBBXSTIAntTY,

iTUDtsTuiainsnB»nLoifTiuBTinai*oB


.873


PROPOSITION  L


_  m  satisfactory  evidence  that  many,  pre-
to  be  original  witnesses  of  the  Christian
«,  passed  their  lives  in  labours,  dangers,
aad  aamn^ugs,  voluntarily  undergone  in  attesta-
tion eft?  the  accounts  which  they  delivered,  and
seedy  m  consequence  of  their  belief  of  those  ac-
eeeats:  and  that  they  also  submitted,  from  the
same  motives,  to  new  rules  of  conduct
CHAP.  L  Evidence  of  the  sufferings  of  the  first
of  Christianity,  from  the  aotars  ef  Os


874


tSSi


977


CBAP.  EL  Evidence  of  the  sufferings  of  the  first
■  of  Christianity,  from  Pre/en*  TWti-

r.UL  Indirect  evidence  of  the  raflerings  of

tm  Jmt  nropagntors  of  Christianity,  from  tat

CaUfTlY.  Direct  evidence  of  the  »«-M  . . .960


CHAP.  V.  Observations  upon  the  preceding  <


CBAP.  VL  That  the  story,  for  which  the  first  pro-
pagators of  Christianity  suffered,  was  miraculnu  J
CHAP.  VII.  That  it  was,  in  the  main,  the  story
which  we  have  now  proved  by  indirect  considera-
tions

CHAP.  Yin.  The  same  proved,  from  the  authority

of  our  historical  Scriptures

CHAP.  IX.  Of  the  authenticity  of  the  historical

Scriptures,  in  eleven  Section* ....

Beer.  I.  Quotations  of  the  historical  Scriptures

by  ancient  Christian^  writers ....

Sect.  II.  Of  the  peculiar  respect  with  which  they

were  quoted

Sbct.  Ill  The  Scriptures  were  in  very  early  times

collected  into  a  distinct  volume
Sect.  IV. And distinguished  by  appropriate

names  and  titles  of  respect *
Sect.  V.  Were  publicly  read  and  expounded  in
the  religious  assemblies  of  the  early  Christians
8acT.  VI. Commentaries,  Ac were  anciently

written  upon  the  Scriptures
Sect.  VII.  They  were  received  by  ancient  Chris-

tians  of  different  sects  and  persuasions
Sect.  VIII.  The  fonr  Gospels,  the  Acts  of  the
Apostles,  thirteen  Epistles  of  St.  Paul,  the  First
Epistle  of  John,  and  the  first  of  Peter,  were  re-
ceived without  doubt  by  thorn  who  doubted
concerning  the  other  books  of  our  present  canon
BecT.  IX  Our  present  Gospels  were  considered
by  the  adversaries  of  Christianity,  as  contain.


.964
986

987
901
995
997
304
906
307
ib.
306
310

311


CONTENTS.


PagB

lag  the  Mwntf  npra  which  the  mligion  wu
Sounded 813

flacr.  X.  Formal  catalogues  of  authentic  Scrip-
tuns  were  published,  in  fell  which  our  present
Sacred  histories  were  included  .  .915

finer.  XI-  Time  propositionscannot  be  predicated
of  any  of  ihoee  books  which  are  commonly  call,
td  apocryphal  books  of  the  New  Testament .  ib.
CHAP.  X.  Recapitulation 317


Of  1U  MMCT  nSTOMGAL  BVXOBMCI  09  CHBllTlAjriTY.

PROPOSITION  U.

CHAP.  L  That  there  is  hot  satisfactory  evidence,
that  persons  pretending  to  be  original  witnesses  of
any  other  similar  miracles,  have  acted  in  the  same
manner,  in  attestation  of  the  accounts  which  they
delivered,  and  solely  in  consequence  of  their  bo*
hefofthe  troth  of  those  accounts  .318

CHAP.  U.  Consideration  of  some  specific  instances  324


PART  IT.

QT  THB  AUXILIARY  KVLDSJrCBS  OF  CHKUTUJIXTT.

CHAP.  I.  Prophecy 328

CHAP.  U.  The  Morality  of  the  Gospel . .329
CHAP.  HI.  The  Candour  of  the  Writers  of  the  New
Testament 338


CHAP.  IV.  Identity  of  Christ's  character . .  341
CHAP.  V.  Originality  of  our  Saviour's  character 349
CHAP.  VI.  Conformity  of  the  facta  occasionally
mentioned  or  referred  to  in  Scripture,  with  the
state  of  things  in  those  times,  ss  represented  by
foreign  and  independent  accounts . . . ib.
OH  A  P.  VII.  Umircisned  Coincidences . . .354
(HAP.  VIII.  Of  the  History  of  the  Resurrection 355
CHAP.  IX.  The  Propagation  of  Christianity  .  359

Sect.  II.  Reflections  upon  the  preceding  Account  361
Sect.  Hi.  Of  the  religion  of  Mahomet  .  963


PART  III.

A  BS1IBP  OOMSlDttATlOlf  OF  SOMI  POPVLAE  OBHCTIOM.

CHAP.  I.  The  Discrepancies  between  the  several
Gospels 367

CHAP.  II.  Erroneous  Opinions  imputed  to  the
Apostles 369

CHAP.  III.  The  Connexion  of  Christianity  with
the  Jewish  History 370

CHAP.  IV.  Rejection  of  Christianity . . .371

CHAP.  V.  That  the  Christian  miracles  are  not  re-
cited, or  appealed  to,  by  early  Christian  writers
the  nisei  vrs,  so  fully  or  frequently  as  might  have
been  expected 373

CHAP.  VI.  Want  of  universality  in  the  knowledge
and  reception  of  Christianity,  and  of  greater  __
clearness  in  the  evidence 377

CHAP.  VII.  The  supposed  Effects  of  Christianity 380

CHAP.  VIII.  The  Conclusion 383


NATURAL  THEOLOGY.


Page
CHAP.  1  Bute  of  the  Argument .  .  3r<7

II.  Bute  of  the  Argument  continued  . .  389

III.  Application  of  the  Argument  .  390

IV.  Of  the  Succession  of  Plants  and  Ani-
mate 396

V.  Application  of  the  Argument  continued  397
VL  The  Argument  cumulative  .  .401
VIL  Of  the  Mechanical  and  Immechanical

Parts  and  Functions  of  Animals  and

Vegetables ib.

VIII.  Of  Mechanical  Arrangement  in  the

Human  Frame 404

Of  the  Bones ib.

Of  the  Joints 407

DL  Of  the  Muscles 410

X.  Of  the  Vessels  of  Animal  Bodies  .  .  414
XL  Of  the  Animal  Structure  regarded  as  a

**~~~ 481


CHAP.  XII.  Comparative  Anatomy  .  496

XIII.  Peculiar  Organisations . . .  431

XIV.  Prospective  Contrivance!  . . .  433

XV.  Relations 435

XVI.  Compensation 438

XVII.  The  Relation  of  animated  Bodies  to
Inanimate  Nature 440

XVIII.  Of  Instincts 442

_  XIX.  Of  Insects 446

XX.  Of  Plants 450

XXI.  The  Elements 455

XXII.  Astronomy 456

XXIII.  Of  the  Personality  of  the  Deity .  469

XXIV.  Of  the  Natural  Attributes  of  the
Deity 469

XXV.  Of  the  Unity  of  the  Deity  .  400

XXVI.  Of  the  Goodness  of  the  Deity  . .  470

XXVII.  Conclusion 485


A  DEFENCE  OF  THE  CONSIDERATIONS  ON  THE  PROPRIETY  OF  REQUIRING  A
SUBSCRIPTION  TO  ARTICLES  OF  FAITH  488


REASONS  FOR  CONTENTMENT,  ADDRESSED  TO  THE  LABOURING  PART  OF  THE
BRITISH  PUBLIC . . . , .496


CONTENTS.


SERMONS  ON  PUBLIC  OCCASIONS.


P*g9

SBRMON  1  Caution  n»onnHnend*d  In  the  Use  and
of  Scriptural Language:— A  Ber-
md,  July  17,  1777,  in  the  Cathedral
&  of  Carlisle,  at  the  Visitation  of  the  Right
"fed  Lord  Bishop  of  Carlisle  .500-

rJL  Advice,  addressed  to  the  Young
Chug/  of  the  Diocese  of  Carlisle,  in  a  Sermon,
prase*  at  a  General  Ordination,  bolden  at  Rose
Crnfe.  on  Sunday,  July  90, 1781  .  ...  503
SSEJfON  ILL  A  Distinction  of  Orders  in  the
Chaich  defended  upon  Principles  of  Public  Uti-
lity, ia  a  Sermon,  preached  in  the  Castle-Chapel,
ftihha,  at  the  Consecration  of  John  Law,  D.  D.


SERMON  IV.  The  Use  and  Propriety  of  local  and
occasional  Preaching:— A  Charge,  delivered  to
the  Clergy  of  the  Diocese  of  Carlisle,  in  the  year
1790 .511

SERMON  V.  Dangers  incidental  to  the  Clerical
Character,  stated,  in  a  Sermon,  preached  before
the  University  of  Cambridge,  at  Great  St.  Mary's
Church,  on  Sunday,  July  5,  being  Cc


roent  Sunday ,  S17

SERMON  VL  A  Sermon,  i

at  Durham,  July

request  of  the  J

Judges  of  Assize,  and  the  Grand  Jury  .  .01


1  Sermon,  preached  at  the  Assizes,

ilyS9, 1795;  and  published  at  the

Lord  Bishop,  the  Honourable  the


SERMONS  ON  SEVERAL  SUBJECTS.


Page
Mf  L  Strim****  fa  RoHgian  indispensable
asses  mtt  other  £>ispomitums.—Be  ye  therefore  so-
ber, and  watch  onto  prayer. 1  Pet.  iv.  7. . .535
SERMON  IL  TSssts  for  Ztortum.— But  the  hoar
cometh  and  now  is,  when  the  true  worshippers
small  worship  the  Father  in  spirit  and  in  truth ;
for  the  Father  seeketh  such  to  worship  him.  God
hi  a  spirit ;  and  they  that  worship  him,  must  wor-
ship aim  in  spirit  and  in  troth. John  iv.  23,  34. 530
SERMON  ILL  Tka  L*oo  ef  Gael— We  love  him,  be-

esssehe  first  loved  us. John  iv.  10. .  .534

SERMON  IV.  Meditating  ipsa  Religion.— Have  I
net  ii urn mm nil  thee  in  my  bed;  and  thought
anon  thee  when  I  was  waking?  Psalm  lziii.  7.  536
SBMON  Y.  Qftha  State  after  Death.- Beloved,
new  nee  we  the  sons  of  God;  and  it  doth  not  yet
anssar  what  we  shall  he;  but  we  know  that,
when  he  shall  appear,  we  shall  he  like  him;  for
a*  sknO  see  him  as  be  is. 1  John  iii.  8.  .538

SERMON  VL  On  Purity  of  the  Heart  and  Afec
time  Ptluvod,  now  are  we  the  sons  of  God ;  and
it  doth  not  yet  appear  what  we  shall  be;  but  we
know  that,  when  he  shall  appear,  we  shall  be  like
Men;  for  we  shall  see  him  as  he  is.  And  every
asaa  that  hath  this  hope  in  him  purineth  himself.
even  as  he  is  pure. 1  John  iii.  ft,  3.  .540

SERMON  VLL  Qf  the  Dextrine  of  Conversion.— 1
am  not  come  to  call  the  righteous,  but  sinners,  to
■.ntniance. Matthew  ix.  13.  .548

SERMON  VOL Prayer  in  Imitation  «/  Christ.—
■drew  himself  into  the  wilderness,

Luke  v.  10 546

r  LX  On  Fitud  Piety.— And  Joseph  nou-
1  Ins  father,  and  his  brethren,  and  all  his
r*s  IfeOttsebokL,  with  bread,  according  to  their
' l Genesis  xlvii.  12.  ....  547

'  X.  (Part  I  )—To  think  lose  of  our  Fir-
ore  ef  ear  Sine. — My  sin  is  ever  before

ili.  3. 549

XI (PartlL} 559

■RMON  XII.  Salvation  for  Penitent  8inners.—
Wenefore  I  say  onto  thee.  Her  sins,  which  are
A**ny,  an  forgiven ;  lor  she  loved  much. Luke

viu47. . 555

■RRMOR  Tin.  Shu  of  the  Pothers  upon  the  CMl-
s>nv  Thoa  abaft  not  bow  down  thyself  to  them,
nw  serve  them ;  for  I  the  Lord  thy  God  am  a  Jea-
sjaiCud,  vim'tins-  the  iniquity  of  the  lathers  upon
■he  embhnn  unto  the  third  and  fourth  generation
ef  than  that  ham  DO- Exodon  xx.  5.  .  .556


SERMON  XIV.  Bow  Virtue  produce*  Belief,  sad***
rue  Unbelief— U  any  man  will  do  His  will,  he
shall  know  of  the  doctrine,  whether  it  be  of  God.
John  vii.  17 559

SERMON  XV.  John's  Message  te  Jar**.— Now
when  John  had  heard  in  prison  the  works  of
Christ,  he  sent  two  of  his  disciples,  and  said  unto
him,  Art  thou  he  that  should  come,  or  do  we  look
for  another  I Matt.  xi.  8,  3. ... .561

SERMON  XVI.  On  Insensibility  to  Offences .— Who
can  tell  how  oft  he  oflendeth  ?  O  cleanse  thou  me
from  my  secret  faults.  Keep  thy  servant  also
from  presumptuous  sins,  lest  they  get  the  do-
minion over  me. Psalm  xix.  12,  IX .  .  561

SERMON  XVII.  Seriousness  of  Heart  no  to  R*U-
gion.— But  that  on  the  good  ground  are  they,  who
in  an  honest  and  good  heart,  having  heard  the
word,  keep  it,  and  bring  forth  fruit  with  patience.
Luke  viii.  15. 564

SERMON  XVLTL  (Part  J.)- The  Eficacy  of  the
death  of  Christ— Now  once  in  the  end  of  the
world  hath  he  appeared  to  put  away  sin  by  the
sacrifice  of  himself. Hebrews  ix.  86. .  .566

SERMON  XIX.  (Part  U}-AU  stead  in  need  of  a

SERMON  XX.  The  Efficacy  of  the  Death  of  Christ
consistent  with  the  necessity  of  s  Good  Life:  the
one  being  the  cause,  the  other  the  condition,  of
Salvation.— What  shall  we  say  then?  shall  we
continue  in  sin,  that  grace  may  abound  f  God
forbid. Romans  vi.  1 530

SERMON  XXI.  Pure  Religion.— Fun  religion  and
undented  before  God  and  the  Father  is  this,  TO
visit  the  fatherless  and  widows  in  their  affliction,
and  to  keep  himself  unspotted  from  the  world.
James  i.  27. .  57ft

SERMON  XXII.  The  Agency  of  Jesus  Christ  since
his  Ascension.— Jesus  Christ,  the  same  yesterday,
to-day.  and  for  ever. Hebrews  xiii.  8.  .  574

SERMON  XXIII.  Of  Spiritual  Influence  M  gene- .
rai.— (Part  I.)— Know  ye  not  that  ye  are  the  tem-
ple of  God,  and  that  the  Spirit  of  God  dwelleth  in
you? 1  Cor.  iii.  16. 578

SERMON  XXIV.  On  the  Influence  of  the  Spirit.—
(Part  II.) 580

SERMON  XXV.  (Part  III.) 588

SERMON  XXVI.  Sin  encountered  by  Spiritual  Aid.
—{Part  I.)— O,  wretched  man  that  I  ami  who
shall  deliver  me  from  the  body  of  this  death  7  Ro-

vii.84. 684


CONTENTS.


Pmg$

SERMON  XZVIL  MoUPrtpmuMm  law— firef  »y
tUmidtftU8ptrit.-<VMrtVL) SB

SERMON  XXVIH.  li*  Ad  tf  **  Spirit  to  ft*
sea***  e»rf  preserved  by  J»ray«r<— (Part  HI.) .  986

SERMON  XXIX.  The  JDetfraelim  qf  tk»  C*na*m-
itet  ■  80  Joshua  smote  til  the  country  of  the
bills,  and  of  the  south,  and  of  the  vale,  and  of  the
springs,  and  all  their  kings;  he  left  none  remain*
inf ,  bat  utterly  destroyed  all  that  breathed,  as  the
Lord  God  of  brael  commanded. Joshua  x.  40. 990

SERMON  XXX.  JtogUet  «/  Wamingt  —Oh.  that
they  were  wise,  that  they  understood  this,  that
they  would  consider  their  latter  end  I  Deal
xxxii.SO. . .90S

SERMON  XXXI.  The  Ttmrt  qftJu  lord.— What
is  a  man  profited,  if  he  shall  gain  the  whole
world,  end  lose  his  own  soul?  or  what  shall  a
BMP  give  in  exchange  for  his  soul  f  Matt.  xvi.  98.  9M

4EsVPN  XXXIX  Fmtmtim  serf  JfrnsETy/rem


4re.~ For  the  grace  of  God,  that  bringeth  sal  va>
tion,  hath  appeared  onto  all  men,  teaching  us,
that  denying  ungodliness  and  worldly  lusts,  we
should  lite  soberly,  righteously,  and  godry,  in
this  present  world. Titus  ii.  11,  IS. .  .906

SERMON  XXXIII.  TkULiftaSUUifPTohatimi.
—It  is  good  for  me  that  I  have  been  afflicted,
that  I  might  learn  thy -statutes. Psalm  cxix.  71.  590

SERMON  XXXIV.  The  KnmoUdf  «/  «u  mutftsr
to  c  Futur*  Atefe—Whom  we 'preach,  warn-
ing every  man,  and  teaching  every  man  to  all
wisdom,  that  we  may  present  every  man  perfect
in  Christ  Jesus. Col  i.  28 001

SERMON  XXXV.  TU  General  Ruurncti**.
The  hour  is  coming,  in  the  which  all  that  are  in
the  graves  shall  hear  bis  voice,  and  shall  come
forth;  they  that  have  done  good,  unto  the  resur-
rection of  life ;  and  they  that  have  done  evil,  unto
the  leenrrection  of  damnation John  v.  88, 29. 003


LIFE  OF  THE  AUTHOR.


Or  William:  Paijst,  whose  writings  have  exerted  no  inconsiderable  influence
on  the  moral  and  theological  opinions  of  the  more  enlightened  part  of  the
English  community,  no  life  has  yet  appeared  that  is  worthy  of  the  subject,  or  that
gives  us  a  full  and  satisfactory  insight  into  his  character.  Though  he  was  known
to  so  many  scholars,  and  had  enjoyed  a  rather  enlarged  intercourse  with  the  world,
bat  few  particulars  of  his  conduct,  his  manners,  and  habits,  have  been  detailed,
and  but  few  of  his  sayings  recorded.  Yejt  there  are  few  men  whose  conversation
was  more  varied  and  instructive;  and  as  he  always  expressed  himself  with
cogency  and  perspicuity,  our  regret  is  increased  that  we  possess  such  scanty  de-
tails of  his  familiar  hours,  when  the  internal  state  of  his  mind  was  exhibited  with-
out disguise,  when  he  spoke  what  he  felt,  and  felt  what  he  spoke.

The  best  account  of  Mr.  Paley's  life,  with  which  we  have  been  hitherto  fa-
voured, is  by  Mr.  Meadley,  who  had  not  known  him  till  late  in  life ;  and  who,
if  he  had  known  him  longer  and  earlier,  was  hardly  capable  of  analysing  his  mind,
ec  of  estimating  his  character.  Mr.  Meadley  was  a  man  neither  of  very  enlarged
mind,  very  refined  taste,  nqr  very  ample  information.  What  he  knew,  he  could
relate ;  but  he  did  not  know  enough  to  enable  him  to  give  much  vivacity  to  his
narrative,  or  to  exhibit  in  his  memoirs  the  living  identity  of  the  writer  to  whom
we  are  indebted  for  some  of  the  best  moral  and  theological  productions  of  the
last  century.

Bat  whatever  may  be  the  scantiness  of  Mr.  Meadley 's  information,  his  narrative
is  the  most  copious  which  we  possess;  and  as  we  are  not  likely  soon  to  be  fur-
wrth  a  richer  store,  we  must  be  contented  with  taking  his  memoirs  for

:  principal  guide  in  the  present  biographical  sketch. We  make  no  boast  of

relty. All  that  we  can  do  is  to  give  a  new  form  to  old  materials.

William  Paley  was  born  at  Peterborough,  in  July  1743.  His  father  was  a
^nunor  canon  in  that  cathedral ;  but  he  relinquished  this  situation  upon  being  ap-
|»tated*E9ff*naster  of  the  grammar  school  at  Giggleswick,  in  Craven,  in  the
West  Riding  of  Yorkshire.  Here  the  family  had  long  resided  on  a  small  patri-
monial estate.  His  mother  is  described  as  a  woman  of  strong  and  active  mind.
At  school  young  Paley  soon  surpassed  the  other  boys  of  his  age,  by  superior  dili-
gence and  abilities.  A  mind,  like  his,  could  not  but  profit  of  the  opportunities
which  he  possessed  for  acquiring  classical  knowledge ;  but  he  appears  to.  have
been  at  all  times  more  ambitious  of  enriching  himself  with  knowledge  of  other
kinds.  He  was  curious  in  making  inquiries  about  mechanism,  whenever  an  op-
portunity occurred.  His  mind  was  naturally  contemplative ;  and  he  mingled  in*
taBactual  activity  with  corporeal  indolence.  He  never  excelled  in  any  of  those
boyish  nantimea  which  require  much  dexterity  of  hand  or  celerity  of  foot.  But
B  °


z  THE  LIFE  OF  THE  AUTHOR.

he  appears  to  have  imbibed  an  early  taste  for  the  amusement  of  fishing ;  and  this
taste  remained  unimpaired,  or  rather  invigorated,  to  a  late  period  of  his  life.  la
one  of  his  portraits  he  is  represented  with  a  fishing  rod  and  line.  His  cheerful-
ness and  drollery  are  said  to  have  made  him  a  favourite  with  his  school-fellows.
Before  he  left  school  he  one  year  attended  the  assizes  at  Lancaster,  where  he  is
said  to  have  been  so  much  interested  by  the  judicial  proceedings  he  had  witness-
ed, that  he  introduced  them  into  his  juvenile  games,  and  presided  over  the  trials
of  the  other  boys.

In  November  1758,  Paley  was  admitted  a  sizer  of  Christ's  College,  Cambridge.
He  •proceeded  to  the  University  on  horseback,  in  company  with  his  father  ;  and
in  after-life  he  thus  described  the  disasters  that  befell  him  on  the  way.

"  I  was  never  a  good  horseman,"  said  he,  "  and  when  I  followed  my  rather  on
a  pony  of  my  own,  on  my  first  journey  to  Cambridge,  I  fell  off  seven  times :  I  was
lighter  then  than  I  am  now ;  and  my  falls  were  not  likely  to  be  serious :  My  fa-
ther, on  hearing  a  thump,  would  turn  his  head  half  aside,  and  say — Take  care  of
thy  money,  lad."

Young  Paley  did  not  become  a  resident  member  in  the  University  till  the  Oc-
tober in  the  year  after  his  matriculation.  His  father  is  said  to  have  anticipated
his  future  eminence,  and  to  have  remarked,  with  parental  delight,  the  force  and
clearness  of  his  intellectual  operations.

Mr.  Paley  took  with  him  to  the  University  such  a  considerable  share  of  mathe-
matical science,  that  the  mathematical  tutor,  Mr.  Shepherd,  excused  his  atten-
dance at  the  college  lectures  with  the  students  of  his  own  year.  But  he  was  re-
gularly present  at  Mr.  Backhouse's  lectures  in  logic  and  metaphysics.

Whatever  might  be  his  assiduity  in  those  studies  which  the  discipline  of  the
University  required,  he  had  little  of  the  appearance,  and  none  of  the  affectation,
of  a  hard  student.  His  room  was  the  common  resort  of  the  juvenile  loungers  of
his  time ;  but  it  must  be  remembered  that  Mr.  Paley  possessed  the  highly  desirable
power  of  concentrating  his  attention  in  the  subject  before  him ;  and  that  he  could
read  or  meditate  in  the  midst  of  noise  and  tumult  with  as  much  facility  as  if  he
had  been  alone.  During  the  first  period  of  his  undergraduateship,  he  was  in  the
habit  of  remaining  in  bed  till  a  late  hour  in  the  morning,  and  as  he  was  much  in
company  during  the  latter  part  of  the  day,  many  wondered  how  he  found  leisure
for  making  the  requisite  accession  to  his  literary  stores.

But  the  mind  of  Paley  was  so  formed  that,  in  reading,  he  could  rapidly  select
the  kernel  and  throw  away  the  husk.  By  a  certain  quick  and  almost  intuitive
process,  he  discriminated  between  the  essential,  and  the  extraneous  matter  that
were  presented  to  his  mind  in  the  books  that  he  perused ;  and,  if  he  did  not  read
ao  much  as  many,  he  retained  more  of  what  he  read.

The  hilarity  and  drollery,  which  Mr.  Paley  had  manifested  at  school,  did  not
desert  him  when  he  entered  the  University.  Thus  his  company  was  much  sought  ;
and  the  cumbrousness  of  his  manner,  and  the  general  slovenliness  of  his  apparel,
perhaps  contributed  to  increase  the  effect  of  his  jocularity.

When  he  made  his  first  appearance  in  the  schools,  he  surprised  the  spectators
by  a  style  of  dress,  very  different  from  his  ordinary  habiliments.  He  exhibited
his  hair  full  dressed,  with  a  deep  ruffled  shirt,  and  new  silk  stockings.

When  Paley  kept  his  first  act,  one  of  the  theses  in  support  of  which  he  pro-
posed to  dispute  was,  that  the  eternity  of  punishments  is  contrary  to  the  Divine
Attribute* But  finding  that  this  topic  would  give  offence  to  the  master  of  his


THEUFE  OF  THE  AUTHOR.  si

college,  (Dr.  Thomas,)  he  went  to  Dr.  Watson,  the  moderator,  to  get  it  changed.
Dr.  Watson  told  him  that  he  might  put  in  non  before  antiradicit. Mr.  Paley,
therefore,  defended  this  position,  that  "  JSternitas  poenarum  turn  contradicit  Di-
viais  A&tributis,"  or  that  the  eternity  of  punishments  is  not  contrary  to  the  Divine
Attributes. As  he  had  first  proposed  to  argue  against  the  eternity  of  future
punishments,  we  may  suppose  that  that  was  his  UDdissembled  opinion ;  and  there-
fan,  it  would  have  been  more  honourable  to  his  candour,  to  hare  taken  an  en-
tirely new  question,  rather  than  to  have  argued  in  opposition  to  his  real  senti-
ments. Through  the  whole  course  of  his  life,  Dr.  Paley  seemed  too  willing  to
support  established  doctrines ;  and  to  find  plausible  reasons  lor  existing  institu-
tions ;  even  in  cases  in  which  he  must  have  felt  those  doctrines  to  be  at  variance
with  truth,  and  those  institutions  in  opposition  to  the  best  interests  of  mankind.
His  great  and  rigorous  mind  ought  to  have  disdained  the  petty  subterfuges  of
disingenuous  subtlety,  and  interested  sophistication.

Mr.  Paley  acquired  no  small  celebrity  in  the  University  by  the  ability  which
he  displayed  in  keeping  his  first  act ;  and  the  schools  were  afterward  uniformly
crowded  when  he  was  expected  to  dispute.  He  took  his  degree  of  bachelor  of
arts,  in  January  1763 ;  and  was  the  senior  wrangler  of  the  year.

After  taking  his  bachelor's  degree,  he  became  second  usher  in  an  academy  at
Greenwich.  Here  his  office  was  to  teach  the  Latin  language.  During  his  lei-
sure hours  he  often  visited  London,  and  rambled  about  the  metropolis,  which  af-
fords such  numerous  opportunities  for  edifying  contemplation  to  an  active  and
discriminating  mind.  He  pursued  knowledge  and  amusement  with  equal,  or
nearly  equal,  eagerness  and  avidity.  The  mind  cannot  always  be  kept  upon  the
stretch ;  and  those  minds  which  are  capable  of  great  intensity  of  exertion,  seem
most  to  require  proportionate  relaxation.  One  of  the  characteristics  of  a  great
mind,  is  flexibility  of  attention  to.  a  diversity  of  objects.  Mr.  Paley  attended  the
play-houses  and  the  courts  of  justice  with  similar  delight.  Every  scene  furnish-
ed him  with  intellectual  aliment.

In  1765,  Mr.  Paley  obtained  one  of  the  prizes,  which  are  annually  given  by
the  members  of  the  University  for  the  two  best  dissertations  in  Latin  prose.  The
subject  was,  "  A  Comparison  between  the  Stoic  and  Epicurean  philosophy  with
respect  to  the  influence  of  each  on  the  morals  of  the  people."  Mr.  Paley  vindi-
cated the  Epicurean  side  of  the  question.  He  had  afterward  to  read  bis  disser-
tation in  the  senate-house  before  the  University.  His  delivery  is  reported  not
to  have  done  justice  to  the  merits  of  the  composition.

In  June  1766,  Mr.  Paley  was  elected  fellow  of  Christ's  College.  This  oc-
casioned Ms  return  to  the  University,  where  he  soon  became*  one  of  the  tutors  of
his  college.  Tuition  was  a  province,  in  which  his  clear  and  vigorous  under-
standing, the  lucid  perspicuity  with  which  he  could  develope  his  ideas,  and  the
diversified  modes  in  which  he  could  illustrate  his  positions,  combined  with  no
small  share  of  hilarity  and  good-humour,  rendered  him  peculiarly  qualified  to
excel.  Mr.  Law,  son  of  the  master  of  Peterhouse,  was  his  coadjutor  in  the  busi-
ness of  tuition ;  and  the  union  of  so  much  ability  soon  raised  the  fame  of  the
ooQege  to  an  unusual  height.  The  intimacy  which  was  thus  cemented  between
Mr.  Paley  and  Mr.  Law,  contributed  to  promote  the  interest  of  our  author  by  the
ffieodship  to  which  it  led  with  Mr.  Law's  father ;  who,  on  his  elevation  to  the
**  of&rMe,  in  1769,  made  Mr.  Paley  his  chaplain.
b  hi§  province  of  tutor  to  Christ's  College,  Mr.  Paley  lectured  on  metaphysics,


m  THE  LIFE  OF  THE  AUTHOR.

morals,  the  Greek  Testament,  and,  subsequently,  on  divinity.  Tie  whole  sub.
stance  of  his  moral  instructions  is  contained  in  his  Principles  of  Moral  and  Po-
litical Philosophy ;  and  it  is  well  known  that  hardly  a  single  idea  has  found  its
way  into  his  subsequent  publications,  which  he  had  not  previously  promulgated
in  his  lectures.

In  his  .theological  lectures,  he  very  judiciously  avoided,  as  much  a*  possible*
all  matter  of  polemical  strife  or  sectarian  animosity.  /He  used  to  consider  the
/  thirty-nine  articles  of  religion,  as  mere  articles  of  peace,  of  which  it  was  impossi-
ble that  the  framers  could  expect  any  one  person  to  believe  the  whole,  as  they
contain  altogether  about  two  hundred  and  forty  distinct,  and  many  of  them  incon-
sistent, propositions.  ^ .^

Notwithstanding  the  great  liberality  of  opinion  which  Mr.  Paley  exhibited  in
his  lectures,  and  constantly  inculcated  upon  his  pupils,  he  refused  to  sign  the
clerical  petition  to  the  House  of  Commons  in  1772,  for  a  relief  from  subscription
to  articles  of  religion,  though  he  approved  the  object  of  the  petition,  and  wished
to  see  it  accomplished. — Ought  he  not  then  to  have  given  the  petition  the  sane*
tion  of  his  name  ?  On  this  occasion  he  is  reported  to  have  said,—"  /  cannot  af-
ford to  have  a  conscience  ;"  but  no  serious  stress  ought  to  be  laid  on  such  effu-
sipns  of  jocularity  or  inconsideration.  If  all  a  man's  light,  humorous,  or  inad-
vertent sayings  were  to  be  brought  up  in  judgment  against  him,  the  purest  virtue,
and  the  brightest  wisdom,  would  hardly  be  able  to  endure  the  ^ordeal.  The  best,
and  the  wisest  men  are  often  remarkable  for  particular  inconsistencies.

Though  Mr.  Paley  refused  to  lend  his  name  to  the  clerical  petition,  yet  be  ap-
pears afterward  to  have  vindicated  the  object  which  it  proposed  to  obtain,  in  the
defence  of  a  pamphlet  written  by  Bishop  Law,  entitled,  "  Considerations  on  the
propriety  of  requiring  a  subscription  to  Articles  of  Faith."  The  defence  which
is  just  mentioned  has  been  uniformly  ascribed  to  Mr.  Paley :  and  though  it  must
be  reckoned  among  his  more  juvenile  performances,  yet  it  must  be  allowed,  in
many  instances,  to  have  exhibited  a  display  of  ability,  and  a  force  of  argument,
worthy  of  his  more  improved  judgment,  and  his  more  matured  abilities.

While  Paley  was  engaged  in  the  office  of  tuition  at  Christ's  College,  his  cele-
brity induced  the  late  Earl  Camden  to  offer  him  the  situation  of  private  tutor  to
his  son.  But  this  was  incompatible  with  his  other  occupations,  and  was  accord-
ingly declined.

In  1775,  Mr.  Paley  began  to  receive  solid  proofs  of  Bishop  Law's  regard.—
The  ecclesiastical  patronage,  which  ia  attached  to  the  see  of  Carlisle,  is  very
scanty  and  poor;  but  alter  providing  for  his  son,  Bishop  Law  conferred  upon
Paley  the  best  benefices  which  he  had  to  bestow.  He  was  collated  to  the  rec-
tory of  Musgrove  in  Westmoreland,  which  was  at  that  time  worth  about  £80
a-year.  He  was  soon  after  presented  to  the  vicarage  of  Dalston  in  Cumberland :
anjl  on  the  5th  of  September,  1777,  he  resigned  the  rectory  of  Musgrove  upon
being  inducted  to  the  more  valuable  benefice  of  Appleby.  Whilst  he  was  in
possession  of  this  benefice,  he  published  a  little  work,  denominated  "  The  Clergy,
man's  Companion  in  Visiting  the  Sick."  Such  a  book  was  much  wanted ;  and  aa
it  contains  a  judicious  selection  of  prayers  for  different  occasions,  it  has  supplied
the  clergy  with  a  very  useful  auxiliary  in  their  devotional  occupations.

In  1760,  Paley  was  preferred  by  his  patron,  Bishop  Law,  to  a  prebendal  stall
in  the  cathedral  of  Carlisle,  which  was  worth  about  four  hundred  pounds  a-year.
And  in  August,  1782,  he  was  appointed  Archdeacon  of  Carlisle,  a  sort  of  sine-


THE  LIFE  OF  THE  AUTHOR.  stii

erne,  tat  by  which  his  clerical  dignity  was  increased,  and  Ha  temporal  income
enlarged*

In  1785,  the  period  arrived  when  Mr.  Paley,  who  had  hitherto,  published  only
a  pamphlet,  or  a  few  occasional  sermons,  was  to  appear  as  an  author  in  a  larger
and  more  substantial  form.  It  was  in  this  year  that  his  Principles  of  Moral  and
Midcal  Philosophy  issued  from  the  press*  This  work  soon  experienced  a  de-
gree  of  success,  not  indeed  greater  than  its  general  excellence  deserves, -but
greater  than  any  work  of  merit,  on  its  first  appearance,  usually  receives.  In  this
most  useful  production  Paley  exhibits  no  dazzling  novelties,  and  makes  no  parade
of  new  discoveries ;  for  what  that  is  new,  was  likely  to  be  said  on  such  a  subject,
of  which  the  great  principles  are  coeval  with  the  existence  of  man  upon  the
habitable  globe  f  But  though  the  matter,  of  which  this  work  consists,  is  so  old,
and  has  so  often  been  fabricated  into  a  diversity  of  forms  by  other  writers,  yet
the  capacious  mind  of  Paley  has  formed  it  anew  into  a  system  in  which  there  is
so  much  clearness  in  the  arrangement,  so  much  cogency  in  the  reasoning,  and  so
much  precision  in  the  language,  that  there  is  no  moral  treatise  by  which  it  is  sur-
passed in  the  great  merit  of  general  usefulness.  Mr.  Paley  did  not  make  his
materials ;  he  found  them  already  made ;  but  Ids  own  hands  raised  the  fabric ;
and  of  that  fabric  the  merit  is  all  his  own.

Some  few  parts  of  Mr.  Paley's  moral,  and  more  of  his  political  reasoning  are
liable  to  objections ;  but  with  all  its  defects,  his  "  Moral  and  Political  Philosophy''
constitutes  a  valuable  addition  to  that  department  of  our  literature.  As  it  forms
one  of  the  lecture  books  for  the  students  in  the  University  of  Cambridge,  mis
circumstance  must  have  tended  greatly  to  augment  its  circulation,  and  to  extend
its  usefulness.

In  addition  to  his  other  honours  and  emoluments  in  the  see  of  Carlisle,  Mr*
Friey  was,  at  the  end  of  the  year  1785,  appointed  chancellor  of  that  diocese.  In
the  year  1787,  he  lost  his  venerable  friend  and  patron,  the  Bishop  of  Carlisle*
who  died  on  the  1 4th  of  August,  at  the  advanced  age  of  eighty-four.  Bishop  Law
was  an  honest  and  intrepid  inquirer  after  truth ;  and  though  he  was  inferior  to  his
younger  friend  in  intellectual  energy,  yet  it  would  have  made  no  small  addition
to  Paley's  fame,  if  he  had  equalled  his  affectionate  and  revered  patron  in  the  fear-
less declaration  of  all  his  theological  opinions.  -  ><
t  It  is  highly  honourable  to  Paley  that  he  was  among  the  first  of  those,  who  ex*  \
presold  a  decided  opinion  against  the  iniquity  of  the  slave-trade.  What  he  wrote
\  on  that  subject,  and  particularly  his  unreserved  reprobation  of  the  abominable
tnScj  in  his  Moral  Philosophy,  contributed  very  much  to  accelerate  the  abolition*
it  was,  for  a  long  time,  a  mere  question  of  interest  with  a  considerable  part  of
the  community ;  but  moral  considerations,  in  unison  with  the  amiable  spirit  of  the
gospel,  and  the  tender  sympathies  of  humanity,  at  length  triumphed  over  the  sor-
did projects  of  avarice  and  cruelty.

Mr.  Paley,  much  to  bis  honour,  suggested  a  plan  for  promoting  the  civiliza-
tion of  Africa,  and  for  making  some  restitution  to  that  outraged  continent,  for
the  cruelty,  the  injustice,  and  the  oppression,  which  it  had  so  long  experienced.
He  proposed  to  export  from  the  United  States  of  America  several  little  colonies
of  free  Negroes,  and  t^  settle  them  in  different  parts  of  Africa,  that  they  might

re  as  patterns  of  more  civilized  life  to  the  natives  in  their  several  vicinities*

In  the  year  1700,  Mr.  Paley  published  his  Horn  Paulina?,  in  which  he  ap.
i  to  have  displayed  more  originality  of  thought,  more  sagacity  of  remark,  and

2


xiv  THE  LIFE  OF  THE  AUTHOR.

more  delicacy  of  discrimination,  than  in  any  of  his  other  works.  The  great  ob-
ject of  this  volume  ia  to  illustrate  and  enforce  the  credibility  of  the  Christian
revelation,  by  showing  the  numerous  coincidences  between  the  Epistles  of  Paul
and  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles.  These  coincidences,  which  are  often  incorporated
or  intertwined  in  references  and  allusions,  in  which  no  art  can  be  discovered,
and  no  contrivance  traced,  furnish  numerous  proofs  of  the  truth  of  both  these
works,  and  consequently  of  that  of  Christianity.  The  Epistles  of  Paul  and  the
Acts  of  the  Apostles  mutually  strengthen  each  other's  credibility ;  and  Mr.  Paley
has  shown,  in  the  clearest  manner,  how  one  borrows  light  from  the  other ;  and
how  both  conjunctively  reflect  the  splendour  of  their  united  evidence  on  some
of  the  principal  facts  and  most  important  truths  in  the  memoirs  of  the  Evan-
gelists.

(Some  of  the  coincidences  which  Mr.  Paley  discovers,  seem  too  minute  for  com-
mon observation ;  but  his  remarks  show  their  importance,  while  they  evince  the
keenness  of  his  intellectual  sight.  The  merit  of  this  performance,  though  it  has
been  generally  acknowledged  both  at  home  and  abroad,  is  even  yet  greater  than
the  celebrity  it  has  acquired,  or  the  praise  it Jias  received.

In  1700,  Mr.  Paley  delivered  an  excellent  charge  to  the  clergy  of  the  diocese
of  Carlisle,  in  which  he  forcibly  recommended  them  to  imitate  the  example  of
Christ,  in  the  adaptation  of  their  sermons  to  local  circumstances,  to  times  and
seasons,  and  to  the  general  state  of  mind  in  their  several  congregations.  Much
of  the  efficacy  of  preaching  depends  upon  the  observance  of  this  rule.

In  May  1791,  Mr.  Paley  had  the  misfortune  to  be  left  a  widower,  with  four  sons
and  four  daughters.  In  the  following  year,  the  dean  and  chapter  of  Carlisle  ad-
ded the  vicarage  of  Addingbam,  near  Great  Salkeld,  to  his  other  ecclesiastical
preferments.  In  the  same  year  he  published  his  Reason*  for  Contentment,  which
he  addressed  to  the  labouring  classes  of  society.  This  work  appeared  at  a  time
when  the  principles  of  the  French  revolution  had  been  widely  disseminated,  and
when  the  richer  part  of  the  community,  terrified  almost  into  idiocy  by  the  wild
alarms  of  Burke,  and  the  sonorous  declamations  of  Pitt,  trembled  with  a  sort  of
paralytic  horror  for  the  security  of  their  property.  They  fondly  imagined,  that
it  was  the  great  object  of  the  poorer  class  of  reformers  to  divide  the  possessions
of  the  rich ;  and  thus  to  attempt  not  merely  to  establish  a  political  equality  of
rights,- but  a  substantial  equality  of  fortunes.  Some  few  fanatics  might  have
cherished  such  a  delusion,  and  might  have  entertained  such  a  wish,  without  be-
ing aware  that  it  was  only  one  of  those  frantic  chimeras  of  a  distempered  brain
which  couid  never  be  accomplished.  Inequality  in  the  mental  and  physical  pow-
ers of  individuals  is  the  order  of  nature,  or  rather  the  appointment  of  God ;  and
consequently  no  equality  of  circumstances  is  ever  possible  to  be  realised.  If  it
could  be  established  to-day,  it  would  be  altered  to-morrow.

It  is  hardly  to  be  supposed  that  Mr.  Paley  really  believed  that  a  large  body  of
the  people  ever  designed  to  equalize,  or  had  actually  conspired  to  equalize,  the
whole  mass  of  private  property,  and  thus  subvert  the  foundations  of  the  social
scheme  by  establishing  a  community  of  goods.  But,  whatever  might  be  Mr*
Paley's  real  opinions  on  the  political  temper  of  the  times,  and  on  the  perils  to
which  rank  and  property  seemed  exposed,  this  pamphlet,  which  he  addressed  to
the  labouring  classes,  proves,  that  he  had  placed  himself  on  the  list  of  the  alarm-
ists of  that  stormy  period.  Was  Mr.  Paley  anxious  to  rest  the  permanence  of
his  future  fame  on  his  larger  works,  while  he  made  use  of  this  trivial  pamphlet


THE  LIFE  OF  THE  AUTHOR.  xv

to  procure  an  ephemeral  applause?  or,  did  he  deliberately  labour  to  accomplish
some  secular  project  by  seconding  the  wishes  of  the  court,  and  promoting  the
views  of  the  minister  t — If  the  real  object  of  Mr.  Paley,  in  writing  this  two-penny
political  pamphlet,  -which  consists  of  some  common-place  truisms,  clearly  develop-
ed and  forcibly  expressed,  were  to  place  a  mitre  upon  his  brow,  the  attempt  pro-
ved abortive,  and  the  wish  vain. Mr.  Pitt  was,  no  doubt,  pleased  in  seeing  a
great  mind  like  that  of  Paley  bending  to  act  in  subserviency  to  his  will,  and  co-
operating in  augmenting  the  delusion  under  which  the  nation  was  at  that  time
mistaking  its  bane  for  its  good,  and  pursuing  its  ruin  for  its  interest. But  though
Mr*  Pitt  loved  and  rewarded  flexibility  of  opinion,  it  is  well  known  that  he  loved
and  rewarded  it  most,  where  it  was  accompanied  with  mediocrity  of  talenL The
haughty  premier,  in  his  treatment  both  of  Watson  and  Paley,  showed,  that  he  had
no  fondness  for  intellectual  superiority ;  and  he  seems  to  have  been  particularly
studious  not  to  elevate  any  mind  that  might  wrestle  with  his  own.

In  1793,  Mr.  Paley  vacated  the  benefice  of  Dakton,  and  was  inducted  to  that
of  Stanwix,  which  was  more  in  the  vicinity  of  Carlisle.  He  assigned  the  follow-
ing reasons  to  a  clerical  friend  for  assenting  to  this  change  : — "  First,  (said  he,)
it  saved  me  double  housekeeping,  as  Stanwix  was  within  twenty  minutes'  walk
of  my  house  in  Carlisle ;  secondly,  it  was  fifty  pounds  a  year  more  in  value ;  and,
thirdly,  I  began  to  find  my  stock  of  sermons  coming  over  again  too  fast."

The  most  popular  of  Mr.  Paley 's  theological  works  appeared  in  the  year  1704,
under  the  title  of  a  "  View  of  the  Evidences  of  Christianity."  The  author  show-
ed great  wisdom  in  not  mingling  any  controversial  ingredients  in  the  body  of
this  work,  and  in  not  connecting  the  facts  of  the  Christian  Scriptures  with  any
doctrinal  matter  of  doubtful  authority  or  ambiguous  interpretation.  He  has  thus
added  very  much  to  the  usefulness  of  his  labours,  and  has  rendered  them  accept-
able to  a  greater  number  of  readers.  If  he  has  not  silenced  every  gainsayer,  or
converted  every  infidel,  he  has  at  least  established  many  in.  the  faith)  and  has  in-
duced some  to  study  the  evidences  of  revelation,  who  were  previously  disposed
to  reject  it  without  examination.  Mr.  Paley  is  less  compressed  .than  Grotios,  and
less  diffuse  than  Lardner ;  but  he  is  more  convincing  than  either,  .and  more  lumin-
\  than  both*  His  reasoning  is  every  where  remarkable  for  its  cogency,  and
:  for  its  perspicuity.  There  are  several  works  which  evince  more
,  but  there  are  none  so  well  calculated  for  general  perusal,  and,  conse-
quently, general  utility.

Mr.  Paley  was,  in  a  pecuniary  point  o£  view,  better  rewarded  for  his  Evidences
of  Christianity  than  for  any  of  his  other  works.  The  minister  of  the  day,  indeed,
showed  bo  willingness  to  put  a  mitre  on  his  head,  but  three  bishops  seemed  to
vie  with  each  other  in  remunerating  him  for  his  labours  in  vindicating  the  truth
of  die  Scriptures,  and  serving  the  cause  of  the  church.  The  tjien  bishop  of  Lon-
don, Porteus,  gave  him  a  prebendal  stall  in  St  Paul's.  The  bishop  of  Lincoln
made  him  the  subdean  of  that  diocese  $  and  the  bishop  of.  Durham  presented  him
with  the  valuable  living  of  Bishop  Wearmouth.  These  several  pieces,  of  prefer-
aent  amounted  to  considerably  more  than  two  thousand  pounds  a-y ear.  It  would
be  well  for  the  church,  if  the  episcopal  patronage  were  always  equally  well  be-
stowed, or  if  it  were  always  made  equally  subservient  to  the  remuneration. of
kerning,  to  the  cause  of  piety,  and  the  interests  of  truth.  After  being  installed
as  subdean  iA  Lincoln,  Mr.  Paley.  proceeded  to  Cambridge  to  take  his  degree  of
Dedor  of  Divinity. In  the  Concio  ad  clervm  which  he  preached  on  the  occasion,


art  THE  LIFE?  OF  THE  AUTHOR.

be  unfortunately  pronounced  the  word  prcf\igu$,  prefugut,  which  wu  noticed  by
one  of  the  University  wits  in  the  following  epigram :

Italian?  fato  profagus  Lavinaque  venit

Litora

Errat  Virgilius,  forte  prafugus  erat.

Neither  Paley  nor  Watson,  both  of  whom  had  received  their  classical  instruc-
tion at  private  schools  in  the  country,  ever  attained  to  an  accurate  knowledge  of
quantity,  or  to  a  familiar  acquaintance  with  the  rules  of  prosody.  Watson  says,
that  it  often  cost  him  more  pains  to  recollect  the  right  quantity  of  a  few  Latin
words  than  to  solve  a  difficult  problem  in  mathematics.  But  both  Paley  and
Watson  aspired  to  higher  intellectual  excellence  than  that  of  classical  erudition.
Paley  was,  indeed,  by  no  means  deficient  in  Greek  or  Roman  literature.  He
had  enough  for  his  purpose,  but  he  had  no  superfluity.

Of  Mr.  Paley's  occasional  sermons,  not  the  least  memorable  is  that  which  he
preached  before  the  University  of  Cambridge,  when  he  returned  thither  for  the
purpose  of  completing  the  exercises  for  his  doctor's  degree.  In  this  discourse  he
expatiates  with  much  force  of  expression  and  shrewdness  of  remark  on  the  dan-
gers incidental  to  the  clerical  character.  He  shows  how  the  constant  repetition
of  the  same  devotional  labours  is  apt  to  diminish  the  sensibility  to  religious  im-
pressions ;  and  he  noticeB,  with  great  truth,  the  moral  perils  to  which  even  a
secluded  and  contemplative  life  is  exposed.  The  clergy  are  earnestly  admonish-
ed, that  it  is  their  duty  to  make  their  own  devotion  contribute  to  augment  that
of  their  congregation,  while  it  is  instrumental  in  improving  their  own  hearts,  and
saving  their  own  souls.

At  Bishop  Wearmouth,  where  Dr.  Paley  fixed  his  residence  in  1795,  he  found
one  of  the  best  parsonage  houses  in  the. kingdom,  and  associated  with  every  ac-
commodation which  he  could  desire.  In  order  to  avoid  all  dissension  with  his
parishioners,  he  granted  them  a  lease  of  the  tithes  for  his  life.  In  his  Moral
Philosophy  he  had  represented  tithes  as  injurious  to  cultivation  and  improve-
ment ;  and  he  now  acted,  as  for  as  circumstances  would  permit,  in  conformity  to
his  opinions.  As  the  produce  of  land  was  considerably  augmented  in  price  soon
after  this  period,  and  the  value  of  landed  property  in  general  experienced  an  ex-
traordinary advance,  Dr.  Paley's  tenants  had  reason  to  congratulate  themselves  on
the  good  bargains  they  had  made,  and  to  extol  his  forbearance  and  moderation.

The  growing  prosperity  of  his  parishioners  and  his  tenants  was  a  source  of  un-
feigned satisfaction  to  Dr.*  Paley ;  and  he  never  regretted  the  opportunities  of
gain  which  he  had  lost,  or  by  which  they  had  been  enriched.  It  seems  to  mani-
fest a  higher  degree  of  virtue  cordially  to  rejoice  at  the  prosperity  of  others,  than
to  sympathise  with  their  adversities  and  sufferings.

In  December  1705,  Dr.  Paley  took  for  his  second  wife  a  Miss  Dobinson,  of
Carlisle,  whose"  friendship  he  had  long  enjoyed,  and  whose  worth  he  had  long
known.  His  office  of  subdean  of  Lincoln  obliged  him  to  reside  in  that  city  for
three  months  in  the  beginning  of  the  year ;  and  he  accordingly  now  divided  his
time  between  Lincoln  and  Bishop  Wearmouth.  At  both  places  he  maintained
the  relations  of  social  intercourse  with  his  neighbours  without  any  affectation  of
"Superiority;  and  practised  the  rights  of  hospitality  without  any  ostentation.  He
did  not  disdain  the  amusement  of  the  card-table,  and  was  partial  to  a  game  at


i


THE  LIFE  OF  THE  AUTHOR.  ~  xrii

viust.  When  a  lady  once  remarked  to  him,  "  that  the  only  excuse  for  their  play-
ing was,  that  it  served  to  kill  Jime  :"— "The  best  defence  possible  (replied  he,)
tboagh  time  will,  in  the  end,  kill  us."  Dr.  Paley  possessed  as  much  of  what  the
French  call  "  waaoir  were,"  as  most  men.  He  knew  how  to  make  the  most  6f
life,  with  all  its  diversified  concomitants ;  and  there  were  few  evej>  of  its  less
pleasurable  accessories  frofn  which  he  knew  not  how  to  extract  some  lesson  of
usefulness,  or  some  particles  of  enjoyment.

In  order  to  enlarge  his  sphere  of  doing  good,  and  to  comply  with  the  wishes  of
the  Bishop  of  Durham,  Dr.  Paley  consented  to  act  in  the  commission  of  the
peace.  Mr.  Meadley  has  informed  us,  that  in  discharging  these  functions,  he
was  blamed  for  his  irascibility  and  impatience.  No  ordinary  tranquillity  of  mind
is  requisite  in  investigating  the  wants,  ascertaining  the -claims,  or  composing  the
bickerings,  of  the  poor.

Dr.  Paley  enjoyed  the  singular  happiness  of  having  his  parents  live  to  witness
bis  celebrity,  and  to  rejoice  at  his  success.  His  mother  did  not  die  till  M^arch
1796,  at  the  age  of  eighty-three ;  and  bis  father  survived  her  till  September  1790,
when  he  leached  the  more  advanced  period  of  eighty-eight

In  1800,  Dr.  Paley  experienced  a  violent  paroxysm  of  some  hephralgic  conv
plaint,  which  returned  with  increased  exacerbations  during  the  next  and  the  fot
loving  year,  and  by  which  he  was  agonised  for  longer  or  shorter  intervals  during
the  remainder  of  his  life.  His  last,  and,  perhaps,' greatest  work,  entitled  "  Natu-
ral Theology ,w  was  principally  composed  during  the  period  in  which  he  was  sub-
ject to  attacks  of  this  terrible  malady.  These  attacks  must  occasionally  have
impeded  the  progress  of  the  work ;  but  it  is  probable  that  he  had  been  long  previ*
onsly  revolving  the  materials  in  his  mind.  In  this,  as  well  as  in  his  other  publica-
tions, he  has  made  large  use  of  the  labours  of  others ;  but  he  has  illuminated
what  they  left  obscure,  enriched  what  was  jejune,  amplified  what  was  scanty,  in-
vigorated what  was  weak,  and  condensed  what  was  diffuse.  The  proofs  which
be  adduces  of  the  Divine  Attributes,  are  clear  and  cogent,  and  calculated  to  garry
conviction  to  every  capacity.  These  proofs  are  not  so  arranged  as  to  distract  by
the  multiplicity  of  the  parts,  or  to  confound  by  the  enormity  of  the  mass.  They
consist  of  a  few  simple  expositions,  but  of  such  a  nature  as  to  interest  every
reader,  and  to  edify  both  the  young  and  the  old  in  the  prosecution  of  the  argu-
Natural  theology  can  never  be  dull  or  uninteresting  when  it  is  occupied
bating  the  perfections  of  the  Deity  by  his  works,  and  does  not  diverge
the  subtleties  of  metaphysics,  or  lose  itself  in  the  labyrinths  of  interminable
speculation,

Dr.  IWey  was  never  more  at  home  than  in  the  composition  of  this  work. .  The
materials,  with  which  he  was  furnished  by  what  he  had  read,  and  by  what  he  had
ehserveb%  were  so  various  and  ample,  that  it  was  more  difficult  for  him  to  select
than  to  amplify,  to  methodise  than  to  vary,  and  to  conipress  than  to  dilate.—
Thongh  the  proofs  of  the  Divine  power  and  wisdom  are  so  many,  so  vast,  and  so
that  they  hardly  need  any  explanation,  yet  there  is  no  .one  who  can
the  demonstrative  evidence  which  Di\  Paley  has  produced  of  these  attri-
,  without  being  more  deeply  impressed  with  the1  sentiment  of  their  presence
he  was  before.
The  chapter  on  the  Divine  Goodness,  though  it  evinces  strong  marks  of  the
■hne  unclouded  and  powerful  intellect  that  predominates  in  other  parts  of  the
•wk,  k  perhaps  upon  the  whole  less  copious  and  satisfactory  than  the  rest.  The
C  2*


gvm  TEE  LIFE  OF  THE  AUTHOR.

evidence  in  this  division  of  the  subject  is,  in  fact,  more  perplexed  by  conflicting
argumentsrand  more  exposed  to  contradictory  conclusions.  Dr.  Palsy  has  well
remarked,  that  when  we  consider  the  benevolence  of  the  Deity,  we  can  consider
it  only  in  relation  to  sensitive  beings.  Without  this  reference  the  term  has  no
meaning-;  for  it  would. otherwise  be  without  any  medium  through  which  it  could
operate,  by  which  its  influence  could  be  felt,  or  its  presence  ascertained.  Gross
matter,  as  long  as  it  remains  inanimate  and  insentient,  can  never  be  an  object  of
good  or  evil,  of  pleasure  or  of  pain.  It  is  alike  unconscious  of  the  one  and  the
other.  But,  while  the  arguments  for  the  power  and  wisdom  of  t)ie  Deity  are  so
completely  satisfactory  as  not  .to  leave  a  doubt  upon  the  mind,  yet  there/  are  van-
ons  appearances  which  seem  hardly  compatible  with  the  idea  of  unlimited  benevo-
lence, and  which  it  is  difficult  to  accord  with  that  supposition,  except  by  travel*
ling  out  of  this  visible  diurnal  sphere,  and  connecting  the  present  life  with  a  life
beyond  the  grave.  That  the  plurality  and  the  preponderance  of  sensations  in  all
the  different  classes  of  beings  is  in  favour  of  happiness,  cannot  reasonably  be
denied ;  bat  if  pain  and  misery  are  the  lot  of  many,  or  only  of  a  few,  for  a  whole
life,  or  even  for  short  intervals,  the  argument  recurs,  how  is  this  partial  or  tern*
porary  suffering  to  be  reconciled  to  the  theory  of  Infinite  Benevolence  1  If  pain
sod  misery  exist  in  instances  collectively  numerous,  or  in  portions  however
minute,  yet  vast  in  the  aggregate,  how  is  this  to  be  reconciled  with  the  attribute)
of  Unbounded  Goodness,  unless  we  connect  an  eternity  of  existence  with  the)
present  transient  scene  ?  If  evil  exists,  it  is  hardly  a  satisfactory  solution  of  the
difficulty  to  say,  that  it  is  not  an  object  of  contrivance,  when  the  world  is  so  con-
stituted that  it  is  more  or  less  one  of  the  ingredients,  or  accessories,  in  the  con*
dition  of  all  sensitive  beings.  If  the  evil  is  not  a  part  of  the  original  intent,  it
seems  an  adjunct  that  cannot  be  disjoined  from  the  present  scheme ;  and  if  it  be
an  adjunct  of  the  present  scheme,  that  scheme  cannot  be  said  to  be  a  proof  of
Infinite  Benevolence,  unless  we  consider  it  only  as  part  of  a  greater  whole,  and
infer  that  the  present  is  only  the  commencement  of  our  sensitive  and  reflective
existence*

In  the  works  of  human  genius  or  industry,  the  object  of  the  contrivance  may
differ  from  the  effect,  owing  to  the  imperfection  of  the  human  faculties;  bat
when  we  consider  the  operations  of  the  Divine  Mind,  we  cannot  separate  the  ob-
ject and  the  end ;  or  say  that  one  thing  was  designed  and  another  produced,  with*
out  impeaching  the  Supreme  Power  of  weakness,  or  the  Supreme  Intellect  of  in*
consistency.  If  in  any  particular  contrivances  in  the  creation,  good  was  the
object  while  evil  is  the  result,  can  we  reverentially  affirm,  that  God  willed  one
thing,  bnt  that  a  different  was  produced  ?  If  God  is  the  author  of  all  things,  the
evil  must  be  regarded  as  much  his  contrivance  as  the  good.  If  God  made  the
teeth,  he  made  them  to  ache  as  well  as  to  masticate.  The  good  of  mastication
is  the  principal  object  of  the  contrivance,  but  is  not  the  evil  of  aching  the  occa-
sional effect  t  In  considering  the  sensitive  works  of  the  Great  Creator  in  the
present  world,  all  that  we  can  truly  say  is,  that  good,  or  pleasure,  is  the  frsdoxi*
vast  design,  the  primary  object,  but  that  evil,  or  pain,  is  one  of  the  concomitant
effects,  or  subordinate  accessories.  There  is  too  much  good  in  the  world  to  ad*
mit  the  supposition  of  malevolence  in  the  Great  Author  of  the  scheme ;  and  there
is  too  much  evil  not  to  lead  us  to  expect  a  state  of  future  retribution*  Those
phenomena  in  the  present  state  of  things,  which  militate  against  the  theory  of
Infinite  Benevolence,  appear  to  be  only  presages  of  the  good  that  is  to  cooku If


THU  LIFE  OF  THE  AUTHOR.  ax

to  goo&  even  here  greatly  predominates  over  the  evil,  it  is  reasonable  to  infer,
that  in  tone  fntuie  period  the  evil  will  disappear,  and  the  Divine  Benevolence
be  resplendent,  without  any  apparent  spot  or  limitation,  in  the  condition  of  every
hfividnaL

|d  the  commencement  of  the  year  1805,  while  Dr.  Paley  was  resident  at
tiaooln,  he  experienced  a  violent  paroxysm  of  his  agonising  malady,  which
could  not  be  appeased  by  the  usual  remedies ;-  and  symptoms  appeared  that  bis
end  was  approaching*  He  languished,  however,  in  a  state  of  debility  and  dis-
ease, til!  the  period  of  Ins  return  to  Bishop  Wearmouth,  where  be  expired  on  the
2Mb  of  May.  His  mental  faculties  suffered  little,  if  any,  diminution  to  the  last
nKNnent  of  bin  existence ;  but  if  Jiis  intellectual  vision  underwent  no  eclipse,  his
corporeal  sight  is  said  to  have  failed  for  a-  few  days  before  his  death*

k  cannot  be  said  of  Dr.  Paley  that  he  lived  in  vain  ! — His  was  a  mind  of  great
powers ;  and  in  general  he  employed  it  for  the  noblest  ends.  He  was  particular*
ry  active  in  diffusing  that  knowledge  which  tends  most  to  exaljt  the  dignity  of
■n ;  and  raise  bim  highest  in  the  scale  of  virtue  and  intelligence.  His  moral
and  theological  works  reflect  the  highest  honour  on  his  memory ;  and  if  he  be-
trayed a  little  seeming  political  versatility  -in  smaller  and  more  ephemeral  pre*
etactkme,  we  may  find  some  apology  for  his  inconsistency  in  the  times  in  which
he  lived ;  in  his  solicitude  for  the  welfare  of  a  large  family ;  and  in  circumstances'
ef  which  few  have  sufficient  energy  to  control  the  agency  or  to  resist  the  influ-


Ih  person,  Dr.  Paley  was  above  the  middle"  size,  and  latterly  inclined  to  corpu-
lence* "Hie  best  likeness  of  him  is  by  Romney,  in  which  he  is  drawn  with  a
in  his  hand* As  in  his  domestic  arrangements,  and  in  his  general
i  ef  expense,  he  practised  what  may  be  called  an  enlightened  economy,  and
:  a  doe  medium  between  parsimony  and  profusion,  his  income  was  more
adequate  to  ail  his  wants ;  and  he  left'  bis  family  in  easy  if  not-  in  affluent


A  volume  of  sermons  was  published  after  the  death  of  Dr.  Paley,  which  he
left  by  his  will  to  be  distributed  among  his  parishioners. In  clearness  of  expres-
sion, in  harmony  of  style,  and  in  force  of  moral  sentiment,  some  parts  of  these
sermons  are  equal  if  not  superior  to  any  of  his  other  works. In  the  pulpit  he
was  one  of  those  preachers  who  excelled  in  bringing  the  most  important  truths
home  to  men's  interests  and  bosoms.— Though  a  few  will  rejoice,  yet  the  majority
of  readers  will  lament,  that  in  these  sermons  the  author  has  abandoned  his  usual
reserve  with  respect  to  certain  doctrinal  matters,  which  it  is  more  easy  to  find
in  the  liturgy  and  the  articles  of  the  church,  than  in  the  precepts  of  Christ,  or
the  writings  of  the  Evangelists. — Those  doctrines  which  tend  only  to  engender
■trite  and  to  produce*  Tain  logomachies,  would  always  be  better  omitted  in  the
[  it  is  greatly  to  be  deplored  that  in  these  sermons  Dr.  Paley  has  sanc-
!  their  introduction. The  great  end  of  the  commandment  is  charity ;  but
i  doctrines  conduce  to  that  end  ? If  this  question  had  been  proposed  to  *
Br.  Rtfer,  it  is  not  difficult  to  conjecture  what  would  have  been  his  reply,  if  that
wnfv  had  been  in  unison  with  his  unsophisticated  sentiments.
Tk/eader  will  perhaps  not  be  displeased,  if  we  add  to  this  biographical  sketch
ft  Dr.  JfeJer  the  following  interesting  anecdote,  which  he  related  to  a  friend  at
fhllWafiT  k*  *ke  year  17W>>  while  they  were  conversing  on  the  early  part  of  his
tademicul  lite-


ix  THE  LIFE  .OF  THE  AUTHOR.

"  I  spent  the  first  two  years  of  my  imdergraduateship,"  said  he,  "  happily,  but
nnprofitably.  I  was  constantly  in  society,  where  we  were  not  immoral,  but  idle,
and  rather  expensive.  At  the  commencement  of  my  third  year,  however,  after
having  left  the  usual  party  at  rather  a  late  hour  m  the  evening,  I  was  awakened
at  five  in  the  morning  by  one  oT  my  companions,  who  stood  at  my  bed-side,  and
said, '  Paley,  I  have- been  thinking  what  a  d****d  fool  you  are.  I  could  do  no-
thing, probably,  were  I  to  try,  and  can  afford  the  life  I  lead:  you  could  do  every
thing,  and  cannot  afford  it.  I  have  had  no  sleep  during  the  whole  night  on  ac-
count of  these  reflections,  and  am  now  come  solemnly  to  inform  you,  that  if  you
persist  in  your  indolence,  I  must  renounce  your  society.'  I  was  so  struck,"  Dr.
Paley  continued,  "  with  the  visit  and  the  visitor,  that  I  lay  in  bed  great  part  of
the  day  and  formed  my  plan.  I  ordered  my  bed-maker  to  prepare  my  fire  jevery
evening,  in  order  that  it  might  be  lighted  by  myself.  I  arose  at  five ;  read  dur-
ing the  whole  of  the  day,  except  during  such  hours  as  chapel  and  hall  required,
alloting  to  each  portion  of  time  its  peculiar  branch  of  study ;  and  just  be/ore  the
closing  of  gates  (nine  o'clock)  I  went  to  a  neighbouring  coffee-house,  where  I
constantly  regaled  upon  a  mutton  -chop  and  a  dose  of  milk  punch.  And  thus,  on
taking  my  bachelor's  degree,  I  became  senior  wrangler."

Anecdotes  of  this  kind,  which  have  something  of  the  marvellous,  are  seldom
related  with  a  punctilious  adherence  to  truth :  but  if  here  be  no  erroneous  state*
ment,  or  inaccurate  representation,  Mr.  Meadley  appears  to  ascribe  too  much  to
the  occurrence,  when  he  attributes  to  it  "  not  only  his  (Paley's)  successful  labours
as  a  college  tutor,  but  the  invaluable  productions  of  his  pen."  .  A  mind  like  that
of  Paley  could  net  have  been  long  so  indolent  as  is  represented,  without  some
compunctious  visirings  of  remorse.  It  is  more  than  probable  that  when  he  first
received  this  friendly  admonition,  his  bosom  was  a  prey  to  some  lurking  pangs
of  self-condemnation ;  and  he  was  consequently  predisposed  instantly  to  put  in
force  a  plan  of  more  systematic  and  -more  vigorous  application.  Where  the  mat-
ter of  combustion  already  exists,  a  little  spark  will  set  it  in  a  blaze.


PREFACE.


i  that  I  have  met  with  upon  the  subject  of  morals,  I  appear  to  myself  to  have  remarked
perfections  9— either  that  the  principle  was  enoneou*,  or  that  it  wwiiMiiWiiK^y  explained,
ei ttiBlihe  ralea  deduced  from  it  were  not  sufficiently  adapted  to  leal  lift  and  to  actual  aitaatiooa. The
miunss  of  Gtotiua,  end  the  larger  work  of  Pufiendorfi;  are  of  too  fmrtnmc  a  cart,  too  much  mixed  up
aim  me  civil  law  and  with  the  jurisprudence  of  Germany,  to  answer  precisely  the  design  of  a  system  of
•ftftfy-ma  direction  of  private  consciences  in  the  general  conduct  of  human  life. Perhaps,  indeed,  they
am  sat  to  he  regarded  a*  matitqtes  of  morality  calculated  to  instruct  an  individual  in  hp  duty,  so  much  as
aspsekeof  law  books  and  law  authorities,  suited  to  the  practice  of  those  courts  of  justice,  whose  deci-
sions sn  regulated  by  general  principles  of  natural  equity,  in  conjunction  with  the  maxims  of  the  Roman
code;  of  which  kind,  I  understand,  there  are  many  upon  the  Continent To  which  may  be  added,  ooev
cernmgboaa  mese  authors,  thai  they  are  more  occupied  in  describing  the  rights  and  usages  of  indepen-
,  than  is  necessary  in  a  work  which  professes  not  to  adjust  the  correspondence  of
,  bat  to  delineate  the  offices  of  domestic  life. The  profusion  also  of  classical  quotations  with
/  of  their  pages  abound,  seems  to  me  a  mojtfrom  winch  it  will  not  be  easy  to  excuse  them.
i  exxnets  be  intended  as  decorations  of  style,  the  composition  is  overloaded  with  ornaments  of  one
To  any  thing  more  than  ornament  they  can  make  no  claim. To  propose  them  as  serious  argu-
measa,  suavely  to  attempt  to  establish  or  fortify  a  moral  duty  by  the  testimony  of  a  Greek  or  Roman  poet*
is  to  trifle  with  the  attention  of  the  reader,  or  rather  to  take  it  off  from  all  just  principles  of  masoning  in

Of  oar  own, writers  in  this  branch  of  philosophy,  1  find  none  that  I  think  perfectly  free  from  the  three
1  which  I  have  stated.  There  is  likewise  a  fourth  property  observable  almost  in  all  of  them,
,  that  they  divide  too  much  the  law  of  Nature  from  the  precepts  of  Revelation;  some  authom
oasty  Helming  the  mention  of  Scripture  authorities,  as  belonging  to  a  different  province ;  and.
1  reserving  them  for  a  separate  volume;  which  appears  to  me  much  the  same  defect,  as  if  a  com*
sssmmaor  on  the  laws  of  England  should  content  himself  with  stating  upon  each  head  the  common  law
ef  the  land,  without  taking. any  notice  of  acts  of  parliament;  or  should  choose  to  give  his  readeis  the
iiiiasawilsH  in  urn  book;  and  the  statute  law  in  another.  "When  the  obligations  of  morality  are  taught,"
says  a  psoas  and  celebrated  writer,  "let  the  sanctions  of  Christianity  never  be  forgotten:  by  which  it
wnD  be  shown  mat  they  give  strength  and  lustre  to  each  other;  religion  will  appear  to  be  the  voice  of
sesenav  and  laorality  will  be  the  will  of  G06V+

The  saeaasr  also  in  which  modern  writers  have  treated  of  subjects  of  morality,  is,  in  my  judgment,
■aVMn  to  much  exception.  It  has  become  of  late  a  fashion  to  deliver  moral  institutes  in  strings  or  series
af  detached  propositions,  without  subjoining  a  continued  argument  or  regular  dissertation  to  any  of  them.
The  asjstfaatmsjsapophthi^  fit  "pan  the  mind,

ssad  by  carrying  the  eye  of  the  reader  from  subject  to  subject  m  too  quick  a  succearion,  gai»  not  a

1 WM 1— » tfr»  ««t— »f««  to,  1^^  «frlw»  du  immuwy  fiirnkhftd.  or  the  understanding  satisfied. How-
1  a  syllsjms  of  topics  or  a  series  of  propound

t,  who  is  supposed  to  consult  other  books,  or  to  institute  upon  each  subject  researches  of  his
,  rheaspthod  is  by  no  means  convenient  lor  ordinary  readers;  because  few  readeis  are  such  tfaafcrs
ssAonryahinttosetmeirthooghtsatworktipon;  or  such  as  will  pause "andnarry  at  every  pio-
,  nil  they  have  traced  out  its  dependency,  proof;  relation,  and  consequences,  before  they  permit
1  to  step  on  to  another. Arespectahtowriterofthkclej^
hi  the  three  following  propositions  j—
"Ho  one  is  bom  a  slave;  because  every  one  is  ^om  with  all  his  original  rights."
-JVb  on*  can  become  a  slave;  because  ho  one  from  being  a  person  can,  m  me  language  cf  the  Roman
Isa^heeosae  a  thing,  or  subject  of  property." .
•The  supposed  property  of  the  master  in  the  slave,  therefore,  is  matter  of  usurpation,  not  of  right"
It  may  be  possible  to  deduce  from  these  few  adages,  such  a  theory  of  the  primitive  rights  of  human
sater*,  as  wiH  evince  the  illegality  of  slavery :  but  surely  an  author  requires  too  much  of  his  reader,  when
he  expect  him  to  make  mese  deductions  for  himself;  or  to  supply,  perhaps  from  some  remote  chapter  of
,  the  seventl  proofs  and  explanations  whk^  are  necessary  to  render  the  1
1  intelligible.


*  Frames  to  M  The  Precepto*,"  by  Dr.  Johnson.

t  Dr.  FeTgusson,  author  of  u  Iostttutas  of  MM  RiUisopoy.n  17*7.


tl


xxtt  PREFACE.

There  m  a  fruit,  the  opposite  of  this,  which  some  monlkti  who  have  Adopted  a  different,  and  I  think  a
better  plan  of  composition,  have  not  always  been  careful  to  avoid ;  namely,  the  dwelling  upon  verbal  and
elementary  distinctions,  with  a  labour  and  proHiity  proportioned  much  more  to  the  subtlety  of  the  ques-
tion, than  to  its  value  and  importance  in  the  prosecution  of  the  subject.  A  writer  upon  the  law  of  na-
ture,* whose  explications  in  every  part  of  philosophy,  though  always  diffuse,  are  often  very  successful,
has  employed  three  long  sections  in  endeavouring  to  prove  that  "peraussfon*  are  not  laws."  The  dis-
cussion of  thai  eontroveiey,  however  essential  it  might  be  to  dialectic  precision,  was  certainly  not  neces-
sary to  the  progress  of  a  work  designed  to  describe  the  duties  and  obligations  of  civil  life.  The  reader
becomes  impatient  when  he  is  detained  by  disquisitions  which  have  no  other  object  than  the  settling  of
terms  and  phrases  s  and,  what,  is  worse,  they  tor  whose  use  such  books  are  chiefly  intended,  will  not  be
persuaded  to  read  thematalL

I  am  led  to  propose  these  strictures,  not  by  any  propensity  to  depreciate  the  labours  of  my  predecessors,
much  leaf  to  invite  a  comparison  between  the  merits  of  their  performances  and  my  own;  but  solely  by
the  consideration,  that  wjien  a  writer  offers  a  book  to  the  public  upon  a  subject  on  which  the  public  are
abeady  in  possession  of  many  others,  he  is  bound,  by  a  kind  of  literary  justice,  to  inform  his  readers,  dis-
tinctly and  specifically,  what  it  is  he  professes  to  supply,  and  what  he  expects  to  improve.  The  imper-
fections above  enumerated,  are  those  which  I  have  endeavoured  to  avoid  or  remedy.  Of  die  execution
Ike  reader  must  judge;  but  this  was  the  design.

Conceraing  the  principle  of  morals  it  would  be  premature  to  speak ;  but  concerning  the  manner  of
unfolding  and  explaining  that  principle,  I  have  somewhat  which  I  wish  to  be  remarked.  An  experience
of  nine  years  in  the  office  of  a  public  tutor  in  one  of  the  universities,  and  in  that  department  of  education
to  which  these  chapters  relate,  afforded  me  frequent  occasions  to  observe,  that  in  discoursing  to  young
upon  topics  of  morality,  it  required  much  more  pains  to  make  them  perceive  the  difficulty,  than  to
Hand  the  solution:  that,  unless  the  subject  was  so  drawn  up  to  a  point,  as  to  exhibit  the  full  force
of  an  objection,  or  the  exact  place  of  a  doubt,  before  any  explanation  was  entered  upon,— in  other  words,
unless  some  curiosity  was  excited  before  it  was  attempted  to  be  satisfied,  the  labour  of  the  teacher  was
lost  When  information  was  not  desired,  it  was  seldom,  I  found,  retained.  I  have  made  this  observation
say  guide  in  the  following  work:  (hat  is,  upon  each  occasion  I  have  endeavoured,  before  I  suffered  my-
self to  proceed  in  the  disquisition,  to  put  the  reader  in  complete  possession  of  the  question ;  and  to  do  St
m  the  way  mat  I  thought  most  likely  to  stir  up  his  own  doubts  and  solicitude  about  it

In  pursuing  the  principle  of  morals  through  the  detail  nf  cases  to  which  it  is  applicable,  I  have  had  fn
view  to  accommodate  both  the  choice  of  the  subjects  and  the  manner  of  handling  them,  to  the  situations
which  arise  in  the  life  of  an  inhabitant  of  this  country  in  these  times.  This  is  the  thing  that  I  think  to
be  principally  wanting  in  former  treatises ;  and  perhaps  the  chief  advantage  which  wfll  be  found  in  mine.
I  have  examined  no  doubts,  I  have  discussed  no  obscurities,  I  have  encountered  no  errors,  I  have  adverted
to  no  controversies,  but  what  I  have  seen  actually  to  exist  If  some  of  the  questions  treated  of,  appear
to  a  more  instructed  reader  minute  or  puerile,  I  desire  such  reader  to  be  assured  that  f  have  found  them
occasions  of  difficulty  to  young  minds;  and  what^I  have  observed  in  young  minds,  I  should  expect  to
meet  with  in  all  who  approach  these  subjects  for  the  first  time.  Upon  each  article  of  human  duty,  I  have
combined  with  the  conclusions  of  reason  the  declarauons  of  Scripture,  when  they  are  to  be  had,  at  of  co-
ordinate  authority,  and  as  both  terminating  in  the  same  sanctions.

In  the  manner  of  the  work,  I  have  endeavoured  so  to  attemper  the  opposite  plana  above  animadverted
upon,  as  mat  the  reader  may  not  accuse  me  either  of  too  much  haste,  or  too  much  delay.  I  have  be-
stowed upon  each  subject  enough  of  4iatertation  to  give  a  body  and  substance  to  the  chapter  in  which  it
is  treated  oC  as  well  as  coherence  and  perspicuity :  on  the  other  hand,  I  hare  seldom,  I  hope,  exercised
me  patience  of  the  reader  by  the  length  and  prolixity  of  my  essays,  or  disappointed  that  patience  at  last
by  the  tenuity  and  unimportance  of  the  conclusion.

'  There  are  two  particulars  in  the  following  work,  for  which  it  may  be  thought  necessary  mat  I  should
offer  some  excuse.  The  first  of  which  is,  that  I  have  scarcely  ever  referred  to  any  other  book ;  or  men-
tioned the  name  of  the  author  whose  thougntt,  and  sometimes,  possibly,  whose  very  expressions  I  have
adopted.  My  inethocrof  writing^  has  constandy  been  this :  to  extract  what  I  could  from  my  own  stores
and  my  own  reflections  in  die  first  place;  to  put  down  mat,  and  afterwards  to  consult  upon  each  subject
such  readings  as  fell  in  my  way :  which  order,  I  am  convinced,  is  the  only  one  whereby  any  person  can
keep  his  thoughts  from  sliding  into  other  men's  trains.  The  .effect  of  such  a  plan  upon  the  production
itself  will  be,  that,  whilst  some  parts  in  matter  or  manner  may  be  new,  others  will  be  litde  else  than  a
repetition  of  the  old.  I  make  no  pretensions  to  perfect  originality :  I  claim  to  be  something  more  than  a
mere  compiler.  Much,  no  doubt,  is  borrowed ;  but  the  feet  is,  that  the  notes  for  this  work  having  been
prepared  for  some  years,  and  such  things  having  been  from  time  to  time  inserted  in  them  as  appeared  to-
me worth  preserving,  and  such  insertions  made  commonly  without  the  name  of  the  author  from  whom
they  were  taken,  I  should,  at  this  time,  have  found  a  difficulty  in  recovering  those  names  wife  sufficient
exactness  to  be  able  to  render  to  every  man  his  own.  Nor,  to  speak  the  truth,  did  it  appear  to  me  worm
while  to  repeafthe  search  merely  for  this  purpose/  When  authorities  are  relied  upon,  names  must  be
produced ;  when  a  discovery  has  been  made  in  science,  it  may  be  unjust  to  borrow  the  invention  withoot
acknowledging  the  author.  But  in  an  argumentative  treatise,  and  upon  a  subject  which  allows  no  place
fir  discovery  or  invention,  properly  so  called ;  and  in  which  all  feat  can,  belong  to  a  writer  is  his  mode  of

^— ^^— — — *  ■  " m

*  Dr.  Butberforth,  author  of  "  Institutes  of  Natural  Law.",


.  KEFACE.  cni

WMOMBCgr  bin  jwrtgineaU  ef  probabilities ;  I  should  have  thought  it  superfluous,  M  it  been  cosier  to  me
tBUttwevto  have  interrupted  my  text,  or  crowded  my  margin,  with  reference*  to  every  author  whoa*
ilkfeBBadeoaaof  There  is,  however,  one  work  to  which  I  owe  so  much,  thai  it  would  he
1  not  to  ooufeea  the  obligation:  J  mean  the  writing  of  the  late  Abraham  Tocher,  Eaq.  part  of
vera  enhliehad  by  H™— K  and  the  remainder  since  his  death,  under  the  title*  of  "The  light  of
Nstam  panned,  by  Edward  Search,  Eaq."  I  hare  found  in  thk  writer  more  original  thinking  and  obaaf
islim  upon  the  ssrtwiadsnlveic*^

pa  heather  Hie  talent  also  for  illustration  if  unrivalled.  But  hk  thoughts  are  diffused  through  a  long}
Mnm,aAd  inogolar  work.  I  ahall  account  it  no  mean  pntise,  if  I  have  been  sometimes  ahle  to  ditpoaa
smaethod,  to  collect  into  heads  and  articles,  or  to  exhibit  in  more  compact  and  tangible  masses,  what
hfral  maw  wawi  excellent  performance,  ia  spread  over  too  much  surfeco.

TV*  Mat  tin  nianleiiMi  for  which  some  apology  may  be  expected,  ia  the  joining  of  moral  and  political
asflosousj  together,  or  the  addition  of  a  hook  of  politics  to  a  system  of  ethics, Against,  this  objection,  if
nbsamde  one,  I  might  defend  myself  by  the  example  of  many  approved  writers,  who  have  treated  dm
qpVsIi  haaiaii  Hf  ctete,  or,  aa  some  choose  to  express  it,  "of  the  righto  and  obligations  of  man,  in  hk  indi-
vidual and  social  capacity,"  in  the  same  book. I  might  allege,  also,  that  the  part  a  member  of  the  com*
i  shall  take  in  political  contentions,  the  vote  he  shall  give,  the  counsels  he  shall  approve,  the
the  shall  afibrd,  or  the  opposition  he  shall  make,  to  any  system  of  public  measures,— is  as  much  a
sjmnhon  of  personal  duty,  aa  much  concerns  the  conscience  of  the  individual  who  deliberates,  aa  the  de-
■fiiainalim  of  any  doubt  which  relates  to  the  conduct  of  private  life ;  that  consequently  political  pbno.
saphy  ia,  uropwly  spooking,  a  oantinuation  of  moral  philosophy ;  or  rather  indeed  a  part  of  iV  supposing
■awl  philosophy  to  have  for  its  aim  the  information  of  the  human  conscience  in  every  deliberation  mat
fessmny  to  canm  before  it I  might  avail  myself  of  these  excuses,  if  I  wanted  them;  but  the  vindication
i  which  I  rely  ia  the  following  >— In  stating  the  principle  of  morals,  the  reader  will  observe  that  I
i  industry  in  explaining  the  theory,  and  showing  the  necessity  of  general  rales;  with*
>  tall  and  wmaranf  consideration  of  which,  I  am  persuaded  that  no  system  of  moral  philosophy  can
This  fnmriatinn  frrh%  laid  nr  rnthnr  thia  hn bit  bamg  fnrmnri  llin  ilirriaaksi
,  to  which,  more  than  to  almost  any  other,  general  rules  are  applicable,  became  dear
,  had  these  topics  been  assigned  to  a  distinct  work,  it  would  have  been  necessary  to
I  the  same  rudiments,  to  have  established  over  again  the  same  principles,  as  these  which  wo
had  already  exemplified,  and  rendered  familiar  to  the  reader,  in  the  former  parts  of  this. In  a  word,  if
i  appear  to  any  one  too  great  a  diversity,  or  too  wide  a  distance,  between  the  subjects  treated  of  in
sesjEae  of  the  present  volume,  let  him  be  reminded,  that  the  doctrine  of  general  rules,  pervades  and


It  may  not  be  improper,  however,  to  admonish  the  reader,  that,  wnffer  the  name  of  potties,  he  is  not  to
ssek  for  those  occnsinnal  controversies,  which  the  occurrences  of  the  present  day,  or  any  temporary  situa-
tion of  public  aflairs,  may  excite;  and  most  of  which,  if  not  beneath  the  dignity,  it  h  beside  the  purpose,
of  a  phOosophical  instimtion  to  advert  to.  He  will  perceive  that  the  several  disquisitions  are  framed  with
a  leaeraace  to  the  condition  of  thk  country,  and  of  thk  government;  but  it  seemed  to  me  to  belong  to
the  design  of  a  work  like  the  following,  not  so  much  to  discuss  each  altercated  point  with  the  particularity
of  a  posairal  pamphlet  upon  the  subject,  aa  to  deliver  those  universal  principles,  and  to  exhibit  that  mode
t  of  n  earning  in  politics,  by  the  due  application  of  which  every  man  might  be  enabled  to  attain
i  of  hk  own.  I  am  not  ignorant  of  an  objection  mat  has  been  advanced  against  all
i  concerning  the  origin,  principle,  or  limitation  of  civil  authority;  namely,  that  such
i  little  or  no  influence  upon  the  conduct  either  of  the  state  or  of  the  subject,  of  the
i  or  the  governed;  nor  are  attended  with  any  useful  consequences  to  either:  that  in  times  of
r  theyarcaot  wanted ;  in  times  of  confusion  they  are  never  heard.  Thk  representation,  how-
,  knot  just  Times  of  tumult,  it  k  true,  are  not  the  times  to  learn;  but  the  choice
i  men  make  of  their  aide  and  party,  in  the  moat  critical  occasions  of  the  commonwealth,  may  never-
1  upon  the  lessons  they  have  received,  the  book*  they  have  read,  and  the  opinions  they
saoieeaVm  seasons  of  leisure  and  quietness.  Some  judicious  persons,  who  were  present  at  Geneva,
;  the  troubles  which  lately  convulsed  that  city,  thought  they  perceived,  in  the  contentions  there
aj  on,  the  operation  of  that  political  theory,  which  the  writings  of  Rosses*,  and  the  unbounded
i  m  which  these  wriongs  are  hoUen  by  hkro^  Through-

out the  political  disputes  that  have  within  these  lew  years  taken  place  in  Great  Britain,  in  her  akter-
,  and  in  her  foreign  dependencies,  it  was  impossible  not  to  observe,  in  the  language  of  party,  in
i  of  public  meetings,  in  debate,  in  conversation,  in  the  general  strain  of  those  fugitive  and
to  the  public  which  such  occasions  call  forth,  the  pre  valency  of  those  ideas  of  crvfl
sashersty  which  are  displayed  in  the  works  of  Mr.  Locke.  The  credit  of  that  great  name,  the  courage
sad  liberality  of  hk  principles,  the  skill  and  clearness  with  which  hk  arguments  are  proposed,  no  torn
man  the  weight  of  the  arguments  themselves,  have  given  a  reputation  and  currency  to  hk  opinions,  of
wlach  I  aan  persuaded,  in  any  unsettled  state  of  publk  ah^lra,  ue  mfluence  would  be  felt  As  thk  k
ast  apiece  for  «*— ^T^»g  the  truth  or  tendency  of  these  doctrines,  I  would  not  be  understood  by  what
I  have  said,  to  express  any  judgment  concerning  either.  I  mean  only  to  remark,  that  such  doctrines  are
mt  without  eject;  and  that  it  h  of  proofed  importance  to  have  the  principles  from  which  the  obligations
tf«KBBlnB0o,aod  the  extent  of  civil  obediency,  are  derived,  rightly  explained,  and  well  lmderstood.


i


nftr  PREFACE.

Indeed,  at  far  as  I  have  observed,  in  political,  beyond  all  other  subjects,  where  men  are  without  noose
fundamental  and  scientific  princitilei  to  resort  to,  they  are  liable  to  have  their  un^entaadmgs  played
upon  by  cant  phnaea  and  unmeaning  tome,  of  which  every  party  in  every  country  possesses  a  vocabulary.
We  appear  astonished  when  we  see  the  multitude  led  away  by  sounds;  but  we  should  remember' that,
if  aounds  work  miracles,  it  is  always  upon  ignorance.  The  influence  of  names  is  in  exact  proportion  to
Ike  want  of  knowledge.

Hiese  are  the  observations  with  which  I  have  judged  it  expedient  to  prepare  the  attention  of  my  Fender.
Concerning  the  personal  motives  which  engaged  me  in  the  following  attempt,  it  is  not  necessary  that  1
say  much ;  the  nature  of  my  academical  situation,  a  great  deal  of  leisure  since  my  retirement  from  it,  the
incommendation  of  an  honoured  and  excellent  friend,  the  authority  of  the  venerable  prelate  to  whom
these  labours  are  inscribed,  the  not  perceiving  in  what  way  I  could  employ  my  time  or  talents  better,  and
my  disapprobation*  in  literary  men,  of  that  fastidious  Indolence  which  aits  still  because  it  disrianm  to  do
Kttfe,  were  the  considerations  that  directed  my  thoughts  to  this  design.  Nor  have  I  repented  of  the
undertaking. ,  Whatever  be  the  fate  or  reception  of  this  work,  it  owes  its  author  nothing.  In  sickness
and  in  health  I  have  found  in  it  that  winch  can  alone  alleviate  the  one,  or  give  eojoyment  to  the  other,—


TO  THfi  RIGHT  REVEREND  EDMUND  LAW,  D.  D.

LORD  BISHOP  OF  CARLISLE.


Mt  lobb,*— Had  the  obligations  which  I  owe  to  your  Lordahip'g  kindness  been  much
tew,  or  much  fewer,  than  they  are ;  had  personal  gratitude  left  any  place  in  my  mind  for
deliberation  or  for  inquiry ;  in  selecting  a  name  which  every  reader  might  confess  to  be
prefixed  with  propriety  to  a  work,  that,  in  many  of  its  parts*  bears  no  obscure  relation  to
the  general  principles  of  natural  and  revealed  religion,  I  should  have  found  myself  directed
by  many  considerations,  to  that  of  the  Bishop  of  Carlisle.  A  long  life  spent  in  the  most  inter-
esting of  all  human  pursuits— the  investigation  of  moral  and  religious  truth,  in  constant  and
unwearied  endeavours  to  advance  the  discovery,  communication,  and  success  of  both ;  a
life  so  occupied,  and  arrived  at  that  period  which  renders  every  life  venerable,  commands
respect  by  a  title  which  no  virtuous  mind  will  dispute,  which  no  mind  sensible  of  the  im-
portance of  these  studies  to  the  supreme  concernments  of  mankind  will  not  rejoice  to  see
acknowledged.  Whatever  difference,  or  whatever  opposition,  some  who  peruse  your
Lordship's  writings  may  perceive  between  your  conclusions  and  their  own,  the  good  and
i  of  all  persuasions  will  revere  that  industry,  which  has  for  its  object  the  illustration  or
i  of  our  common  Christianity.  Your  Lordship's  researches  have  never  lost  sight  of
i  purpose,  namely,  to  recover  the  simplicity  of  the  Gospel  from  beneath  that  load  of  W
I  additions,  which  the  ignorance  of  some  ages,  and  the  learning  of  others,  the
of  weak,  and  the  craft  of  designing  men,  have-  (unhappily  for  its  interest)
.  upon  it  And  this  purpose,  I  am  convinced,  was  dictated  by  the  purest  motive ;
by  a  firm,  and  I  think  a  just  opinion,  that  whatever  renders  religion  more  rational,  renders
it  we  credible;  that  he  who,  by  a  diligent  and  faithful  examination  of  the  original  re-
cords, ArmitmM  from  the  system  one  article  which  contradicts  the  apprehension,  the  ex-
perience, or  the  reasoning  of  mankind,  does  more  towards  recommending  the  belief,  and,
with  the  belief;  the  influence-  of  Christianity,  to  the  understandings  and  consciences  of
seriooB  inquirers,  and  through  them  to  universal  reception  and  authority,  than  can  be
effected  by  a  thousand  contenders  for  creeds  and  ordinances  of  human  establishment

When  the  doctrine  of  Transubstantiation  had  taken  possession  of  the  Christian  world,  it
was  not  without  the  industry  of  learned  men,>that  it  came  at  length  to  be  discovered,
that  no  such  doctrine  was  contained  in  the  New  Testament  But  had  those  excellent
pejgona  done  nothing  more  by  their  discovery,  than  abolished  an  innocent  superstition,
or  changed  some  directions  in  the  ceremonial  of  public  worship,  they  had  merited  but  little
of  that  veneration  with  which  the  gratitude  of  Protestant  Churches  remembers  their  ser-
vicea.  What  they  did  for  mankind,  was  this:  they  exonerated  Christianity  of  a  weight
which  sunk  it  If  indolence  or  timidity  had  checked  these  exertions,  or  suppressed  the
fruit  and  publication  of  these  inquiries,  is  it  too  much  to  affirm,  that  infidelity  would  at  this
say  have  been  universal]
I  do  not  mean,  my  Lord,  "by  the  mention  of  this  example  to  insinuate,  that  any  popular
i  which  your  Lordship  may  have  encountered,  ought  to  be  compared  with  TransinV
j  or  that  the  assurance  with  which  we  reject  that  extravagant  absurdity,  is
t  in  the  controversies  in  which  your  Lordship  has  been  engaged ;  but  I  mean,  by
callmgto  mind  those  great  reformers  of  the  public  faith,  to  observe,  or  rather  to  express
■y  own  persuasion,  that  to  restore  the  purity,  is  most  effectually  to  promote  the  progress,
af  Christianity ;  and  that  the  same  virtuous  motive  which  hath  sanctified  their  labours,
Lyour*  At  a  time  when  some  men  appear  not  to  perceive  any  good,  and  others
D  25  3


xxvi  DEDICATION.

to  suspect  an  evil  tendency,  in  that  spirit  of  examination  and  research  which  is  gone  forth
in  Christian  countries,  this  testimony  is  become  due,  not  only  to  the  probity  of  your
Lordship's  views,  bat  to  the  general  cause  of  intellectual  and  religious  liberty.

That  your  Lordship's  life  may  be  prolonged  in  health  and  honour;  that  it  may  continue
to  afford  an  instructive  proof;  how  serene  and  easy  old  age  can  be  made  by  the  memory  of
important  and  well-intended  labours,  by  the  possession  of  public  and  deserved  esteem,  by
the  presence  of  many  grateful  relatives ;  above  all,  by  the  resources  of  religion,  by  an  un-
shaken confidence  in  the  designs  of  a  "faithful  Creator,"  and  a  settled  trust  in  the  truth
and  in  the  promises  of  Christianity*  is  the  fervent  prayer  ofj  my  Lord,  your  Lordship's
dutiful,  most  obliged,  and  most  devoted  servant,

'  ^  WILLIAM  PALEY.

C«ftaZe,feo.  10,178*.


MORAL  AND  POLITICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


BOOK  L

PRELIMINARY  CONSIDERATIONS.


CHAPTER  L
l  and  use  iff  the  Srienee.

Hobal  Philo«opht,  Morality.  Ethics,  Casuis-
try, Natural  Law,  mean  all  the  aame  thing;
■aneWt  thai  science  which  teaches  men  their  duty
end  the  twwii  qfU.

The  use  of  audi  a  study  depends  upon  this,
%uW,  without  it,  tha  raks  of  life,  by  winch  men
are  ordinarily  governed,  oftentimes  mislead  them,
\  a  defect,  either  in  the  role,  or  in  the  ap-


i  are,  the  Law  of  Honour,  the  Law
of  the  Ls^aiki  the  Scriptures.


CHAPTER  IL

The  Lam  qf  Honour.

Tbb  Law  of  Honour  is  a  system  of  rales  con-
*  by  people  of  mshion,  and  calculated  to
then:  iuseicourse  with  01


[ Hi  W1WTT |WK|JUBU.

CnsasuiiMialy,  nothing  hr  adverted  to  by  the
anv  of  Honour,  hot  what  tends  to  iiMnmmnde


( tins  law  only  prescribes  and  regulates
to  da&iee  betwixt  equaUj  omitting  such  as  relate
la  lac  Supreme  Being  ja  well  as  those  which  we
esse  to  our  inferiors.  For  which  reason,  prolane-
nesa,  neglect  of  public  worship  or  private  devotion,
'  to  servants,  rigorous  treat  incut  of  tenants
r  dependants,  want  of  charity  to  the  poor,
-__~^  done  to  tradesmen  by  fosolvency.  or  oaky
ex  payment,  with  numberless  examples  or  the  same
shai,  are  aocuimtwl  no  breaches  of  honour;  be-
eaaae  a  man  is  not  a  leas  agreeable  companion  for
these  vices,  nor  the  worse  to  deal  with,  in  those
.  which  are  usually  transacted  between
"  man  and  another.

,  the  Law  of  Honour,  being  constituted
W  asan  occnpied  in  the  pursuit  6f  pleasure,  and
■r  the  Bsutual  conveniency  of  such  men^  will


at  iiiiai!,aanright  be  expected  from  the  character

sad  design  of  the  kw-makers,  to  be,  in  most  in-

"  "j  to  the  licentious  indulgence  of


_  natural  passions.  Thus  k  auow*of  fornica-
tion, adultery,  drunkenness,  prodigality,  duelling,
and  of  revenge  in  the  extreme;  and  lay*  no;  stress
upon  too  virtues  opposite  to  these. - „


CHAPTER  III.

The  Law  of  the  Land.

THATpart  of  mankind,  who  are  beneath  tha
Law  of  Honour,  often  make  thf  Law  of  the  Land
their  rule  of  lift;  that  is,  they  are  satisfied  with
themselves,  so  long  aa  they  do  or  omit  nothing,
for*  the  doing  or  omitting  of  which  the  law  can
punish  them.

Whereas  every  system  of  human  lawa,  con-
sidered aa  a  rule  of  life,  labours  under  the  two
following  defects;

I.  Human  laws  omit  many  duties,  as  aot  objects


of  compulsion;  such  aa  tasty  to  JBod,  bounty  te
the  poor,  forgiveness  of  injui
children,  gratitude  to]


forgiveness  ofinjuries,  education  of


The  law  neyer.epeaks  but  to  command,  nor
commands  but  where  it  can  compel :"  consequently,
those  duties,  which  by  their  nature  must  bo  volun-
tary, are  left  out  of  , the  statute  book,  as  lying  be-
yond the  reach  of  ife  operation- and  authority.

II.  Human  laws  permit,  or  which  is  the  same
thing,  suffer  to  go  unpunished,  many  crimes,  be-
cause they  are  incapable  of  being  denned  by  any
pieviouaoWriptibn.  Of  which  nature  are  luxury,
prodigality,  partiality  in  voting  at  those  elections
m  which  the  qualifications  of  the  candidate  ought
to  determine  the  success,  caprice  m  the  disposition
of  men's  fortunes  at  their  death,  disrespect  to
parents,  and  a  multitude  of  similar  examples.

For,  this  is  the  alternative:  either  the  law  must
define  beforehand,  and  with  precision,  the  offences
which  it  punishes;  or  it  must  be  left  to  the  discre-
tion of  tne  magistrate,  to  determine  upon  each
particular  accusation,  whether  it  constitute  that
offence  which  the  kw  designed  to  punish, of  not;
which  is,  in  effect,  leaving  %>  the  magistrate  to
punish,  or  not  to  punish,  at  his  pleasure,  the  in-
dividual who  is  brought  before  him ;  which  is  just
so  much  tyranny.  Where,  therefore,  aa  in  the  in-
stances above  mentioned,  the  distinction  between
right  and  wrong  u  of  too  subtile,  or  of  too  secret,
a  nature,  to  be  ascertained  by  any  preconcerted
language,  the  kw  of  most  countries,  especially  of
free  states,  rather  than  commit  the  liberty  of  the
subject  to  the  execration  of  the  magistrates,  leaves
men  in  such  cases  to  themselves,
anr


98


MORAL  AND  POLITICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


CHAPTER  IV.

The  Scriptures.

Whoever  expects  to  find  in  the  Scriptures  a
specific  direction  for  every  moral  doubt  that  arises,
looks  for  more  than  he  will  meet  with.  And  to
what  a  magnitude  such  a  detail  of  particular  pre-
cepts would  have  enlarged  the  sacred  volume,
may  be  partly  understood  from  the  following  con-
sideration : — The  laws  of  this  country  {  including
the  acts  of  the  legislating  and  the  decisions  of  our
supreme  courts  of  justice,  are  not  contained  in  a
fewer  than  fifty  folio  volumes.  And  yet  it  is  not
once  in  ten  attempts  that  you  can  find  the  case
you  look  for,  in  any  law  book  whatever:  to  say
nothing  of  those  numerous  points  of  conduct,  con-
cerning which  the  law  professes  not  to  prescribe
or  determine  any  thing.  Had  then  the  same  par-
ticularity, which  obtains  in  human  laws  so  for  as
they  go,  been  attempted  in  the  Scriptures,  through-
out  the  whole  extent  of  morality,  it  is  nuuufest
they  would  have  been  by  much  too  bulky  to  be
either  read  or  circulated;  or  rather,  as  St  John
says,  "even  the  world  itself  could  not  contain  the
books  that  should  be  written."

Morality  is  taught  in  Scripture  in  this  wise. —
General  rules  are  laid  down,  of  piety,  justice,
benevolence,  and  purity :  such  as  worshiping  God
in  spirit  and  in  truth :  doing  as  we  would  be  done
by;  loving  our  neighbour  as  ourself;  forgiving
others,  as  we  expect  forgiveness  from  God;  that
mercy  is  better  than  sacrifice;  that  not  that  which
entereth  into  a  man,  (nor,  by  parity  of  reason,
any  ceremonial  pollutions,)  but  that  which  pro-
ceedeth  from  the  heart,  defileth  him.  These  rules
are  occasionally  illustrated,  either  by  fictitious  ex-
amples, as  in  the  parable  of  the  good  Samaritan ;
and  of  the  cruel  servant,  who  refused  to  his  fellow-
servant  that  indulgence  and  compassion  which
his  master  had  shown  to  him:  or  in  instances
which  actually  presented  themselves,  as  in  Christ's
reproof  of  his  disciples  at  the  Samaritan  village;
his  praise  of  the  poor  widow,  who  east  in  her  last
mite;  his  censure  of  the  Pharisees,  who  chose  out
the  chief  rooms,— and  of  the  tradition,  whereby
they  evaded  the  command  to  sustain,  their  indigent
parents :'  or,  lastly,  in  the  resolution  qf  questions,
vhich  those  who  were  about  our  Saviour  proposed
to  him:  as  his  answer  to  the  young  man  who
asked  him,  "  What  lack  I  yet]"  and  to  the  honest
scribe,  who- had  found  out,  even  in  that  age  and
country,  that  "to  love  God  and  his  neighbour,
was  more  than  all  whole  bumtan%riiigs  aim  sacri-
fice." *

And  this  is  in  truth  the  way  in  which  all  prac-
tical sciences  are  taught,  as  Arithmetic,  Grammar,
Navigation,  and  the  like.— Rules  are  laid  down,
and  examples  are  subjoined  r  not  that  these  ex*
amples  are  the  cases,  much  less  all  the  cases,
which  will  actually  occur;  but  by  way  only  of
explaining  the  principle  of  the  rule,  and  as  so
many  specimens  of  the  method  of  applying  it. —
The  chief  difference  is,  that  the  examptes  in
Scripture  are  not  annexed  to  the  rules  with  the
didactic  regularity  to  which  we  are  now-a-days
accustomed,  but  delivered  dispersedly,  as  particular


suggested  them;  which  gave  them,
however,  (especially  to  those  who  heard  them,
and  were  present  to  the  occasions  which  produced
them,)  an  energy  and  persuasion,  much  beyond
what  the  same  or  any  instances  would  have  ap-
oeaied  with,  in  their  places  in  a  system.


Besides  this,  the  Scriptmes  commonly  pro-sup-
pose in  the  person  to  whom  they  speak,  a  know-
ledge of  the  principles  of  natural  justice;  and  are
employed  not  so  much  to  teach  new  rules  of
morality,  as  to  enforce  the  practice  of  it  by  new
sanctions,  and  by  a  greater  certainty  ;  which  last
seems  to  be  the  proper  business  of  a  revelation
from  God.  and  what  was  most  wanted.

Thus  the  "unjust,  coveiisjit-breakem,  and  ex-
tortioners," are  condemned  in  Scripture,  supposing
it  known,  or  leaving  it,  where  it  admits  of  doubt,
to  moralists  to  determine,  what  injustice,  extortion,
or  breach  of  covenant,  are.

The  above  considerations  are  intended  to  prove
that  the  Scriptures  do  not  supersede  the  use  of  the
science  of  which  we  profess  to  treat,  and  at  the
same  time  to  acquit  them  of  any  charge  of  imper-
fection or  insufficiency  on  that  account


CHAPTER  V.
The  Moral  Sense.

"  The  fether  of  Cams  Toranius  had  been  pro-
scribed by  the  triumvirate.  Cains  Toranius
coming  over  to  the  interests  of  that  party,  dis-
covered to  the  officers,  who  were  in  pursuit  of  his
Cither's  life,  the  place  where  he  concealed  himself,
and  gave  them  withal  a  description,  by  which
they  might  distinguish  his  person,  when  they
found  him.  The  old  man,  more  anxious  for  the
safety  and  fortunes  of  his  son,  than  about  the  little
that  might  remain  of  his  own  life,  began  imme-
diately to  inquire  of  the  officers  who  seized  him,
whether  his  son  was  well,  whether  he  had  done
his  duty  to  the  satisfaction  of  bis  generals.  'That
son  (replied  one  of  the  officers  J  so  dear  to  thy
affections,  betrayed  thee  to  us ;  fey  his  information
thou  art  apprehended,  and  diest.'  The  officer
with  this,  struck  a  poniard  to  his  heart,  and  the
unhappy  parent  fell,  not  so  much  affected  by  his
fete,  as  by  the  means  to  which  he  owed  it"*

Now  the  question  is,  whether,  if  this  story  were
related  to  the  wild  boy  caught,  some  years  ago,  in
the  woods  of  Hanover,  or  to  a  savage  without
experience,  and  without  instruction,  cut  off  in  bis
infancy  from  all  intercourse  with  his  species,  and,
consequently,  under  no  possible  influence  of  ex-
ample, authority,  education,  sympathy  or  habit ;
whether,  I  say,  such  a  one  would  feel,  upon  the
relation,  any  degree  of  that  sentiment  of  disap-
probation of  Toranius" s  conduct  which  we  feel,
or  not]

They  who  maintain  the  existence  of  a  moral
sense;  of  innate  maxims;  of  a  natural  conscience;
that  the  love  of  virtue  and  hatred  of  vice  are  in-
stinctive ;  or  the  perception  of  right  and  wrong
intuitive ;  (all  which  are  only  different  ways  o?
expressing  the  same  opinion,)  affirm  that  he
would.


*  (LCaius  Tannins  triumvJrum  partes  seeotas,  pro-
script!  paths  sui  prattorii  et  ornati  viri  latebras.  rtatem,
notasque  corporis,  qui  bus  ag  nosci  posset,  eeoturionibus
edidit,  qui  sum,  persecute  sunt.  Benex  de  filii  maais  vita
et  ioorementis,  quam  de  reliquo  spiritu  suo  sotlicitus,  an
ineciumis  esset,  et  aa  imperatoribus  satisfaceret,  inter -
rogare  eos  eoepit.  B  quibus  unus:  •  Ab  iuo,'  inqult,
'  quern  taatoperadilig^demonstratusnostromimsterio,
filii  indicio  oeciderts:'  protinnsque  pectus  ejus  gladio
trajecit,  Collapsus  itaque  est  infetu,  auctore  cadis,
quam  ipsa  caede,  miserior.*'— VALBR.  MAX.  lis.  ix.
Ml.


THK  MORAL  SENSE.


99


They  who  deny  the  existence  of  *  moral  sense,
Ac.  affirm  that  he  would  not
And  upon  this,  issue  is  joined.
.  A*  the  experiment  has  never  been  made,  and,
from  the  difficulty  of  procuring  a  subject  (not  to
mention  the  impossibility  of  proposing  the  question
to  him,  if  we  had  one,)  lrf  never  likely  to  be  made,
what  would  be  the  event,  can  only  be  judged  of
from  probable  reasons.

They  who  contend  for  the  affirmative,  observe,
that  we  approve  examples  of  generosity,  gratitude,
fidelity,  Ac.  and  condemn  the  contrary,  instantly,
without  deliberation,  without  having  any  interest
of  our  own  concerned  in  them,  oft-times  without
being  conscious  of,  or  able  to  give  any  reason  for,
our  approbation :  that  this  approbation  is  uniform
and  universal,  the  same  sorts  of  conduct  being  ap-
proved and  disapproved  in  all  ages  and  countries  of
the  world;  circumstances,  say  they,  which  strongly
indkate'the  operation  of  an  instinct  or  moral  sense.
On  the  other  hand,  answers  have  been  given  to
most  of  these  arguments,  by  the  patrons  of  the
opposite  system:  and,

First,  as  to  the  uniformity  above  alleged,  they
controvert  the  (act. They  remark,  from  authentic
accounts  of  historians  and  travellers,  that  there  is
scarcely  a  single  vice  which,  in  some  age  or  coun-
try of  the  work!,  has  not  been  countenanced  by
public  opinion  2  that  in  one  country,  it  is  esteemed
an  office  of  piety  in  children  to  sustain  their  aged
parents ;  in  another  to-  dispatch  them  out  of  the
way :  that  sukade{  in  one  age  of  the  world,  has
been  heroism,  is  m  another  felony:  that  theft,
which  is  punished  by  most  laws,  by  the  laws  of
Sparta  was  not  unfrequently  rewarded :  that  the
promiscuous  commerce  of  the  sexes,  although  con-
demned by  the  regulations  and  censure  of  all
dvilned  nations,  is  practised  by  the  savages  of  the
tropical  regions  without  reserve,  compunction,  or
disgrace :  that  crimes,  of  which  it  is  no  longer
permitted  us  even  to  speak,  have  had  their  advo-
cates amongst  the  sages  of  very  renowned  times :
that,  if  an  inhabitant  of  the  polished  nations  of
Europe  be  delighted  with  the  appearance,  wher-
ever ne  meets  with  it,  of  happiness,  tranquillity,
and  comfort,  a  wild  American  is  no  less  diverted
with  the  wnthings  and  contortions  of  a  victim  at
the  stake:  that  even  amongst  ourselves,  and  in
the  present  improved  state  of  moral  knowledge,
we  are  for  from  a  perfect  consent  in  our  opin-
ions or  feelings: that  you-  shall  hear  duelling
alternately  reprobated  and  applauded,  according
to  the  sex,  age  or  station,  of , the  person  you  con-
verse with :  that  the  forgiveness  of  injuries  and
intuits  is  accounted  by  one  sort  of  people  magna-
nimity ,  by  another  meanness :  that  in  the  above
instances,  and  perhaps  in  most  others,  moral  ap-
probation fbHows  the  fashions  and  institutions  of
the  country  we  live  in ;  which  fashions  also,  and
institutions  themselves,  have  grown  out  of  the
exigences,  the  climate,  situation,  or  local  circum-
stances of  the  country ;  or  have  been  set  up  by
the  authority  of  an  arbitrary  chieftain,  or  the  un-
accountable caprice  of  the  multitude :  all  which,
they  observe,  looks  very  little  like  the  steady  hand
and  indelible  characters  of  Nature. But,

Secondly,  because,  after  these  exceptions  and
abatements,  H  cannot  be  denied  but  that  some
sorts  of  actions  command  and  receive  the  esteem
of  mankind  more  than  others;  and  that  the  appro-
bation of  them  is  general  though  not  universal
r  say,  that  the  general  a


as  to  this  they  1


1  approbation


of  virtue,  even  in  instances  where  we  have  no
interest  of  our  own  to  induce  us  to  it,  may  be
accounted  for  without  the  assistance  of  a  moral
sense:  thus:

"  Having  experienced,  in  some  instances,  a  par-
ticular conduct  to  be  beneficial  to  ourselves,  or
observed  that  it  would  be  so,  a  sentiment  of  ap-
probation rises  up  in  our  minds;  which  sentiment
afterwards  accompanies  the  idea  or  mention  of  the
same  conduct,  although  the  private  advantage,
which  first  excited  it  no  longer  exist.11  ,

And  this  continuance  of  the  passion,  after  the
reason  of  it  has  ceased,  is  nothing  more,  say  they,
than  what  happens  hi  other  cases;  especially  in
the  love  of  money,  which  is  in  no  person  so  eaper,
as  it  is  oftentimes  found  to  be  in  a  rich'  old  miser,
withouf  family  to  provide  for,  or  friend  to  oblige
by  it,  and  to  whom,  consequently,  it  is  no  longer
(and  he  may  be  sensible  of  it  too)  of  any  real  use
or  value ;  yet  is  this  man  as-much  overjoyed  with
gain,  and  roortifieaV  by  losses,  as  he  was  the  first
day  he  opened  bis.  shop,  and  when  his  very  sub-
sistence depended  upon  his  success  in  it.

By  these  means  (hecustom  of  approving  certain
actions  commenced :  and  when  once  sucn  a  cus-
tom hath  got  footing  in  the  world,  it  is  no  diffi-
cult thing  to  explain  how  it  is  transmitted  and
continued;  for  then  the  greatest  part  of  those  who
approve  of  virtue,  approve  of  it  from  authority)  by
imitation,  and  from  a  habit  of  approvinff  such  and
such,  actions,  inculcated  in  early  youth,  and  re-
ceiving, as  men  grow,  up,  continual  accessions  of
strength  and  vigour,  from  censure  and  encourage-
ment, from  the  books  they  read,  the  conversations
they  hear,  the  current  application  ef  epithets,  the
general  turn  of  language,  and  the  various  other
causes  by  which  it  univenally  comes  to  pass,  that
a  society  of  men,  touched  in  the  feeblest  degree
with  the  same  passion,  soon  communicate  to  one
another  a  great  degree  of  it*  This  is  the  case
with  most  of  us  at  present;  and  is  the  cause  also,
that  the  process  of  association,  described  in  the
last  paragraph  but  one,  is  little  now  either  per-
ceived or  wanted.

Amongst  the  causes  assigned  for  the  continu-
ance and  diffusion  of  the  same  moral  sentiments
amongst  mankind,  we  have  mentioned  imitation.

The  efficacy  of  this  principle  is  most  observable
in  children :  indeed,  if  there  be  any  thing  in  them,
which  deserves  the  name  of  an  instinct,  it  is  their
propensity  to  imitation.  Now  there  is  nothing
which  children  imitate  or  apply  more  readily  than
expressions  of  affection  and  aversion,  of  approba-
tion, hatred,  resentment,  and  the  like;  and  when
these  passions  and  expressions  are  once  connected,
which  they  soon  will  be  by  the  same  association
which  unites  words  with  their  ideas,  the  passion
will  follow  the  expression,  and  attach  upon  the
object  to  which  the  child  has  been  accustomed  to
apply  the  epithet  In  a  word,  when  almost  every
thing  else  is  learned  by  imitation,  can  we  wonder


*  "  From  instances  of  popular  tumults,  seditions,  fac-
tion!, panics,  and  of  atl  passions  whidh  are  shared  with-
a  multitude,  we  May  learn  the  influence  of  society,  in
exciting  and  supporting  any  emotion ;  while  the  most
ungovernable  disorders  are  raised,  we  And,  by  that
means,  from  the  slit htest  and  most  frivolous  occasions.
He  must  be  more  or  lew  than  man,  who  kindles  not  in
the  common  Mass.  What  wonder  then,  that  moral
sentiments  are  found  of  such  influence  in  lira,  though
springing  from  principles,  which  may  appear,  at  first
riant,  somewhat  small  and  delicate  V  -Hume's  Inquiry
esnceraJiif  c**  PrtmdpU*  «f  Moral*,  Sect.  ix.  p.  SW
3*


80


MORAL  AND.POLITICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


to  find  the  nme  cause  concerned  in  the  generation
of  our  moral  sentiments  ?

Another  considerable  objection  to  the  system  of
moral  instincts  is  this,  that  there  are  no  maxims
m  the  science  which  can  well  be  deemed  innate,
as  none  perhaps  can  be  assigned,  which  are  abso-
lutely and  universally  true ;  in  other  words,  which
do  not  bend  to  circumstances.  Veracity,  which
seems, -if  any  be,  a-  natural  duty,  is  excused  in
many  oases  towards  an  jenemy,  a  thief,  or  a  mad-
man. The  obligation  of  promises,  which  is  a  first
principle  in  morality,  depends  upon  the  circum-
stances under  which  they  were  made;  they  may
have  been  unlawful,  or  become  so  since,  or  incon-
sistent with  former  promises,  or  erroneous,  or
extorted;  under  all  which  cases,  instances  may
be  suggested,  where  the  obligation  to  perform  the
promise  would  be  very  dubious ;  and  so  of  most
other  general  rules,  when  they  come  to  be  actually


An  argument  has  been  also  nroposed  on  the
June  side  of  the  question,  of  this  Kind.  Together
wHh  the  instinct,  there  must  have  been  implanted,
it  is  said,  a  clear  and  precise  idea  of  the  object
Upon  which  it  was  to  attach.  The  instinct  and
the  idea  of  the  object  arc  inseparable  even  in  ima-
gination, and  as  necessarily  accompany  each  other
as  any  correlative  ideas. whatever:  that  is,  in
plainer  terms,  if  we  be  prompted  by  nature  to  the
approbation  of  particular  actions,  we  must  have
received  also  from  nature  a  distinct  conception  of
the  action  we  are  thus  prompted  to  approve;
which  we  certainly  have  not  received.

But  as  this  argument  bears  alike  against  all
instincts,  and  against  their  existence  in  brutes  as
well  as  in  men,  it  will  hardly,  I  suppose,  produce
conviction,  though  it  may  be  difficult  to  find  an
answer  to  it

Upon  the  whole,  it  seems  to  me,  either  that
there  exist  no  such  instincts  as  compose  what  is
called  the  moral  sense,  or  that  they  are  not  now
to  be  distinguished  from  prejudices  and  habits;
on  which  account  they  cannot  be  depended  upon
in  moral  reasoning :  I  mean  that  it  is  not  a  safe
way  of  arguing,  to  assume  certain  principles  as  so
many  dictates,  impulses,  and  instincts  of  nature,
and-  then  to  draw  conclusions  from  these  princi-
ples, as  to  the  rectitude,  or  wrongness  of  actions,
independent  of  the  tendency  of  such  actions,  or  of
any  other  consideration  whatever.

Aristotle  lays  down,  as  a  fundamental  and  self-
evident  maxim,  that  nature  intended  barbarians  to
be  slaves ;  and  proceeds  to  deduce  from  this  maxim
a  train  of  conclusions,  calculated  to  justify  the
policy  which  then  prevailed.  And  I  question
whether  the  same  maxim  be  not  still  self-evident
to  the  company  of  merchants  trading,  to  the  coast
of  Africa.

Nothing  is  so  toon  made,  as  a  maxim ;  and  it
appears-  from  the  example  of  Aristotle,  that  au-
thority and  convenience,  education,  prejudice,  and
general  practice,  have  no  small  share  in  the  mak-
ing of  them;  and  that  the  laws  of  custom  arc
very  apt  to  be  mistaken  for  the  order  of  nature.

For  which  reason,  I  suspect,  that  a  system  of
morality,  built  upon  instincts,  will  only  find  out
reasons  and  excuses  for  opinions  and  practices
already  established,— will  seldom  correct  or  reform
either.

Put  further,  suppose  we  admit  the  existence  of
these  instincts ;  what,  it  may  be  asked,  is  their
authority  1 No  man,  you  say,  can  act  in  deliber-


ate opposition  to  them,  without  a  secret  remorse
of  conscience.  But  this  remorse  may  be  borne
with :  and  if  the  sinner  choose  to  bear  with  it,  for
the  sake  of  the  pleasure  or  the  profit  which  he
expects  from  his  wickedness ;  or  finds  the  plea-
sure of  sin  toexceed  the  remorse  of  conscience,  of
which  he  alone  is  the  judge,  and  concerning  which,
when  he  feels  them  both  together,  he  can  hardly
be  mistaken,  the  moral-instinct  man,  so  far  as
I  can  understand,  has  nothing  more  to  offer.

For  if  he  allege  that  these  instincts  are  so  many
indications  of  the  will  of  God,  and  consequently
presages  of  what  we  are  to  look  for  hereafter;
this,  I  answer,  is  to  resort  to  a  rule  and  a  motive
ulterior  to  the  instincts  themselves,  and  at  which
rule  and  motive  we  shall  by-and-by  arrive  by  a
surer  road : — I  say  surer,  so  long  as  there  remains
a  controversy  whether  there  be  any  instinctive
maxims  at  all;  or  any  difficulty  in  ascertaining
what  maxims  are  instinctive.

This  celebrated  question  therefore  becomes  in
our  system  a  question  of  pure  curiosity ;  and  as
such,  we  dismiss  it  to  the  determination  of  those
who  are  more  inquisitive,  than  we  are  concerned
to  be,  about  the  natural  history  and  constitution
of  the  human  species.


CHAPTER  VI.

Human  Happiness.

Th9  word  kappy, m  a  relative  term:  that  is,
when  we  call  a  jnan  happy,  we  mean  -that  he  is
happier  than  some  others,  with  whom  we  com-
pare him :  than  the  generality  of  others ;  or  than
he  himaalf  was  in  some  other  situation:  thus,
speaking  of  one  who  has  just  compassed  the  ob-
ject of  along  pursuit, — "Now,"  we  say,  "he  is
happy;"  ana  in  a  like  comparative  sense,  com-
pared, that  is,  with  the  general  lot  of  mankind,  we
call  a  man  happy  who  possesses  health  and  com*
petency.

-In  strictness,  any  condition  may  be  denominated
happy,  in  which  the  amount  or  aggregate  of  plea-
sure exceeds  that  of  pain;  and  the  degree  of
happiness  depends  upon  the  quantity  of  this
excess. '

And  the  greatest  quantity  of  it  ordinarily  at-
tainable in  human  life,  is  what"  we  mean  by  nap-
piness,  when  we  inquire  or  pronounce  whit
human  happiness  consists  in.*


*  If  any  positive  signification,  distinct  from  what  we
mean  by  pleasure,  can  lie  affixed  to  the  term  "bappi-
new,"  I  should  take  it  \p  denote  a  certain  stare  of  the
nervous  system  in  that  part  of  the  human  frame  in
which  we  feci  joy  and  grief,  passions  and  affections.—
Whether  this  part  be  the  heart,  which  the  turn  of  most
languages  would  l»?ad  us  to  believe,  or  tb*  diaphragm,
a*  Burton,  or  tfle  upper  orifice  of  the  stomach,  as  Van
Hclmont  thought;  or  rather  be  a. kind  of  fine  net-work,
lining  the  whole  region  of  the  prvcordia.asotliers  have
imagined;  it  is  po»-pible,  not  only  that  each  pfl'JJ™*
sensation  may  violently  shake  and  disturb  the  fibres
at  the  time,  but  that  a  series  of  such  may  at  length  so
derange  the  very  texture  of  the  system,  as  to  produce  a
perpetual  irritation,  which  *  ilL  show  itself  by  fretful-
ness.  impatience,  and  restlessness.  It  is  possible  also,
on  the  other  hand,  that  a  succession  of  pleasurable  sen-
sations may  have  such  an  effect  upon  this  subtile  orga»
nization,  ai  to  cause  the  fibres  to  relax,  and  return  into
their  place  and  order,  and  thereby  to  recover,  or,  if  not
lest*  to  preserve,  that  harmonious  conformation  which
gives  to  the  mind  its  sense  of  complacency  and  sails'
faction.  This  state  may  be  denominated  happiness,
and  is  so  far  distinguishable  from  pleasure,  that  it  does


HITMAN  HAPPINESS.


31


which  inquiry  I  will  omit  much  usual
nation  on  the  dignity  and  capacity  of  our
oaton;  the  superiority  of  the  soul  to  the  body,  of
the  ranonal  Co  the  animal  part  of  our  constitution ;
upon  the  worthiness,  refinement,  and  delicacy,  of
some  ffltjffarfiopfl,  or  the  meanness,  crossness,
and  sensuality,  of  others;  because  I  hold  that
pfessnres  diner  in  nothing,  but  in  continuance
sod  intensity :  from  a  just  computation  of  which,
confirmed  by  what  we  observe  of  the  apparent
cheerfulness,  tranquillity,  and.  contentment,  of
men  of  different  tastes,  tempers,  stations,  and  pur-
snita,  «ety  question  concerning  human  happiness
■nut  receive  Its  decision.

It  will  be  our  bnwrras  to  show,  if  we  can,

I  What  Human  Happiness  does  not  consist  in:1

IL  Whs*  tt  doe*  consist  in.

Futtr,  then,  Happiness  does  not  ednsist  in  Che
fissures  ef  sense,  m  whatever  profusion  or  va-
riety  they  be  enjoyed.  By  the  pleasures  of  sense.
I  rnaui,  as  wefl  as  the  animal  gratifotions  of
,  and  that  by  which  the  species  is
b  more  refined  pleasures  of  music,
;,  architecture,  gardening,  splendid  shows,

^  exhibitions ;  and  the  pleasures,  lastly,  of
acta  spots,  at  of  hunting,  shooting,  nahingr  &c.
Par,

1st,  These  pleasures  continue  but  a  little  while
it  t  lime.  This  is  true  of  them  all,  especially  of
the  grosser  sort  of  them.  Laying  aside  the  pre-
pBinon  and  the  expectation, .  and  computing
*nilT  the  actual  sensation,  we  shall  be  surprised
to  find  how  inconskkrabie  apportion  of  our  tune
6ej  occupy,  how  few  hours  in  the  fbur-and-twenty
ware  aUe  to  fill  up.

Sfflj,  These  pleasures,  by  repetition,  lose  their
•dam.  ft  as  a  property  of  the  machine,  for  which
wt  know  no  remedy,  that  the  organs,  by  which
we  poem  pleasure,  are  blunted  and  benumbed
jjr boar  frequently  exercised  in-  the  same  way.
Tkre  m  hardly  any  one  who  has  not  found  the
een  a  gratification,  when  new,  and
i  or  any  pleasure  which  does  not

ent  aa  it  grows  habitual.

r  My,  The  eagerne—  for  high  and  intense  de-
%!«■  takes  away  the  relish  from  all  others;  and
Baxhdefights  fiul  rarely  in  our  way,  the  greater
pan  of  our  tone  becomes,  from  this  cause,  empty
•ad  massy.

TJae  Bhaidtr  any  delusion  by  which  men  are
P*te<B&KB m  their  happiness,  than  by  their
cxpeeuag  too  much,  from  what  is  called  pleasure;
™JV 6«  those  intense  delights,  which  vulgarly
e^nsjtfce  name  ef  pleasure.  •  The  very  expec-
^^«?oflithem.  When  they  do  come,  we  are
ga  engaged  in  taking  pains  to-persuade  our-
■enw  bow  much  we  are  pleased,  rather  than  en-
9jg  «r?  pleasure  which  springs  naturally  out
j*tk object.  And  whenever  we  depend  upon
*ag*>uy  delighted,  we  always  *p. home  secretly
fneftd  at  aliasing  our  aim.  Likewise,  as  has
J»a  ebsened  just  now,  when  this  humour  of
^prodjgijosiy  delighted  has  once  taken  hold


J*»  any  serUenlar  object  of  enjoyment,  or  eon-
J***  afrasaie,  in  gratification  of  one  or  more  of  toe
*■*"»*«  is  ratter  the  secondary  effect  which  inch
"— ■  the  nervous

t. These  eon-

. province. The

,ia  whicli  we  have  explained  the

_. „  ,  ■■..,!  saote  popular,  and  is  sufficient  for

^l»nsaasffji|ttatatrtisptf>r.


***i»bel  is  ratter  the  secondary  effect
2*  aas  (ratifications  prodoea  upon  i
gn,  or  tat  state  in  which  they  leave  it.
?**baloat  net,  however,  to  our  proi


of  the  imagination,  it  hinders  us  from  providing
for,  or  acquiescing  in,  those  gently  soothing  en-
gagements, the  due  variety  and  succession  of
which  are  the  only  things  that  supply  a  vein  or
continued  stream  of  happiness.

What  I  have  been  able  to  observe  of  that  part
of  mankind,  whose  professed  pursuit  is  pleasure,
and  who  are  withheld  in  the  pursuit  by  no  re-
straints of  fortune,  or  scruples  of  conscience,  cor-
responds sufficiently  with  this  account  I  have
commonly  remarked  in  such  men,  a  restless  and
inextinguishable*  passion  for  variety ;  a  great  nut
of  their  time  to  be  vacant,  and  so  much  of  it  ttk-


and  that,  with  whatever  eagerness  and
expectation  they  set  out,  they  become,  by  de-
grees, fastidious  in  their  choice  of  pleasure,  Ian*
guid  in  the  enjoyment,  yet  miserable  under  the
want  of  it.

The  truth  seems  to  be,  that  there  is  a  limit  at
which  these  pleasures  soon  arrive,  and  from  which
they  ever  afterwards  decline.  They  are  by  ne-
cessity of  short  duration,  as  the  organs  cannot
hold  on  their  emotions  beyond  a  certain  length  of
time;  and  if  you  endeavour  to  compensate  for  tine
imperfection  m  their  nature  by  the  frequency  with
which  you  repeat  them,  you  suffer  more  than  vom
gain,  by  the  fatigue  of  the  Acuities,  and  the  dimi-
nution of  sensibility.

We  have  said  nothing  in  ibis  account  of  the
loss  of  opportunities,  or  the  decay  of  acuities,
which,  whenever  they  happen,  leave  the  voluptu-
ary destitute  and  desperate :  teased  by  desires  that
can  never  be  gratified,  and  the  memory  of  pleasures
which  must  return  no  more.

It  will  also  be  allowed  by  those  who  have  ex-
perienced it,  and  perhaps  by  those  alone,  that
pressure  which  is  purchased  by  the  encumbrance
of  our  fortune,  is  purchased  too  dear :  the  pleasure
never  compensating  for  the  perpetual  irritation,  of
embarrassed  circumstances.

These  pleasures,  after  all,  have  their  value :  and
as  the  young  are  always  too  eager  in  their  pursuit
of  them,  the  old  are  sometimes  too  remiss,  that  is,
too  studious  of  their  ease,  to  be  at  the  pains  for
them  which  they  really  deserve.

Secondly,  Neither  does  happiness  consist  in
an  exemption  from  pain,  labour,  care,  business,
suspense,  molestation,  and  "  those  evils  which  are
without;"  such  a  state  being  usually  attended,  not
with  ease,  but  with  depression  of  spirits,  a  taste-
lessness  in  all  our  ideas,  imaginary  anxieties,  and
the  whole  train  of  hypochondriacal  affections.

For  which  reason,  the  expectations  of  those,
who  retire  from  their  shops  and  countfrg-houses,
to  enjoy  the  remainder  of  their  days  in  leisure  and
tranquillity,  are  seldom  answered  by  the  effect;
much  less  of  such,  as,  in  a  fit  of  chagrin,  shut
themselves  up  in  cloisters  and  hermitages,  or  quit
the  world,  and  their  stations  in  it,  for  solitude  and
repose.-

Where  there  exists  a  known  external  cause  of
uneasiness,  the  cause  may  be  removed,  and  the
uneasinese  will  cease.  But  those  imaginary  dis-
tresses which  men  feel  for  want  of  real  ones  (and
which  are  equally  tormenting,  and  so  far  equally
real)  as  they  depend  upon  no  single  or  assignable
subject  of  uneasiness,  admit  oftentimes  of  no  ap-
plication of  relief.  /

Hence,  a  moderate  pain,  uoon  which  the  atten-
tion may  fasten  and  spend  itself  is  to  many  a
refreshment ;  as  a  fit  of  the  gout  will  sometimes
cure  the  spleen.  And  the  same  of  any  less  violas*


MORAL  AND  POLITICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


W


agitation  of  the  mind,  as  a  literary  contitwaiay,  a
law-suit,  a  contested  election,  and,  above  all,  gam-
ing; the  passion  for  which,  in  men  of  fortune  and
literal  minds,  is  only  to  be  accounted  for  on  this
principle.

Tumult:  Neither  does  happiness  eonskt  in
greatneaa,  rank,  or  elevated  station.

Were  tt  troe  that  all  superiority  aflbrded  plea-
sure, it  would  follow,  that  by  how  much  we
the  greater,  that  is,  the  more  peraons  we


superior  to,  in  the  i


proportion,  ao  for  aa  de-


pended upon  thk  cause,  we  should  be  the  happier;
butaoitictUiatnoaupenorityyiek]aanyaitia£K>-


tfen,


onis,tna
■are  that


which  we


ly
The  ahepherd  perceives  ho  m
hie  superiority  over  his  dog;  the  former,  in  hie
superiority  over  the  ahepherd;  the  lord,  in  his
superiority  over  the  former;  nor  the  king,  lastly,
in  his  superiority  over  the  lord.  Superiority,
where  there  is  no  competition,  is  seldom  contem-
plated', what  most  men  are  quite  unconscious  o£

Bat  if  the  same  ahepherd  can  ran,  fight,  or
wrestle  better  than  the  peasants  of  his  village;  if
the  former  can  show  better  cattle,  if  he  keep  a
better  horse,  or  be  supposed  to  have  a  longer  parse,
than  any  former  in  the  handled ;  if  the  lord  have
more  interest  in  an  election,  greater  favour  at
court,  a  better  house,  or  a  larger  estate  than  any
nobleman  in  the  country;  if  the  king  possess  a
more  extensive  territory,  a  more  powerful  fleet  or
arm/,  a  more"  splendid  rstahhshment,  more  loyal
subjects,  or  more  weight  and  authority  in  adjust-
ing the  affairs  of  nations,  than  any  prince  in
Europe;  in  all  these  eases,  the  parties  feel  an
actual  satisfaction  in  their  superiority.

Now  the  conclusion  that  follows  from  hence  is
this;  that  the  pleasures  of  ambition,  which  are
supposed  to.  be  peculiar  to  high  stations,  are  in
reality  common  to  all  conditions.  The  farrier
who  shoes  a  horse  better,  and  who  is  in  greater'
request  for  his  skill,  than  any  man  within  ten
nuWtf  him,  possesses,  for  all  that  I  can  see,  the
delight  of  distinction  and  of  excelling,  as  truly  and
substantially  aa  the  statesman,  the  soldier,  and  the
scholar,  who  have  filled  Europe  with  the  reputa-
tion  of  their  wisdom,  their  valour,  or  their  know-


No  superiority  appears  to  be  of  any  account,  but
superiority  over  a  mal.  Thb,  it  kmsjufest»may
exist  wherever  rivalships  do;  and  rivalships  &&
out  amongst  men  of  all  ranks  and  degrees.  The
object  of  emulation,  the  dignity  or  magnitude  of
this  object,  makes  no  difference;  as  it  is  not  what
either  possesses  that  constitutes  the  pleasure,  but
what  one  possesses  more  than  the  other.

Philosophy  smiles  at  the  contempt  with  which
the  rich  and  great  speak  of  the  petty  strifes  and
competitions  of  the  poor;  not  reflecting  that  these
strifes  and  competitions  are  just  as  reasonable  as
their  own,  and  the  pleasure,  which  success  affords,

Our  position  is,  that  happiness  does  not  consist
in  greatness.  And  this  position  we  make  out  by
showing,  that  even  what  are  supposed  to  be  pecu-
liar advantages  of  greatness,  the  pleasures  of  am-
bition and  superiority,  are  in  reality  common  to
all  conditions.  But  whether  the  pursuits  of  am-
bition be  ever  wise,  whether  they  contribute  more
to  the  happiness  or  misery  of  the  pursuers,  is


different  question; and  a  question  concerning
which  we  may  be  allowed  to  entertain  gnat  doubt.


The  pleasure  of  success  is  exquisite;  so  also  is)
the  anxiety  of  the  pursuit,  and  the  nam  of  disap-
pointment:—and  what  is  the  Worst  part  of  the
account,  the  pleasure  is  short-lived.  We  soon
cease  to  look  back  upon  those  whom  we  have  left
behind;  new  contests  are  engaged  in;  newpros-
pscts  unfold  themselves;  a  succession  of  struggles;
u  kept  up,  whilst  there  is  a  rival  left  within  the
compass  of  ou*  views  and  profession;  and  when
there  is  none,  the  pleasure  with  the  pursuit  is  at
an  end.
U.  We  have  seen  what  happiness  does  not
--^  in. We*  are  next  to  consider  in  what  it


In  the  conduct  of  life,  the  great  matter  is.  to
know  beforehand,  what  will  Please  us.  and  what
pleasure  will  hold  out  80  far  as  we  know  this,
our  choice  will  be  justified  by  the  event  Ana
this  knowledge  is  more  scarce  and  difficult  than
at  first  sight  it  may  seem  to  be:  for.
pleasures,  which  are  wonderfully  alluring
flittering  in  the  prospect,  turn  out  in  the  posse
extremely  insipid;  or  do  not  hold  out  as  we,  ex-
pected: at  other  times,  pleasures  start  up  which
never  entered  into  our  calculation;  and  which  wa
might  have  missed  of  by  not  foreseeing:— -whence
we  have  reason  to  believe,  that  we  actually  do  miss
of  many  pleasures  from  the  same  cause.  I  say,  to
know  ."  bdbreband:"  for,  after  the  experiment  in
tried,  it  is  commonly  impracticable  to  retreat  or
change;  beside  that  shifting  and  changing  ia  apt
to  generate  a  habit  of  restlessness,  which  is  de-
structive of  the  happiness  of  every  condition.

By  the  reason  of  the  original  diversity  of  taste,
capacity,  and  constitution,  observable  in  the  human,
species,  and  the  stUl  greater  variety,  which  habit
and  fashion  have  introduced  in  these  particulars,
it  is  impossible  to  propose  any  plan  of  nappmess,
which  will  succeed  to  all.  or  any  method  of  life
which  is  universally  eligible  or  practicable.

All  that  can  be  ss*T  is,  that  there  remains  a
in  favour  of  those  conditions  of  fife.


in  which  men  generally  appear  most  cheerful  and
contented.  For  though  the  apparent  happiness
of  mankind  be  not  always  a  true  measure  of  their
real  happiness,  it  is  the  best  measure  we  have.

Taking  this  for  my  guide,  I  am  Inclined  to  be-
lieve that  happiness  consists,

I.  IntbacKeiciseofthesocisJan^ctiofiB. '<>
Those  persons  commonly  possess  good  spirits,

who  have  about  them  many  objects  of  affection
and  endearment,  as  wife,  children,  kindred,  friends.
And  to  the  want  of  these  may  be  imputed  the
peevishness  of  monks,  and  of  such  as  lead  a  mo-
nastic life.

Of  the  same  nature  with  the  indulgence  of  our
domestic  affections,  and  equally  refreshing  to  the
spirits,  is  the  pleasure  which  results  from  acts  of
bounty  and  beneficence,  exercised  either  in  giving
money,  or  imparting  to  those  who  want  it,  the
assistance  of  our  skill  and  profession.

Another  main  article  of  human  happiness  is,

II.  The  exercise  of  our  faculties,  either  of  body"
or  mind,  in  the  pursuit  of  some  engaging  end.

It  seems  to  be  true,  that  no  plenitude  of  present
gratifications  can  make  the  possessor  happy  for  a>
continuance,  unless  he  have  something  in  reserve,
— something  to  hope  for.  and  look  forward  to. — -
This  I  conclude  to  be  the  esse,  from  compr—  -
the  alacrity  and  spirits  of  men  who  are


in  any  pursuit  which  interests  them,  with  t
jecoon  and  wmui  of  almost  all,  who  are  either


HUMAN  HAPPINESS.


38


bom  to  so  much  that  they  want  nothing  more,  or
who  have  used  up  their  satisfactions  too  soon,  and
drained  the  sources  of  them.

It  ia  this  intolerable  ▼acuity  of  mind,  which
carries  die  rich  and  great  to  the  horse-course  and
the  gaming-table;  and  often  engages'  them  in
contests  and  pursuits,  of  which  the  success  bears
■0  proportion  to  the  solicitude  and  expense  with
winch  it  is  sought  An  ejection  for  a  disputed
borough  shall  cost  the  parties  twenty  or  thirty
thousand  pounds  each, — to  say  nothing  of  the
anxiety,  humiliation,  and  fatigue,  of  the  canvass ;
when,  a  seat  in  the  house  of  commons,  of  exactly
the  same  value,  may  be  had  for  a  tenth  part  of  the
money,  and  with  no  trouble.  I  do  not  mention
tins,  to  blame  the  rich  and  ores?  (perhaps  they
cannot  do  better,)  but  in  confirmation  of  what  I
have  advanced.

Hope,  which'  thus  appears  to  be  of  so  much
important*  to  our  happiness,  is  of  two  kinds; —
where  there  is  something  to  be  done  towards  at-
taining the  object  of  our  hope,  and  where  there  is
nothing  to  be  done. The  first  alone  ie  of  any
value-,  the  latter  being  ant  to  corrupt  into  impa-
tience, having  no  power  hut  to  sit  still  and  wait,
winch  anon  (prows  tiresome.
The  doctrine  delivered  under  this  head,  may  be
lily  admitted ; but  how  to  provide  ourselves
i  a  succession  of  pleasurable  engagements,  is
(the difficulty. This  requires  two  things:  judg-
'  in  the  choice  of  end*  adapted  to  our  op-
initios;  and  a  command  of  imagination,  so  as
>  be  able,  when  the  judgment  has  made  choice  of
to  transfer  a  pleasure  to  the-  means:
ash,  the  end  may  be  forgotten  as  soon  as
rprewul

Hence  those  pleasures  are  most  valuable,  not
>  which  are  most  exquisite  in  the  fruition,  but  which
I  are  most  productive  of  engagement  and  activity  in
^the  pursuit.

A  man  who  is  in  earnest  in  his  endeavours
after  the  happiness  of  a  future  state,  has,  in  this
respect,  an  advantage  over  all  the  world:  for,  he
has  constantly  before  his  eyes  an  object  of  supreme
importance,  productive  of  perpetual  engagement
and  activity,  and  of  which  the  punrait(wmch  can
be  said  of  no  pursuit  besides)  lastB  him  to  his  life's'
end.  Yet  even  he  must  have  many  ends,  besides
the  far  end:  but  then  they  will  conduct  to  that,
be  subordinate,  and  in  some  way  or  other  capable
of  being  referred  to  that,  and  derive  their  satisfac-
tion, or  an  addition  of  satisfaction,  from  that.

Engagement  is  every  thing:  the  more  signifi-
cant, however,  our  engagements  are,  the  better:
such  as  the  planning  o?  taws,  institutions,  manu-
factures, charities,  improvements,  public  works;
and  the  endeavouring,  by  our  interest,  address,
sohcitations,  and  activity,  to  carry  them  into  effect;
or,  upon  a  smaller  scale,  the  procuring  of  a  main-
tenance and  fortune  for  our  families  by  a  course
of  industry  and  application  to  oar  callings,  which
forms  and  gives  motion  to  the  common  occupations
of  life;  tanning  up  a  child;  prosecuting  a  scheme
for  his  future  establishment  j  making  ourselves
master*  of  a  language  or  a  science ;  improving  or
managing  an  estate;  labouring  after  a  piece  of
preferment;  and,  lastly,  any  engagement,  which
is  innocent,  is  better  than  none;  as  the  writing  of
t  book,  the  building  of  a  house,  the  laying  out  of
*  garden,  the  (figging  of  a  fish-pond,— even  the
letting  of  a  cucumber  or  a  tulip.

'*  louTmhidsaretauenupwiththeobjeots


or  business  before  us,  we  are  commonly  happy,
whatever  the  object  or  business  be; when  the
mind  iff  absent,  and  the  thoughts  are  wandering
to  something  else  than  what  is  passing  in  the  -
place -in  which  we  are,  we  are  often  miserable.

III.  Happiness  depends  upon  the  prudent  con-  ;
tfttution  or  the  habits.

The  art  in  which  the'  secret  of  human  happiness
in  a  great  measure  consists,  is  to  set  the  habits  in
such  a  manner,  that  every  change  may  be  a  change
for  the  better.  The  habits  themselves  are  much
the  same ;  for,  whatever  is  made  habitual,  becomes
smooth,  and  easy,  and  nearly  indifferent.  The
return  to  an  old  habit  is  likewise  easy,  whatever
the  habit  be.  Therefore  the  advantage  is  with
those  habits  which  allow  of  an  indulgence  in  the
deviation  from  them.  The  luxurious  receive  no
greater  pleasures  from  their  dainties,  than  -the
peasant  does  from  his  bread-  and  cheese*  but  the
peasant,  whenever  he  goes  abroad,  finds  a  feast ;
whereas  the  epicure  must  be  well  entertained,  to
escape  disgust.  1'hose  who  spend  every  day  at
cards,  and  those  who  go  every  day  to  plough,
pass  their  time  much  alike:  intent  upon  what
they  are  about,  wanting  nothing,  regretting
nothing,  they  are  both  for  the  time  in  a  state  or
ease :  but  then,  whatever  suspends  the  occupation
of  the  card-player,  distresses  turn ;  whereas  to  the
labourer,  every  interruption  is  a  refreshment :  and
this  appears  m  the  different  effects  that  Sunday
produces  upon  the  two,  which  proves  a  day  of
recreation  to  the  one,  but.a  lamentable  burthen  tor
the  other.  The  man  who  has  learned  to  live
alone,  feels  his  spirits  enlivened-  whenever  he  en*
ten  into  company,  and  takes  his  leave  without
regret,*  another,  who. has  long  been  accustomed
to  a  crowd,  or  continual  succession  of  company,
experiences  inr  company  no  elevation  of  spirits,
nor  any  greater  satisfaction,  than  what  the  man
of  a  retired  life  finds  in  his  chimney-corner.  So
fits  their  conditions  are  equal ;  but  let  a  change  of
place,  fortune,  or  situation,  separate  the  companion
from  his  circle,  his  viators,  his  club,  common-room,
or  coffee-house;  and  the  difference  and  ad  vantage
in  the  choice  and  constitution  of  the  two  habits
will  show  itself.  Solitude  comes  to  the  one,  cloth-
jed  with  melancholy;  to  the  other,  it  brings  liberty
and  quiet.  You  will  see  the  one  fretful  and  rest*
less,  at  a  loss  how  to  dispose  of  his  time,  till  the
hour  come  round  when  ha  may  forget  himself  in
bed;  the  other  easy  and  satisfied,  taking  up  his
book  or  his  pipe,  as  soon  as  he  find?  himself  alone;
ready  to  admit  any  little  amusement  that  caste
up,  or  to  turn  his  hands  and  attention  to  the  first
business  that  presents  itself;  or  content,  without
either,  to  sit  sail,  and  let  his  train  of  thought  glide
indolently  through  bis  brain,  without  much  use,
perhaps,  or  pleasure,  but  without  hankering  after
any  thing  better,  and  without  irritation.  A  reader,
who  has  inured  himself  to  books  of  science  ana
argumentation,  if  a  novel,  a  well-written  pam-
phlet, an  article  of  news,  a  narrative  of  a  curious
voyage,  or  a  journal  of  a  traveller,  fell  in  his  way,
■its  down  to  the  repast  with  relish;  enjoys  his
entertainment  while  it  last*  and  can  return,  when
it  is  over,  to  his  graver  reading,  without  distaste.
Another,  with  whom  nothing  will  go  down  but
works  of  humour  and  pleasantry,  or  whose  curi-
osity must  be  interested  by  perpetual  novelty,  will
ie  a  bookseller's  window  in  half  a  forenoon ;
which  time  he  is  rather  in  search  of  diver-
diverted}  and  as  books  to  his  taste  ass


34


MORAL  AND  POLITICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


few,  end  short  and  rapidly  read  over,  the  stock  w
soon  exhausted,  when  lie  u  left  without  resource
from  his  principal  supply  of  harmless  amuse-
ment.

So  far  as  circumstances  of  fortune  conduce  to
happiness,  it  is  not  the  income  which  any  man
possesses,  but  the  increase  of  income,  that  affords
the  pleasure.  Two  persons,  of  whom  one  begins
with  a  hundred,  rfnd  advances  his  income  to  a
thousand  pounds 'a  year,  and  the  other  sets  off
with  a  thousand  and  dwindles  down  to  a  hundred,
mar,  in  the  course  of  their  time,  have  the  receipt
and  spending  of  the  same  sum  of  money:  yet  then
satisfaction,  so  far  as  fortune  is  concerned  in  it,
will  be  very  different  5  the  series  and  sum  total  of
their  incomes  being  the  same,  it  makes  a  wide
difference  at  which  end  they  begin.

IV.  Happiness  consists  in  health.

By  health  I  understand,  as  well  freedom  from
bodily  distempers,  as  that  tranquillity,  firmness,
and  alacrity  of  mind,  which  we  call  good  spirits;
and  which  may  properly  enough  be  included  in
our  notion  of  health,  as  depending  commonly
upon  the  same  causes,  and  yielding  to  the  same
management,  as  our  bodily^  constitution.

Health,  in  this  sense,  is  the  one  thing  needful.
Therefore  no  pains,  expense,  self-denial,  or  re-
straint, to.  which  we  subject  ourselves  for  the  sake
of  health,  is  too  much.  Whether  it  require  us
to  relinquish  lucrative  situations,  to  abstain  from
favourite  indulgences,  to  control  intemperate  pas-
sions, or  undergo  tedious  regimens ;.  whatever
difficulties  k  lays  us  under,  a  man,  who  pursues
his  happiness  rationally  and  resolutely,  will  be
Content  to  submit

When  we  are  in  perfect  health  and  spirits,  we
feel  in  ourselves  a  happiness  independent  of  any
particular  outward  gratification  whatever,  and  of
which  we  can  give  no  account  This  is  an  en-
joyment which  the  Deity  has  annexed  to  life;
and  it  probably  constitutes,  in  a  great  measure,
.  the  happiness  of  infants  and  brutes,  especially  of
■  the  lower  and  sedentary  orders  of  animals,  as  of
.  oysters,  periwinkles,  and  the  like ;  for  which  I
J  have  sometimes  been  at  a  loss  to  find  out  amuse-
ment

The  above  account  of  human  happiness  will
justify  die  two  following  conclusions,  whieh,  al-
though found  in  most  books  of  morality,  have
seldom,  I  think,  been  supported  by  any  sufficient


First,  TTiat  happiness  is  pretty  equally  dis-
tributed amongst  the  different  orders  or  civil
society :

Secondly,  That  vice  has  no  advantage  over
virtue,  even  with  respect  to  this  world's  happi-


CHAPTER  VII.

Virtus.

I  Virtus  is  uthe  doing  good  to  mankind,  in
\  obedience  to  the  vn&  of  God,  and  for  the  take  of
V.  everlasting  happiness.1'

According  to  which  definition,  "the  good  of
mankind"  is  the  subject;  the  "will  of  God,"  the
rule;  and  " everlasting  happiness,"  the  motive,  of
human  virtue.

Virtue'  has  been  divided  by  some  moralists  into
benevolence,  prudence,  fortitude,  and  temperance.


Benevolence  proposes  good  ends;  prudence  soff- \
gests  the  best  means  ot  attaining  them;  fortitude  \
enables  us  to-  encounter  the  difficulties,  dangers,  '
and  discouragements,  which  stand  in  our  way  in
the  pursuit  of  these  ends;  temperance  repels  and
overcomes  the  passions  that  obstruct  it. Benevo-
lence, for  instance,  prompts  US'  to  undertake  the
cause  of  an  oppressed  orphan;  prudence  suggests
the  best  means  of  going  about  it ;  fortitude  enables
us  to  confront  the  danger,  and  bear  upagatnst  the
loss,  disgrace,  or  repulse,  that  may  attend  our
undertaking;  and  temperance  keeps  under  the
love  of  money,  of  ease,  or  amusement,  which  might
divert  us  from  it

Virtue  is  distinguished  bv  others  into  two
branches  only,  prudence  and  benevolence:  pru-
dence, attention  to  our  own  interest';  benevolence,
to  that  of  our  fellow-creatures :  both  directed  to
the  same  end,  the  increase  of  happiness  in  nature;
and  taking  equal  concern  in  the  future  as  in  the
present

The  four  cardinal  virtues  are,  prudence,  /or*
titude,  temperance  and  justice.

But  the  division  of  virtue,  to  which  we  are.  in
modern  times  most  accustomed,  is  into  duties;-^

Towards  God;  as  piety, reverence, resignation,
gratitude,  dec.  ^

Towards  other  men  (or  relative  duties ;)  as  jus-
tice, charity,  fidelity,  loyalty.  eVc  •
'  Towards  ourselves;  as  chastity,  sobriety,  tem-
perance, preservation  of  life,  can  of  health,  Ac

More  of  these  distinctions  have  been  proposed,
which  it  is  not  worth  while  to  set  down.


I  shall  proceed  to  state  a  few  observations,  which
relate  to  the  general  regulation  of  human  conduct;
unconnected  indeed  with  each  other,  but  very
worthy  of  attention:  and  which  fell  as  properly
under  the  title  of  tnis  chapter  aa  of  any  future
one. '  •  -v  "

I.  Mankind  act  more  from  habit  than  ranee-)
don.

It  is  on  few  only  and  great  occasions  that  men
deliberate  at  all;  on  fewer. still,  that  they  institute
any  thing  like  a  regular  inquiry  into  the  moral
rectitude  or  depravity  of  what  they  are  about  to
do;  or  wait  for  the  result  of  it  We  are  for  the
most  part  determined  at  once ;  and  by  an  impulse,
which  is  the  effect  and  energy  of  pre-eetobuahed
habit  And  this  constitution  seem*  well  adapted
to  the  exigences  of  human  life,  and  to  the  imbe-
cility of  our  moral  principle.  In  the  current  oc-
casions and  rapid  opportunities  of  life,  there  is
oftentimes  little  leisure  for  reflection;  and  were
there  more,  a  man,  who  has  to  reason  about  his
duty,  when  the  temptation  to  transgress  it  is
upon  him,  is  almost  sure  to  reason  himaelf  intoan


If  we  are  in  so  great  a  degree  passive  under  our\
habits ;  Where,  it  is  asked,  is  the  exercise  of  \
virtue,  the  guilt  <of  vice,  or  any  use  of  moral  and
religious  knowledge  1 I  answer,  in  the  forming  J
and  contracting  of  these  habits.  'J

And  hence  results  a  rule  of  life  of  considerable
importance,  viz.  that  many  things  am  to  be  done
and  abstained  from,  solely  for  the  sake  of  habit.
We  will  explain  ourselves  by  an  example  or  two :
—A  beggar,  with  the  appearance  of  extreme  dis-
tress, agKs  our  charity*  If  we  come  to  argue  the
matter,  whether  the  distress  be  real,  whether,  it  be


VIRTUE.


not  brought  upon  himself,  whether  it  be  of  public
advantage  to  admit  such  application*  whether  it  be
not  to  encourage  idleness  and  vagrancy,  whether
it  may  not  invite  impostors  to  our  doors,  whether
the  money  can  be  well  spared,  or  might  not  be
better  applied;  when  these  considerations  are  put
together,  it  may  appear  very  doubtful,  whether  we
ought  or  ought  not  to  give  any  thing.  But  when
we  reflect,  that  the  misery  before  our  eves  excites
our  pity,  whether  we  will  or  not ;  that  it  is  of  the
utmost  consequence  to  us  to  cultivate  this  tender-
ness of  mind;  that  it  is  a  quality,  cherished  by
indulgence,  and  soon  stilled  by  opposition ;  when
this,  isay,  is  considered,  a  wise  man  will  do  that
for  his  own  sake,  which  he  would  have  hesitated
to  do  for  the  petitioner's;  he  will  give- way  to  his
compassion,  rather  than  offer  violence  to  a  habit
of  so  much  general  use.

A  man  of  confirmed  good  habits,  will  act  in
the  same  manner  without  any  consideration  at  all.

This  may  serve  for  one  instance;  another  is  the
following : — A  man  has  been  brought  up  from  his
infancy  with  a  dread  of  lying.  An  occasion  pre-
sents itself  where,  at  the  expense  of  a  little  vera-
city, he  may  divert  his  company,  set  off  his  own
wit  with  advantage,  attract  the  notice  and  engage
the  partiality  of  all  about  him.  This  is  not  a
amad  temptation. And  when  he  looks  at


the
other  side  of  the  question,  he  sees  no  mischief  that
can  ensue  from  this  liberty,  no  slander  of  any
man's  reputation,  no  prejudice  likely  to  arise  to
any  man's  interest.  Were  there  nothing  further
to  be  considered,  it  would  be  difficult  to  show  why
a  man  under  such  cucumstances  might  not  in-
dulge his  humour.  But  when  he  reflects  that  his
scruples  about  lying  have  hitherto  preserved  him
free  from  this  vice;  that  occasions  like  the  present
will  return,  where  the  inducement  may  be  equally
strong,  but  the  indulgence  much  less  innocent;
that  his  scruples  will  wear  away  by  a  few  trans-
gressions, and  leave  him  subject  to  one  of  the
st  and  most  pernicious  of  airbed  habits,— a
of  bpg,  whenever  it  will  serve  his  turn :
all  this,  I  say,  is  considered,  a  wise  man  will
forego  the  present,  or  a  much  greater  pleasure,
rather  than  lay  the  foundation  of  a  character  so
vicious  and  contemptible.

From  what  has  been  said,  may  be  explained
also  the  nature  of  habitual  virtue.  By  the  defi-
nition of  virtue,  placed  at  the  beginning  of  this
chapter,  it  appears,  that  the  good  of  mankind  is
the  subject,  the  will  of  God  the  rule,  and  everlast-
ing happiness  the  motive  and  end,  of  all  virtue.
Yet,  in  net,  a  man  shall  perform  many  an  act  of
virtue  without  having  either  the  good  of  mankind,
the  will  of  God,  or  everlasting  happiness  in  his
thought.  How  is  this  to  be  understood  1  In  the
same  manner  as  that  a  man  may  be  a  very  good
servant,  without  being  conscious,  at  every  turn,  of
a  particular  regard  to  bis  master's  will,  or  of  an
express  attention  to  his  roaster's  interest:  -indeed,
your  beet  old  servants  are  of  this  sort :  but  then
be  must  have  served  for  a  length  of  time  under
the  actual  direction  of  these  motives,  to  bring  it
to  this:  in  which  service,  his  merit  and  virtue

There  are  habit*,  not  only  of  drinking,  swear-
ing, and  lying,  and  of  some  other  things,  which
are  commonly  acknowledged  to  be  habits,  and
catted  so:  but  of  every  modification  of  action,
-\ speech,  and  thought. Manjs^ajjundle  of  habits.


There  are  habits  of  in


advertency ;  of  a  prompt  obedience  to  the  judg-
ment occurring,  or  of  yielding  to  the  first  impulse
of  passion;  of  extending  our  views  to  the  future,
or  of  resting  upon  the  present ;  of  apprehending,
methodising,  reasoning;  of  indolence  and  dilaton-
ness;  of  vanity,  self-conceit,  melancholy,  partiality;
of  rretftilnees,  suspicion,  captiousness;  censorious*
ness;  of  pride,  ambition,  covetousness ;  of  over-
reaching,  intriguing/ projecting;  in  a  word,  there
is  not  a  quality  or  function,  either  of  body  or  mind,
which  does  not  feel  the  influence  of  this  great  law
of  animated  nature.

II.  The  Christian  religion  hath  not  aseertained\
the  precise  quantity  of  virtue  necessary  to  salve*'  j
tion. ,

This  has  been  made  an  objection  to  Christianity)
but  without  reason.  For  as  all  revelation,  how*
ever  imparted  originally,  must  be  tsansmitted  by
the  ordinary  vehicle  of  language,  it  behoves  those
who  make  the  objection,  to  show  that  any  form  of
words  could  be  devised,  that  might  express  this
quantity;  o*  that  it  is  possible  to  constitute  a
standard  of  moral  attainments,  acrommodatod  to
the  almost  Infinite  diversity  which  subsists  in  the
capacities  and  opportunities  of  different  men.

It  seems  most  agreeable  to  our  conceptions  of
justice,  and  is  consonant  enough  to  the  language
of  scripture,*  to  suppose,  that  there  are  prepared |
for  us  rewards  and  punishments,  of  all  possible
degrees;  from  the  most  exalted  happiness  down  to '
extreme  misery;  so  that  "our  labour  is  never  in )
vain;"  whatever  advancement  we  make  in  virtue, /
we  procure  a  proportionable  accession  of  future
happiness;  as,  on  the  other  hand,  every  accumu-
lation of  vice  is  the  "treasuring  up  so  much  wrath
against  the  day  of  wrath." It  has  been  said,  that
it  can  never  be  a  just  economy  of  Providence,' to
admit  one  part  of  mankind  into  heaven,  and  con*
demn  the  other  to  hell;  since  there  must  be  very
little  to  choose,  between  the  worst  man  who  at
received  into  heaven,  and  the  best  who  is  excluded.
And  iiow  know  we,  it  might  be  answered,  but  that
there  may  be  as  little  to  choose  in  the  conditions  1

Without  entering  into  a-  detail  of  Scripture
morality,  which  would  anticipate  our  subject,  the
following  general  positions  may  be  advanced,  I
think,  with  safety.

1.  That  a  state  of  happiness  knot  to  be  expect-
ed by  those  who  are*  conscious  of  no  moral  or
religious  rule:  I  mean  those  w)sj>  cannot  with
truth  say,  that  they  have  been  prompted  to  one
action,  or  withholden  from  one  gratification,  by
any  regard  to  virtue  or  religion,  either  immediate
or  habituaL

There  needs  no  other  proof  of  ibis,  than  the
consideration,  that  a  brute  would  be  as  proper  an
object  of  reward  na  such  a/rfian,  and  that,  if  the
case  were  so,  the  penal  sanctions  of  religion  could

*  •*  HS  which  sowsth  sparing Jy.  shall  reap  also  spar
ingly ;  and  he  which  soweth  bountifully,  shall  reap  also
bountifully;*  8 Cor.  ix. ft.—11  And  that  servant  which
knew  his  Lord's  will,  and  prepared  not  himself,  neither
did  according  to  his  will,  shall  be  beaten  with  many
stripes ;  but  he* that  knew  not,  shall  be  beaten  with  few
stripes."  Lake  xii.  47, 48.—"  Whosoever  shall  give  you
a  cup  of  water  to  drink  in  my  name,  because  ye  belong
to  Christ ;  verily  I  say  unto  you,  he  shall  not  lose  his
reward:"  to  wit,  intimating  that  there  is  in  reserve  a
proportionable  reward  for  even  the  smallest  act  of
virtue.  Mark  ia.  «l.-«ee  also  the  parable  of  the  pounds,
Luke  xix.  1»,  Ikci  where  he  whose  pound  h«A  famed
ten  sounds,  was  plaeed  over  ten  cities;  and  he  whose
pound  had  gained  five  pounds,  was  placed  over  ft*
cities.


MORAL  AND  POLITICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


}  no  place. For,  whom  would  you  punish,  if
yon  mike  such  a  one  as  this  happy'?— or  rather
I  mdeed,  religion  itself,  both  natural  and  revealed,
1  would  oeaae  to  have  either  use  or  authority.

a  That  a  etate  of  happiness  is  not  to  be  ex-
peeled  By  those,  who  reserve  to  themselves  the
habitual  practice  or  any  one' sin,  or  neglect  of  one
known  duty. .

Because,  no  obedience  can  proceed  upon  proper
motives,  which  is  not  universal,  that  is,  which  is
not  directed  to  ever/  command  of  God  alike,  as
they  all  stand  upon  the  same  authority.

Because  such  an  allowance  would,  in  effect,
amount  to  a  toleration  of  every  vioe  in  the  world.

And  because  the  strain  of  Scripture  language
fgdndee  any  such  hope.  •  When  our  duties  are
rated,  they  are  put  collectively,  that  is,  as  all  and
•very  one -of  them  required  in  the  Christian  cha-
racter. "Add  to  your  feith  virtue,  and  to  virtue
knowledge,  and  to  knowledge  temperance,  and  to
temperance  patience,  and  to  patience  godliness,
and  to  rawness  brotherly  kindness,  and  to
brotherly kindness  charity."*  On  the  other  hand,
when  vices  are  enumerated,  they  are  put  disjunc-
tively, that  is,  as  separately  and  severally  exclud-
ing the  sinner  firom  heaven.  ''AcOA^  fornicators,
nor  idolaters,  nor  adulterers,  nor  effeminate,  nor
abusers  of  themselves  with  mankind,  nor  thieves,
nor  covetous,  nor  drunkards,  nor  revilers,  nor  ex-
tortioners, shall  inherit  we  Juiudom  of  heaven."t

Those  texts  of  Scripture,  which  seem  to  lean
a  contrary  way,  as  tnat  "  charity  shall  cover
the  multitude  of  sins;"*  that  "he  which  con-
▼erteth  a  sinner  from  the  error  of  his  way,
shall  hide  a  multitude  of  sins;"*  cannot,  I
think,  for  the  reasons  above  mentioned,  be  ex
tended  to  sins  deliberately,  habitually,  and  ob-
stinately persisted  in.

3.  That  a  state  of  mere  unprofitableness  will
not  go  unpunished-

This  is  expressly  laid  down  by  Christ,  in  the
parable  of  the  talents,  which  supersedes  all  further
reasoning  upon  the-subjecL  "  Then  he  which
bed  received  one  talent,  came  and  said,  Lord,  I
knew  thee  that  thou  art  an  austere  man,  reaping
where  thou  hast  not  sown,  and  gathering  where
tho&hast  not  strawed :  and  I  was  afraid,  and  hid
thy  talent  in  the  earth;  lo,  there  tnou  hast  that  is
thine.  His  lord  answered  and  said  unto  him,
Thou  wicked  and  slothful  servant,  thou  knewest,
(or,  knewest  thou  1)  that  I  reap  where  I  sowed
not,  and  gather  where  I  have  not  strawed ;  thou
slightest  therefore  to  have  put  my  money  to  the
exchangers,  and  then  at  my  coming  I  should  have
received  mine  own-  with  usury.  Take  therefore  the
talent  from  him,  and  give  it  unto  him  which  ham
ten  tajents;  for  unto  every  one  that  hath  shall  be
riven,  and  he  shall  have  abundance;  but  from
him  that  hath  not,  shall  be  taken  away  even  that
which  he  hath :  and  cast  ye  the  unprofitable  ser-
vant into  outer  darkness,  there  shall  be  weeping
,  and  gnashing  of  teeth."\l
'  III  In  every  question  of  conduct,  where  one
side  is  doubtful,  and  the  other  safe;  we  axe  bound
to  take  the  safe  side.

4  This  is  beet  explained  by  an  instance ;  and  I
know  of  none  more  to  our  purpose  than  that  of
Anode. Suppose,  far  example's  sake,  that  it  ap-


peared doubtful  to  a  reasonor  upon  the  subject,
whether  he  may  lawfully  destroy  himself.  He
can  have  no  doubt,  $at  it  is  lawful  for  him  to  let
it-alone.  Etere  therefore  is.  a  case,  in  which  one  '
side  is  doubtful,  and  the  other  side  safe.  By
virtue  therefore  of  our  rule,  he  is  bound  to  pursue
the  safe  aide,  that  is,  to  forbear  from  offering
violence  to  himself,  whilst  a  doubt  remains  upon
his  mind  concerning  the  lawfulness  of  suicide.

It  is  prudent,  you  allow,  to  take  the  safe  side.
But  our  observation  means  something  more.  We
assert  that  the  action  concerning  which  we  doubt,
whatever  it  may  be  in  itself;  or  to  another,  would,
in  us,  whilst  mis  doubt  remains  upon  our  minds,
be  certainly  sinful.  The  case  is  expressly  so
adjudged  by  St.  Paul,  with  whose  authority  we
will  for  the  present  rest  contented.  "  I  know  and
am  persuaded  by  the  Lord  Jesus,  that  there  is
nothing  unclean  of  itself;  but  to  him  that  esteemelh
any  thtng  to  be  unclean,  to  him  it  is  unclean.—
Happy  is  he  that  condemneth  not  himself  in  that
thing  which  he  alloweth;  and  he  that  doufatoth,
is  damned  (condemned)  if  he  eat;  for  whatsoever
is  not  of  fetth  (t.  «.  not  done  with  a  full  persuasion
of  the  lawfulness  of  it)  is  sin."»


BOOK  IL

MORAL  OBLIGATIONS.


•  8  Pet,  i.  5, 6, 7.

JlDsUv.a.  *Jameiv.9fc

jfMatt.xxv.24,Jtc


1 1  Cor.  vi.  9*  10.
$Ja


CHAPTER  I.

The  question  '  Why  am  I  obliged  to  keep  my
word?'  considered.

Why  am  I  obliged  to  keep  my  woidi

Because  it  is  right,  says  one.— -Because  H  is
agreeable  to  the  fitness  of  things,  sayB  another  —
Because  it  is  conformable  to  reason  and  nature,
says  a  third. — Because  it  is  conformable  to  truth,
says  a  fourth.— Because .  it  promotes  the  public
good,  savs  a  fifth.— Because  it  is  required  by  the
will  of  God,  concludes  a  sixth.

Upon  which  different  accounts,  two  things  are
observable : —

First,  that  they  all  ultimately  coincide.

The  fitness  of  things,  means  their  fitness  to
produce  happiness:  the  nature  of  things,  means
that  actual  constitution  of  the  world,  oy  which
some  things,  as  such  and  such  actions,  for  ex-
ample, produce  happiness,  and  others  misery;
reason  is  the  principle  by  which  we  discover  or
judge  of  this  constitutions  truth  is  this  judgment,
expressed  or  drawn  out  into  propositions.  So
that  it  necessarily  comes  to  pass,  that- what  pro-
motes the  public  happiness,  or  happiness  on  the
whole,  is  agreeable  to  the  fitness  .of  things,  to
nature,  to  reason,  and  to  truth ;  and  such  (as  will
appear  by  and  bye,)  is  the  Divine  character,  that
what  promotes  the  general  happiness,  is  required
by  the  will  of  God ;  and  what  nas  all  the  above
properties,  must  needs  be  right;  for,  right  means
no  more  than  conformity  to  the  rule  we  go  by,
whatever  that  rule  be.

And  this  is  the  reason  that  moralists,  from
whatever  different  principles  they  set  out,  com-


•Kom.ziv.4if8>  S3.


MORAL  OBLIGATIONS.


manly  meet  in  theft  conchuriora ;  that  js,  they
enjoin  the  eune  conduct,  prescribe  the  taste  rules
of  doty,  end,  with  e  few  exceptions,  deliver  upon
dubious  cases  the  seme  determinations.

Secondly,  St  is  to  be  observed,  that  these  an-
swers all  leave  the  matter  short ;  for  the  inquirer
may  turn  round  upon  his  teacher  with  a  second
question,  in  which  he  will  expect  to  be  satisfied,
/namely,  Why  am  I  obliged  to  do  what  is  right;
j  to  act  agreeably  to  the  fitness  of  things ;  to  con-
\  form  to  reason,  nature,  or  truth  ;  to  promote  the
\  public  good,  or  to  obey  the  will  of  God.

The  proper  method  of  conducting  the  inquiry
Is,  first,  to  examine  what  we  mean,  when  we
say  a  man  is  obliged  to  do  any  thing :  and  then
to  show  why  he  is  obliged  to  do  the  thing  which
we  have  proposed  as  an  example,  namely,  "to


CHAPTER  IL

What  we  mean  lo  say  vhen  a  man  i$  obliged  to
do  a  ihing.

I  A  max  hw&tobe obliged,  "when  he  tt  un-
!  gedby  a  violentmotive  resulting  from  the  com-
mand of  another  .n
'  Fust,  "The  motive  must  be  violent"  If  a
person,  who  has  done  me  so  fitue  service,  or  has
a  small  place  in  his  disposal,  ask  me  upon  some
occasion  for  my  vote,  I  may  possibly  give  it  him.
from  a  motive  of  gratitude  or  expectation :  but  1
should  hardly  say  that  I  was  obliged  to  give  it
him;  because  the  inducement  does  not  rise  high
enough.  Whereas,  if  a  father  or  a  master,  any
great  benefactor,  or  one  on  whom  my  fortune, de-
pends, require  my  vote,  I  give  it  him  of  course:
and  my  answer  to  all  who  asked  me  why  I  voted
so  and  so,  is,  that  my  father  or  my  master  obliged
me;  that  I  had  received  so  many  favours  from,  or
had  so  great  a  dependence  upon,  such  a  one,  that
I  was  obliged  to  vote  as  he  directed  me.

Secondly,  "  It  must  result  from  the  command
of  another  "  Offer  a  man  a  gratuity  for  doing
any  thing,  for  seizing,  for  example,  an  offender,
lie  is  not  soJj£erf  try  your  offer  to  do  it;  nor  would
he  say  he  is;  though  he  may  be  induced,  per-
tuaded,  prevailed  upon,  templed.  If  a  magistrate
or  the  man's  immediate  superior  command  it,  he
considers  himself  as  obliged  to  comply,  though
possibly  he  would  lose  less  by  a  refusal  in  this
ease,  than  in  the  former.

I  will  not  undertake  to  say  that  the  words
obligation  and  obliged  are  used  uniformly  in  this
sense,  or  always  with  this  distinction :  nor  is  it
possible  to  tie  down  popular  phrases  to  any  con-
stant signification:  but  wherever  the  motive  is
violent  enough,  and  coupled  with  the  idea  of  com-
mand, authority,  law,  or' the  will  of  a  superior,
there,  I  take  it,  we  always  reckon  ourselves  to  be
obliged.

t  And  from  this  account  of  obfigadon,  it  foBbws,
that  we  can  be  obliged  to  nothing,  but  what  we
curseltes  are  to  gain  or  lose  something  by;  for
nothing  else  can  be  a  "violent  motiverto  us. —
As  we  should  not  be  obliged  to  obey  the  laws,  or
the  magistrate,  unless  rewards  or  punishments.
pleasure,  or  pain,  somehow  or  other,  depended
upon  oar  obedience ;  so  neither  should  we,  without
the  same  reason,  be  obliged  to  do  what  is  right,  to
practise  virtue,  or  to  obey  the  commands  of  God.


CHAPTER  HI

The  question,  '  Why  am  I  obliged  to  keep  my
word?  resumed.  „

Lbt  it  be  remembered,  that  to  be  obliged,  is  H  to
be  urged  by  a  violent  motive,  resulting  from  Che
command  of  another."  '

And  then  let  it  be  asked,  Why  am  I  obliged  to
keep  my  word  ?  and  the  answer  will  be,  Because
I  am  "urged  to  do  so  by  a  violent  motive"  (name-
ly, the  expectation  of  bemg  after  this  life  rewarded,
if  I  do.  or  punished  for  it,  if  I  do  not,)  "resulting  [
from  the  command  of  another"  (namely  of  God.}

This  solution  goes  to.  the'  bottom  of  the  subject,  ^
as  no  further  question  can  reasonably  be  asked;

'  Therefore,  private  happiness  is  our  motive,  and
the  will  of  God  our  rule.

When  I  first  turned  my  thoughts  to  moral  spe-
« •  rthe


eolations,  an  air  of  n


whole  subject;  which  arose,  I  believe,  from  heftee,
— that  I  supposed,  with  many  authors  whom  I
had  read,  that  to  be  obliged  to  do  a  thing,  was
very  different  from  being  induced  only  to  do  it;
and  that  the  obligation  to  practise  virtue,  to  da
what  is  right,  just,  Ac.  was  Quite  another  thing,
and  of  another  kind,  than  the  obligation  which  a
soldier  is  under  to  obey  his  officer,  a  servant  his
master;  or  any  of  the  civil  and  ordinary  obliga-
tions of  human  life.  Whereas,  from  what  has
been  said,  it  appears  that  moral  obligation  is  like
all  other  obligations ;  and  that  obligations  nothing
more  than  an  inducement  of  sufficient  strength.  -
and  resulting,  in  some  way,  from  the  command  or
another.

There  is  always  understood  to  be  a  difference
between  an  act  of  prudence  and  an  act  of  duty.
Thus,  if  I  distrust  a  man  who  owed  me  a  sum  of
money,  I  should  reckon  it  an  act  of  prudence  to
get  another  person  bound  with  him;  out  I  should
hardly  call  it  an  act  of  duty.  On  the  other  hand,
ft  would  be  thought  a  very  unusual  and  loose  kind
of  language,  to  say,  that  as  I  had  made  such  a
promise,  it  was  prudent  to  perform  it;  or  that,  as
my  friend,  when  he  went  abroad,  placed  a  box  of
jewels  in  my  hands,  it  would  be  prudent  in  me  to
preserve  it  for  huh  till  he  returned.

Now,  in  what,  you  will  ask,  does  the  difference
consist  1  inasmuch,  as,  according  to  our  account
of  the  matter,  both  in  the  one  case  and  the  other,
in  acts  of  duty  as  well  as  acts  of  prudence,  we
consider  solely  what  we  ourselves  shall  gain  or  lose
by  the  act.

The  difference, and  th*onfy  difference,  is  this:
that  in  the  one  case,  we  consider  what  we  shall
gain  or  lose  in  the  present  world;  in  the  other
case,  we  consider  also  what  we  shall  gain  or  lose
in  the  world  to  come.

They  who  would  establish  a  system  of  morality,
independent  of  a  fofiire  state,  must  look  out  for
some  different  idea  of  moral  obligation;  unless
they  can  show  that  virtue  conducts  the  possessor
to  certain  happiness  in  this  life,  or  to  a  much
greater  share  of  it  than  he  could  attain  by  a  dif-
ferent behaviour.

To  us  there  are  two  great  questions:  '

I.  Will  there  be  after  this  life  any  distribution
of  rewards  and  punishments  at  all!

II.  If  there  be,  what  actions  will  be  rewarded,
and  what  will  be  punished  1

The  first  question  comprises  the  credibility  of
die  Christian  Religion,  together  with  the  presump-
tive proofs  of  a  future  retribution  from  the  light  of


i

)


MORAL  AND  POLITICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


Baton.  The  second  quartern  comprises  the  pro-
vince of  morality.  Both  questions  are  too.  much
for  one  work.  The  affirmative  therefore  of  the
first,  although  we  confess  that  it  is  the  foundation
upon  which  the  whole  fabric  rests,  moat  in  thia
treatise  be  taken  for  granted.


CHAPTER  IV.
The  wilt  qf  God.

A*  the  wiD  ef  God  w  our  rule;  toinauirewhat
k  our  duty,  or  what  we  are  obliged  to  do,  in  any
instance,  w.  in  effect,  to  inquire  what  ia  the  will
of  God  in  that  instance?  which  consequently  be-
comes the  whole  buaineai  of  morality;
•  Now  there  are  two  methoda  of  coming  at  the
will  of  God  on  any  point :

I.  By  his  express  declarations,  when  they
to  be  had,  ana  which  must  be  sought  foi


are
. _ for  in
Scripture.

IE  'By  what  we  can  discover  of  hie  designsand
diapoaition  from  his  works;  or,  ae  we  usually  call
it,  the  light  of  nature.

And  here  we  may  observe  the  absurdity  of
separating  natural  and  revealed  religion  frpm  each
other.  The  object  of  both  is  the  same,— to  dis-
cover the  will  of  God,— and,  provided  we  do  but
discover  it,  it  matters  nothing  by  what  means.

An  ambassador,  judging  by  what  he  knows  of
his  sovereign's  disposition,  and  arguing  from  what
he  has  observed  of  his  conduct,  or  is  acquainted
with  of  his  designs,  may  take  his  measures  in
many  cases  with  safety,  and  presume  with  great
probability  how  his  master  would  have  him  a^t  on
most  occasions  that  arise :  but  if  he  have  his  com-
mission and  instructions  in  his  pocket  it  would
be  strange  not  to  look  into  them.  He  will  be
directed  by  both  rules :  when  his  instructions  are
dear  and  positive,  there  is  an  end  to  all  further
deliberation  (unless  indeed  he  suspect  their  authen-
ticity :)  where  his  instructions  are  silent  or  du-
bious, he  will  endeavour  to  supply  or  explain  them
by  what  he  has  been  able  to  collect  from  other
.quarters  of  his  master's  general  inclination  or
i  intentions.

Mr.  Hume,  in  his  fourth.  Appendix  to  his
Principles  of  Morals,  has  been  pleased  to  complain
of  the  modern  scheme  of  uniting  Ethics  with  the
Christian  Theology. They  who  find  themselves
>  disposed  to  join  in  this  complaint,  wHl  do  well  to
■  observe  what  Mr.  Hume  himself  has  been  able  to
•  make  of  morality  without  this  union. And  for
j  that  purpose,  let  them  read  the  second  part  of  the
1  ninth  section  of  the  above  Essay; which  part
,  contains  the  practical  application  of  the  whole
:  treatise,— a  treatise  which  Mr.  Hume  declares,  to
be  "  incomparably  the  best  he  ever  wrote."  When
they  have  read  it  over,  let  them  consider,  whether
any  motives  there  proposed  are  likely  to  be  found
sufficient  to  withhold  men  from  the  gratification
of  lust,  revenge,  envy,  ambition,  avarice ;  or  to  pre-
vent the  existence  of  these  passions*  Unless  they
rise  up  from  this  celebrated  essay  with  stronger
inmreaaions  upon  their  minds  than  it  ever  left
upon  mine,  they  will  acknowledge  the  necessity
of  additional  sanctions.  But  the  necessity  of  these
sanctions  ia  not  now  the  question. If  they  be  *»
fatt  cttoNiahcd,  if  the  rewards  and  punishments


held  forth  in  the  Gospel >wffl  actually  eome  to  past,
they  must  be  considered.  §uch  as  reject  the
Christian  Religion,  are  to  make  the  best  shift
they  can  to  build  up  a  system,  and  lay  the  foun-
dation of  morality  without  it  But  it  appears  to
me  a  great  Inconsistency  in  those  who  receive
Christianity,  and  expect  something  to  come  of  it
to  endeavour  to  keep  all  such  expectations  out  or
sight  in  their  reasonings  concerning  human  duty.

The  method  of  coming  at  the,  will  of  God,  conv
cerning  any  action,  by  the  light  of  nature,  is  to  \  v
inquire  into  "  the  tendency  of  the  action  to  pro-  i
mote  or  diminish  the  general  happiness." This  S '
rule  proceeds  upon  the  presumption,  that  God  I
Almighty  wills  and  wishes  the  happiness  of  hv
creatures;  and,  consequently,  that  those  actions,
which  promote  that  will  ana  wish,  must  be  agree-
able to  him;  and  the  contrary.

As  this  presumption  is  the  foundation  of  our
whole  system,  it  becomes  necessary  to  explain  the
reasons  upon  which  it  rests.


CHAPTER  V.
The  Divine  Benevolence.

When  God  created  the  human  species,  either
he  wished  their  happiness*  or  he  wished  their
misery,  or  he  was  indifferent  and  unconcerned
about  both.

If  he  had  wished  our  misery,  he  might  have
made  sure  of  his  purpose,  by  forming  our  senses
to  be  so  many  sores  and  pains  to  ua,  as  they  are
now  instruments  of  ratification  and  enjoyment:
or  by  placing  us  amidst  objects  so  ill-suited  to  our
perceptions,  as  to  have  continually  offended  us..
instead  of  ministering  to  our  refreshment  andp
delight He  might  have  made,  for  example,  every  L
thing  we  tasted,  hitter ;  every  thing  we  saw,  loath- _
some;  every  thing  we  touched,  a  sting:  every
smell  a  stench ;  and  every  sound  a  discord.

If  lie  had  been  indifferent  about  our  happiness
or  misery,  we  must  impute  to  our  good  fortune
'as  all  design  by  this  supposition  is  excluded)  both
he  capacity  of  our  senses  to  receive  pleasure,  and
the  supply  of  external  objects  fitted'  to  produce  it
But  either  of  these  (and  still  more  both  of  them)
being  too  much  |o  be  attributed  to  accident  no-
thing remains  but  the  first  supposition,  that  God,
when  he  created  the  human  species,  wished  their
happiness;  and  made  for  tnem  the  provision
which  he  has  made,  with  that  view,  ana  for  that<
purpose.  \

The  same  argument  may  be  proposed  in  (Ef-
ferent terms,  thus:  Contrivance  proves  design:  '
and  the  predominant  tendency  of  the  contrivance
indicates  the  disposition  of  the  designer.  The
world  abounds  with  contrivances;  and  all  the
contrivances  which  we  are  acquainted  with,
are  directed  to  beneficial  purposes.  Evil,  no
doubt,  exists ;  but  is  never,  that  we  can  perceive,
the  object  of  contrivance.  Teeth  are  contrived  to
eat,  not  to  ache ;  their  aching  now  and  then,  is
incidental  to  the  contrivance,  perhaps  inseparable
from  it ;  or  even,  if  you  will,  let  it  be  caUed  a
defect  in  the  contrivance ;  but  it  is  not  the  object
of  it.  This  is  a  distinction  which  well  deserves
to  be  attended  to.  In  describing  implements  of
husbandry,  you  would  hardly  say  of  the  sickle,
that  it  is  made  to  cut  the  reaper's  fingers,  though,
from  the  obstruction  of  the  instrument,  and  the


NECESSITY  OF  GENERAL  RULES.


Banner  of  using  it,  tin*  mischief  often  happens.
But  if  yoo  bad  occasion  to  describe  mstrumentsef
torture  or  execution,  This  engine,  yon  would  say,
b  to  extend  the  sinews;  this  to  dislocate  the  joints
this  to  break  the  bones;  this  to  scorch  the  sofas  ot
the  feet  Here,  pain  and  misery  ass  the  very
abject*  of  the  contrivance.  Now,  nothing  of  this
sort  is  to  be  found  in  the  works  of  nature/  We
never  discover  a,  train  of  contrivance  to  bring  about
an  evil  purpose.  No  anatomist  ever  discovered  a
system  of  organization  calculated  to  produce  pain
and  disease ;  or,  in  explaining  the  parts  of  the
human  body,  ever  said ;  This  is  to  irritate,  this  to
inflame;  this  duct  is  to  convey  the  gravel  to  the
kidneys;  this  gland  to  secrete  the  humour  which
forms  the  gout:  if  by  chance  he  come  at  a  part
of  which  he  knows  not  the  use,  the  most  that  he
can  say  is,  that  it  is  useless:  no  one  ever  suspects
that  it  is  pat  there  to  incommode,  to  annoy,  or  to
torment.  Since  then  God  hath  catted  forth  his
oonsummate  wisdom  to  contrive  and  provide  for
our  happiness,  and  the  world  appears  to  have  been
constituted  with  this  design  at  first }  so  long  as
this  constitution  is  upholden  by  him,  we  must  in
reason  suppose  the  same  design  to  continue.

The  contemplation  of  universal  nature  rather
bewilders  the  mind  than  effects  it  There  is
always  a  bright  spot  in  the  prospect,  upon  which
the  eye  rests;  a  singfa  example,  perhaps,  by  which
each  man  finds  himself  more  convinced  than  by

IaTJ  others  put  together.  I  seem,  for  my  own  part,
to  see  the  benevolence  of  the  Deity  more  clearly
in  the  pleasures  of  very  young  children,  than  in
any  thing  in  the  world  The  pleasures  of  grown
persons  may  be  reckoned  partly  of  their  own  pro-
curing; especially  if  there  has  been  any  industry
or  contrivance,  or  pursuit,  to  come  at  them;  or  u
they  are  founded,  like  music,  peinnW  &c  upon
any  qualification  of  their  own  acquiring.  But
the  pleasures  of  a  healthy  infant  are  so  manifestly
provided  for  it  by  another,  and  the  benevolence  of
the  provision  is  so  unquestionable,  that  every  child
I  see  at  its  sport,  affords  to  my  mind  a  kind  of
"  *  5  evidence  of  the  finger  of  God,  and  of  the
ion  which  directs  it
i  the  example,  which  strikes  each  man  most
strongly,  is  the  true  example  for  him :  and  hardly
two  minds  hit  upon  the  same ;  which  shows  the
abundance  of  suck  examples  about  us.

We  conclude,  therefore,  that  God  wills  and
wishes  the  happiness  of  his  creatures.  And  this
conclusion  being  once  established,  we  are  at  liberty
to  go  on  with  the  rule  built  upon  it,  namely,
"that  the  method  of  coming  at  the  will  of  God,
concerning  any  action,  by  the  light  of  nature,  is
to  inquire  into  the  tendency  of  that  action  to  pro-
mote or  diminish  the  general  happiness."


CHAPTER  VI.

Utility.

So  then  actions  are  to  be  estimated  by  their
tendency*. Whatever  is  expedient,  is  right It

r  *  Actions  in  the  abstract  are  right  or  wrong,  accord-
ing to  their  Umdtncf ;  the  agent  is  virtuous  or  vicious,
according  to  his  Mg%.  Thus,  if  the  question  be,  Whe-
ther relieving  common  beggars  he  right  or  wrong  1  we
inquire  into  the  tetuUncf  oTsach  a  conduct  to  the  public
advantage  or  inconvenience.  If  the  question  be,  Wbe-
,  (leva  man  lenartauasfbjr  this  tort  of  bountyU  to  be


Which  <


ia_tfae'tttilrty  of  any  rne^  piU  sjrme.
stitutes  t^o*M$*fefi-ofit .^

But  to  all  this* Chere^eems  a,  plain  ejection,
viz.  that  many  actions  are  useful,  which  no  mam
in  his  senses  will  allow  to  be  right  There  an
occasions,  in  which  the  hand  of  the  asaaeein  would
be  very  useful.-  The  present  possessor  of  some
great  estate  employs  his  influence  and  fortune,  to
•annoy,  corrupt,  or  oppress,  all  about,  him.  His
estate  would  devolve,  by  his  death,  to  a  successor
of  an  .opposite  character.  It  is  useful,  therefore,
to  despatch  such  a  one  as  soon  as  possible  out  of  the
way;  as  the  neighbourhood  will  exchange  thereby
a  pernicious  tyrant  for  a  wise  and  generous  bene-
factor. H  might  be  useful  to  rob  a  miser,  and
give  the  money  to  the  poor:  as  the  money,  no
doubt,  would  produce  more  happiness,  by  being
bid  out  in  food  and  clothing  for  naif  a  dozen  dis-
tressed families,  than  by  continuing  locked  upin
a  miser'schest  It  inay  be  useful  to  get  possession
of  a  place,  a  piece  of  preferment,  or  of  a  seat  In
parliament,  by  bribery  or  false  swearing:  as  by
means  of  them  we  may  serve  the  public  more
effectually  than  in  our  private  station.  What
then  shafl  we  say  1  Must  we  admit  these  actions
to  be  right,  which  would.be  to  justify  nananninatimi,
plunder,  and  perjurv ;  or  must  we  give  up  our
principle,  that  the  criterion  of  right  is  utility.

It  is  not  necessary  to  do  either.

The  true  answer  is,  this ;  that  these  actions,
after  all,  are  not  useful,  and  for  that  reason,  and
that  alone,  are  net  right  >

To  see  tins  point  perfectly,  ft  must  be  observed,
that  the  bad  consequences  of  actions,  are  twofold,
particular  and  general.

The  particular  bad  consequence  of  an  action,*  is
the  rnischief  which  that  single  action  dheotly  and


The  general  bad.  censequence  is,  {fee  violation
of  some  necessary  or  useful  general  rule.  -

Thus,  the  particular  bad  consequences  of  the
BBwasiinnhoTi  above  described,  is  the  night  and
pain  which  the  deceased  underwent;  the  loss  he
suffered,  of  life,  which  is  as  valuable  to  a  bad  man*
as  to  a  good  one,  or  more  so;  the  prejudice  and
affliction,  of  which  his  death  was  the  occasion  to
his  family,  friends,  and  dependants.

The  general  bad  consequence  is  the  violation
of  this  necessary  general  rule,  that  no  man  be  put
to  death  for  his  crimes  but  by  public  authority.

Although,  therefore,  such  an  action  have  no
particular  bad  consequences,*  or  greater  particular
good  consequences,  yet  it  is  not  useful,  by  reason
of  the  general  conssqbenoe,  which  is  of  mote  im-
portance, and  whieh  is  eviL.  And  the -same  of  the
other  two  instances,  and  of  a  million  more  which
might  be  mentioned.'

But  as  .this  solution  sttpposes,  that  the  moral
government  of  the  world  must  proceed  by  general
rules,  itiemainsthatwe  show  ti  necessity  of  this.


CHAPTER  VII.

The  necessity  of  general  rulse.

Yon  cannot  permit  one  action  and  forbid  another,
without  showing  a  difference  between  them. —
Consequently,  the  same  sort  of  actions  must  be


virtuous  for  that  reason  I  we  inquire  into  his

istifn,  whether  his  liberality  sprang  from  charity  or
from  ostentation  1  It  is  evident  that  our  concern  ts
with  actions  in  um  abstract,


MORAL  AND  POLITICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


40


igemntyr  permitted-  or  generally  forbidden^-
]  Where,  therefore,  the  general  permission  of  diem
would  be  pernicious,  it  becomes  necessary  to  lay
down  and  support  the  role  Which  generally  forbids
them.

Thus  to  return,  anoe  more  to  the  case  of  die
issaasin.  The  assassin  knocked  the  rich  villain
mi  the  head,  because  he  thought  him  better  out  of
the  way  than  in  it  If  you  allow  this  excuse  in
he  present  instance, you  must  allow  it  to  aT "

let  tn  the  same  manner,  and  from  the  said  m

hat  is,  you  must  allow  every  man  to  kill  any  one
be  meets,  whom  he  think*  noxious  or  useless;
which,  in  the  event,  would  be  to  commit  every
man's  life  and  safety  to  the  spleen,  fury,  and
fenaocisrn,  of  his  neighbour;— a  disposition  of
aftairs  which  would  soon  fill  the  world  with  misery
and  eonfusipn ;  and  ere  long  put  an  end  to  human
society,  if  not  to  the  human  species.

The  necessity  of  general  rules  in  human  govern-
ment is  apparent;  but  whether  the  same  necessity
subsists  in  the  Divine  economy,  in  that  distribu-
tion of  rewards  and  punishments  to  which  a
moralist  looks  forward,  may  be  doubted.

I  answer,  that  general  rules  are  necessary
Id  every  moral  government:  and  by  moral  govern-
ment l  mean  any  dispensation,  whose  object  is  to
influence  the  conduct  of  reasonable  creatures.

For  if.  of  two  actions  perfectly  similar,  one  be
punished,  and  the  other  be  rewarded  or  forgiven,
which  is  the  consequence  of  rejecting  general
rules,  the  subjects  of  such  a  dispensation  would
no  longer  know,  either  what  to  expect  or  how  to
act  Rewards  and  punishments  would  cease  to
be  suci;. — would  become  accidents.  Like  the
stroke  of  a  thunderbolt,  or  the  discovery  of  a  mine,
like  a  blank  or  a  benefit-ticket  in  a  lottery,  they
would  occasion  pain  or  pleasure  when  they  hap-
pened; but  following  in  no  known  order,  from
any  particular  course  of  action,  ttyy  .could  have
no  previous  influence  or  effect  upon  the  conduct.
An  attention  to  general  rules,  therefore,  is  in-
cluded in  the  very  idea  of  reward  and  punishment.
Consequently,  whatever  reason  there  is  to  expect
future  reward  and  punishment  at  the  hand  of
God,  there  is  the  same  reason  to  believe,  that  he
will  proceed  in  the  distribution  of.  it  by  general
rules.


Were  such  a  rule  admitted,  for  i
the  case  above  produced; is  there  not  reason
to  fear  that  people  would  be  dkappcariax  per-
petually? t-

tn  the  next  place,  I  would  wish  them  to  be  weS
satisfied  about  the  points  proposed  in  the  following
queries;—

1.  Whether  the  Scriptures  do  not  teach  as
to  expect  that,  at  the  general  judgment  of  the
world,  the  most  secret  actions  will  he  brought  to
fcghtT*  ^

2.  For  what  purpose  can  this  be,  but  to
make  them  the  objects  of  reward  and  punish-


3.  -Whether,  being  so  brought  to  light,  they
will  not  fell  under  the  operatmn  of  those  equal
and  impartial  rules,  by  which  God  win  deal  with
hbcreatures?

They  will  then  become  examples,  whatever
they  be  now;  and  require  the  same  treatment
from  the  judge  and  governor  of  the  moral  world.
as  if  they  had  been  detected  from  the  first


Before  we  prosecute  the  consideration  of  general
consequences  any  further,  it  may  be  proper  to  an-
ticipate a  reflection,  which  will  be  apt  enough  to
suggest  itself,  in  the  progress  of  our  argument.

As  the  general  consequence  of  an  action,  upon
which  so  much  of  the  guilt  of  a  bad  action  de-
pends, consists  in  the  example ;  it  should  seem,
that  if  the  action  be  done  with  perfect  secrecy,  so
as  to  furnish  no  bad  example,  that  part  of  the
guilt  drops  off.  In  the  case  or  suicide,  for  instance,
if  a  man  can  so  manage  matters,  as  to  take  away
his  own  life,  without  being  known  or  suspected
to  have  done  so,  he  is  not  chargeable  with  any
mischief  from  the  example ;  nor  does  his  punish-
ment seem  necessary,  in  order  to  save  the  au-
thority of  any  general, rule.

In  the-  first  place,  those  who  reason  in  this
manner  do  not  observe,  that  they  are  setting  up  a
general  rule,  of  all  others  the  least  to  be  endured';
namely,  that  secrecy,  whenever  secrecy  is  prac-
ticable, will  justify  any  action.


CHAPTER  Vni.

Consideration  of  General  Consequence*
pursued.

y,.  The  general  consequence  of  any  action  may  be
^estimated,  by  asking  what  would  be  the  conse-
quence, if  the  same  sort  of  actions  were  generally
permitted.— But  suppose  they  were,  and  a  thou-
sand such  actions  perpetrated  under  this  permis-
sion; is  it  just  to  charge  a  single  action  with  the
collected  guilt  and  mischief  of  the  whole  thousand  1
I  answer,  that  the  reason  for  prohibiting  and
punishing  an  action  (and  this  reason  may  be
called  the  ^piilt  of  the  action,  if  you  please)  will
always  be  in  proportion  to  the  whole  mischief
that  would  arise  from  the  general  impunity  and
toleration  of  actions  of  the  same  sort.

"  Whatever  is  expedient  is  right"  But  then
it  must  be  expedient  on  the  whole,  at  the  long
run,  in  all  its  effects  collateral  and  remote,  as  wefl
as  in  those  which  are  immediate  and  direct;  as  it
is  obvious,  that,  in  computing  consequences,  it
makes  no  difference  in  what  way  or  at  what  die-
tance  they  ensue.

To  impress  this  doctrine  on  the  minds  of  young
readers,  and  to  teach  them  to  extend  their  views
beyond  the  immediate  mischief  of  a  crime,  I  shall
here  subjoin  a  string  of  instances,  in  which  the
particular  consequence  is  comparatively  insigni-
ficant; and  where  the  malknity  of  the  crime,
and  the  severity  with  which  numan  laws  pursue
it,  is  almost  entirely  founded  upon  the  general
consequence.

The  particular  conseouence  of  coiningls,  the
loss  of  a  guinea,  or  of  half  a  guinea,  to  the  person
who  receives  the  counterfeit  money:  the  general
consequence  (by  which  I  mean  the  consequence
that  Would  ensue,  if  the  same  practice  were  gene-
rally permitted)  is  to  abolish  the  use  of  money..

The  particular  consequence  of  forgery  is,  a
damage  of  twenty  or  thirty  pounds  to  tine  man


*  "  In  tbe  day  when  God  shall  judge  the  •ecrets.of  men


by  Jesus  Christ."  Rom.  xi.  16.—"  Jndga  nothing  before
tbe  time,  until  the  Lord  come,  who  will  bring  to  light
the  hidden  things  of  darkness,  and  will  make  manifest
the  counsels  of  the  heart*" ICor.  iv.J.


OF  RIGHT.


41


who  accepts  the  forged  bill:  the  general  conse-
quence is,  the  stoppage  of  paper-currency.

The  particular  consequence  of  sheep-stealing,
or  horsestealing,  is  a  loss  to  the  owner,  to  the
amount  of  the  value  of  the  sheep  or  horse  stolen :
the  general  consequence  is,  that  the  land  could
not  be  occupied,  nor  the  market  supplied;  with
this  kind  of  stock.

The  particular  consequence  of  breaking  into  a
house  empty  of  inhabitants,  is,  the  loss  of  a  pair
of  silver  candlesticks,  or  a  few  spoons:  the  gene-
mi  consequence  is,  that  nobody  could  leave  the


i  empty.

The  particular  consequence  of  smuggling  may
he  a  deduction  from  the  national  fund  too  minute
mr  computation:  the  general  consequence  is,  the
destruction  of  one  entire  branch  of  public  revenue ;
a  proportionable  increase  of  the  burthen  upon
other  branches;  and  the  ruin  of  all  feir  and  open
trade  in  the  article  smuggled.

The  particular  consequence  of  an  officer's
breaking  his  parole  is,  the  loss  of  a  prisoner,  who
was  possibly  not  worth  keeping :  the  general  con-
sequence is,  that  this  mitigation  of  captivity  would
be  refused  to  all  others.

And  what  proves  incontestably  the  superior
importance  of  general  consequence  is,  that  crimes
are  the  same,  and  treated  in  the  same  manner,
though  the  particular  conseouence  be  very  differ-
ent The  crime  and  fete  or  the  house-breaker  m
the  same,  whether  his  booty  be  Owe  pounds  or
illy.  And  the  reason  is,  that  the  general  con-
sequence is  the  same.

The  want  of  this  distinction  between  particular
and  general  consequences,  or  rather,  the  not  suf-
ficiently attending  to  the  latter,  is  the  cause  of  that
perplexity  which  we  meet  with  in  ancient  mo-
ralists. On  the  one  hand,  they  were  sensible  of
the  absurdity  of  pronouncing  actions  good  or  evil,
without  regard  to  the  good  or  evil  they  produced.
On  the  other  hand,  they  were  startled  at  the  con-
chseone  to  which  a  steady  adherence  to  conse-
quences seemed  sometimes  to  conduct  them.  To
relieve  this  difficulty,  they  contrived  the  ™  wft«—
or  the  honestum,  by  which  terms  they  meant  to
constitute  a  measure  of  right,  distinct  from  utility.
Whilst  the  utile  served  them,  that  is,  whilst  it
corresponded  with  their  habitual  notions  of  the
rectitude  of  actions,  they  went  by  it.  When  they
fell  in  with  such  cases  as  those  mentioned  in  the
sixth  chapter,  they  took  leave  of  their  guide,  and
resorted  to  the  honestum.  The  only  account  they
couli  rive  of  the  matter  was,  that  these  actions
might  be  useful;  but,  because  they  were  not  at
the  same  time  konesta,  they  were  by  np  means  to
lie  deemed  just  or  right-

t From  the  principles  delivered  in  this  and  the
?  two  preceding  chapters-,  a  maxim  may  be  explained,
J  which  is  in  every  man's  mouth,  and  in  most  men's
i  without  meaning,  viz.  "not  to  do  evil,  that  good
may  come:"  that  is,  let  us  not  violate  a  general
I  rale,  for  the  sake  of  any  particular  good  conse-
quence we  may  expect Which  is  for  the  most
pert  a  sanitary  caution,  the  advantage  seldom
'  compensating  for  the  violation  of  the  rule.  Strictly
•'  speaking,  thai  cannot  be  "evil"  from  winch  "good
comes-, but  m  this  way,  and  with  a  view  to  the
distinction  between  particular  and  general  conse-
quences, it  may.

We  will  conclude  this  subject  of  consequence*
with  the  foflcrong  reflection.  Amannn '


must  be  inconsiderable;  so  also  is  the  agent  •  If  \
his  crime  produce  but  a  small  effect  upon  the\  I
uniceraat  interest,  his  punishment  or  destruction  a  J
bears  a  small  proportion  to  the  sum  of  happiness  '
and  misery  in  the  creation.


CHPTERIX.

Qf  Right.

Right  and  obligation  are  reciprocal;  that  is,  \Z
wherever  there  is  a  right  in  one  person,  there  is  a
corresponding  obligation  upon  others.  If  one  man
has  ^'aright*  to  an  estate,  others  are  "obliged"
to  abstain  from  it: — If  parents  have  a  "right7'  to
reverence  from  their  children,  children  are  "oblig-
ed" to  reverence  their  parents :— and  so  in  all  other


Now,  because  moral  obligation  depends,  as  we
have  seen,,  upon  the  will  of  God ;  right,  which  is
correlative  to  it,  must  depend  upon  the  same.—-
Right,  therefore,  signifies,  consistency  with  ike  will
of  God.

But  if  the  Divine  will  determine  the  distinction
of  right  and  wrong,  what  else  is  it  but  an  identical
proposition,  to  say  ef  God,  that  he  acts  right?  or
how  is  it  possible  to  conceive  even  that  he  should
act  wrong  ?  Yetihese  assertions  are  intelligible
and  significant.  {The  case  is  tins:  By  virtue  of
the  two  principles,  that  God  wills  the  happiness
of  his  creatures,  and  that  the  will  of  God  is  the
measure  of  right  and  wrong,  we  arrive  at  certain
conclusions;  which  conclusions  become  rules ;  and
-w-  we  soon  learn  to  pronounce  actions  right  or  wrong,
that,  according  as  they  agree,  or  disagree  with  our
—  rules,  without  looking  any  further:  and  when
the  habit  is  once  established  of  stopping  at  the
rules,  we  can  go  back  and  compare  with  these
rules  even  the  Divine  conduct  itself;  and  yet  it
may  be  true  (only  not  observed  by  us  at  the  time)
that  the  rules  themselves  ere  deduced  from  the
Divine  will

Right  is  a  quality  of  persons  or  of  actions. v

Of  persons;  as  when  we  say,  such  a  one  has  a
"right"  to  this  estate;  parents  have  a  "right"  to
reverence  from  their  children;  the  king  to  alle-
giance from  his  subjects;  masters  have  "right"
to  their  servants' labour;  a  inan  has  not  a  "right"
over  his  own  life.

Of  actions;  as  inrsuch  expressions  as  the  fol-
lowing: it  is  "right"  to  punish  murder  with
death ;  bin  behaviour  on  thai  occasion  was  "right;"
it  is  not  "right"  to  send  an  unfortunate  debtor  to
jail;  he  did  or  acted  "right,"  who  save  up  Iris
place,  rather  than  vote  against  his  judgment

In  this  letter  set  of  expressions,  you  may  sub-
stitute the  definition  of  right  above  given,  for  the
term  itself:  e.g.iX  is  "consistent  with  the  will  of
God  to  punish  murder  with  death ;  his  behaviour
on  that  occasion  was  "consistent  with  the  will  of
God;"— ft  is  not  "consistent  with  the  will  of  God"
to  send  an  unfortunate  debtor  to  jail;— he  did,  or
acted,  "consistently  with  the  will  of  God,"  who
gave,  up  his  place,  rather  than  vote  against  his
judgment -

In  the  former  set,  you  must  vary  the  construc-
tion a  little,  when  you  introduce  the  definition
instead  of  the  term.  Such  a  one  has  a  "  right"  to
tins  estate,  that  is,  it  is  "consistent  with  the  will
of  God"  that  such  a  one  should  have  it ;— - parents
have  a,  "right"  to  reverence  from  their  children*


MORAL  AND  POUTICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


that  is,  it  is  "consistent  with  the  will  of  God"
that  children  should  reverence  their  parents;— and
the  same  of  the  rut


CHAPTER  X.
The  Division  of  Right*.

Rights,  when  applied  to  persons,  are
Natural  or  adventitious:
Ah>nfH*  or  unalienable:
'  Perfect  or  imperfect.

I.  Rights  are  natural  or  adventitious.

Natural  rights  are  such  as  would  belong  to  a
man,  although  there  subsisted  in  the  world  no
civil  government  whatever.

Adventitious  rights  are  such  as  would  not.

Natural  rights  are,  a  man's  right  to  his  life,
bubs,  and  liberty;  his  right  to  the  produce  of  his
personal  labour ;  to  the  use,  in  common  with  others,
of  sir,  light,  water.  If  a  thousand  different  persons,
from  a  thousand  different  corners  of  the  world\
were  cast  together  upon  a  desert  island,  they  would
from  the  first  be  every  one  entitled  to  these  rights.

Adventitious  rights  are,  the  right  of  a  lung
over  his  subjects :  of  a  general, over  his  soldiers;
*s*  a  judge  over  the  life  and  liberty  of  &  prisoner;
a  right  to  elect  or  appoint  magistrates,  to  impose
taxes,  decide  disputes,  direct  the  descent  or  dispo-


i  of  property;  a  right,  in  a  word,  in  any  one
man.  or  particular  body  of  men,  to  make  laws  and
regulations  for  the  rest  For  none  of  these  rights
Would  exist  in  the  newly  inhabited  island.
!  And  here  it  will  be  asked,  how  adventitious
i  rights  are  created ;  or,  which  is  the  same  thing,
how  any  new  rights  can  accrue  from  the  estab-
lishment of  civil  society;  as  rights  of  all  kinds,  we
remember,  depend  upon  the  will  of  God,  and  ci-
vil society  is  but  the  ordinance  and  institution  of
manl  For  the  solution  of  this  difficulty,  we  must
return  to  our  first  principles.  God  wills  the  hap-
.  pines*  of  mankind;  ana  the  existence  of  civil  so-
v  dety,  as  conducive  to  that  happiness.  Conse-
\  quentlyymany  things,  which  are  useful  for  the
support  of  civil  society  in  general,  or  for  the  con-
duct and  conversation  of  particular  societies  al-
ready established,  are,  for  that  reason,  "-consistent
with  the  will  of  God"  or  "right,"  which,  without
that  reason,  i.  e.  without  the  establishment  of  ci-
vil society,  would  not  have  been  so.

From  whence  also  it  appearSj  that  adventitious
rights,  though  immediately  derived  from  human
appointment,  are  not,  for  that  reason,  less  sacred
than  natural  rights,  nor  the  obligation  to  respect
them  less  cogent  They  both  ultimately  rely
upon  the  same  authority,  the  will  of  God..  Such
a  man  claims  a  right  to  a  particular  estate.  He
can  show,  it  is  true,  nothing  for  his  right,  but-a
rale  of  the  civil  community  to  whkh  he  belongs ;
and  this  rule  may  be  arbitrary,  capricious,  and
absurd.  Notwithstanding  all  this,  there  would
be  the  same  sin  in  dispossessing  the  man.  of  his
estate  by  craft  or  violence,  as  ff  it  had  been  as-
signed to  him,  like  the  partition  of  the  tXMihtry
amongst  the  twelve  tribes,  by  the  immediate  desig-
nation and  appointment  of  Heaven.
•  U.  Rights  are  alienable  or  unalienable.
.  Which  terms  explain  themselves.
,  The  right  we  have  to  most  of  those  things
'which  we  call  property,  as  houses,  lands,  money,


The  right  of  a  prince  over  his  people,  of  a  hus-t
band  over  his  wile,  of  a  master  over  his  servant,/
Am  generally  and  naturally  unalienable,  i

The  distinction  depends  upon  the  mode  of  ac-\
quiring  the  right.  If  the  right  originate  from  a  con*  (
tract,  and  be  limited  to  the  person,  by  the  express  j
terms  of  the  contract,  or  by  the  common  interpnv '
tation  of  such  contracts  (which  is  equivalent  to-
an  express  stipulation,)  or  oy  a  personal  condition
annexed  to  the  right ;  then  it  is  unalienable.  Inj
all  other  cases  it  is  alienable.  >

(  The  right  to  civil  liberty  is  alienable ;  though!
in  the  vehemence  of  men's  zeal  for  it,  and  the  1  -
language  of  some  political  remonstrances,  it  has  I
often  been  pronounced  to  be  an  unalienable  righ.fr
The  true  reason  why  mankind  hold  in  detestation]
the  memory  bf  those  who  have  sold  their 'liberty!
to  a  tyrant,  is,  that,  together  with  their  own,  they .
sold  commonly,  or  endangered,  the  liberty  of  othen ; '
which  certainly  they  had  no  right  to  dispose  of.

III.  Rights  are  perfect  or  imperfect.  ..

Perfect  rights  may  be  assert**]  by  force,  or,  what
in  civil  society  comes  into  the  place  of  private  force,
by  course  of  law.

Imperfect  rights  may  not  ^

Examples  of  perfect  rights. — A  man's  right  to
his  life,  person,  nouae ;  for,  if  these  be  attacked,
he  may  repel  the  attack  by  instant  violence,  or
punish  the  aggressor  by  law.:  a  man's  right  to  bis
estate,  furniture,  clothes,  money,  and  to  all  ordi-
nary articles  of  property;  for,  if  they  be  injurious-
ly taken  from  mm,  he  may  compel  the  author  of
the  injury  to  make  restitution  or  satisfaction. \y

Examples  of  imperfect  rights**— In  elections  or
appointments  to  offices,  where  the  qualifications
are  prescribed,  the  best  qualified  candidate  has  a
right  to  success;  yet,  if  he  be  rejected,  he  has  no
remedy.  He  can  neither  seize  tne  office  by  force,
nor  obtain  redress  at  law ;  his  right  therefore  is
imperfect  A  poor  neighbour  has  a  right  to  re-
lief;  yet,  if  it  be  refused  him,  he  must  not  extort
it  A  Benefactor  has  a,  right  to  returns  of  gra-
titude from  the  person  he  nas  obliged ;  yet^  if  he
meet  with  none,  he.  must  acquiesce.  Children
have  a  right  to  affection  and  education  from  their
parents ;  and  parents,  on  their  part,  to  duty  and
reverence  from  their  children ;  yet,  if  these  rights
be  on  either  side  withholden,  there  is  no  compul-
sion by  which  they  can  be  enforced.

It  may  be  at  first  view  difficult  to  apprehend
how  a  person  should  have  a  right  to  a  tning,  and
yet  have  no  right  to  use  the  means  necessary  to
obtain  it.  This  difficulty,  like  most  others  in  mo-
rality, is  resolvable  into  the  necessity  of  general
rules.  The  reader  recollects,  that  a  person  is  said
to  have  a  "  right"  to  a  thing,  when  it  is  "  consistent
with  the  will  of  God"  that  he  should  possess  it  So
that  thequestion  is  reduced  to  this :  How  it  comes  to
pass  that  it  should  be  consistent  with  the  will  of  God
that  a  person  should  possess  a  things  and  yet  not  be
consistent  with  the  same  will  that  he  should  use
force  to  obtain  it?  The  answer  is,  that  by  reason  of
the  inde^rminateness  either  of  the  object,  or  of
the  circumstances  of  the  right,  the  permission  of
force  in  this  case  would,  in  its  consequence,  lead
to  the  permission  of  force  in  other  cases,  where
there  existed  no  right  at  all.  The  candidate  above
described  has,  no  doubt,  a  right  to  success ;  but
his  right  depends  upon  his  qualifications,  for  in-
stance, upon  his  comparative  virtue,  learning,  eVc.
there  must  be  some  body  therefore  to  compare
them. The  existence,  degree,  and  respective  im-


GENERAL  RIGHTS  OF  MANKIND.


43


poftance,  of  these  qualifications,  are  all  indeter-
minate :  there  must  be  somebody  therefore  to  deter-
mine them.  To  allow  the  candidate  to  demand  suc-
cess by  force,  u  to  make  him  the  judge  of  his  own
qualifications.  You  cannot  do  this,  but  you  must
make  all  other  candidates  the  same;  which  would
open  a  door  to  demands  without  number,  reason,
or  right  In  like  manner,  a  poor  man  has  a  right
to  relief  from  the  rich ;  but  the  mode,  season,  and
quantum  of  that  relief,  who  shall  contribute  to  it,
or  how  much,  are  not  ascertained.  Yet  these  points
must  be  ascertained,  before  a  claim  to  relief  can  be
prosecuted  by  force.  For,  to  allow  the  poor  to  ascer-
tain them  for  themselves,  would  be  to  expose  pro-
pertjr  to  so  many  of  these  claims,  that  it  would  lose
its  value,  or  rather  its  nature,  that  is,  cease  indeed
to  be  property.  The  same  observation  holds  of  all
other  cases  of  imperfect  rights ;  not  to  mention,  that
in  the  instances  of  gratitude,  affection,  reverence,
and  the  like,  force  is  excluded  by  the  very  idea  of  the
dutyjWhich  must  be  voluntary,  or  cannot  exist  at  all.

Wherever  the  right  k  imperfect,  the  correspond-
ing obligation  is  so  too.  I  am  obliged  to  prefer
the  best  candidate,  to  relieve  the  poor,  be  grateful
to  my  benefactors,  take  care  of  my  children,  and
reverence  my  parents  j  but  in  all  these  cases,  my
obligation,  like  their  right,  is  imperfect.

I  call  these  obligations  "  imperfect"  in  conform-
ity to  the  established  language  of  writers  upon
the  subject  The  term,  however,  seems  ill  chosen
on  this,  account,  that  it  leads  many  to'  imagine,
that  there  is  less  guilt  in  the  violation  of  an  im-
perfect obligation,  than  of  a  perfect  one:  which  is
a  groundless  notion.  For  an  obligation  being  per-
fect or  imperfect,  determines  only  whether  violence
may  or  may  "not  be  employed  to  enforce  it;  and
determines  nothing  else.  The  degree  of  guilt
incurred  by  violating  the  obligation,  is  a  different
thing,  and  is  determined  by  circumstances  alto-
gether independent  of  this  distinction.  A  man
who,  by  a  partial,  prejudiced,  or  corrupt  vote,  dis-
appoints a  worthy  candidate  of  a  station  in  life,
upon  which  his  hopes,  possibly,  or  livelihood,  de-
pended, and  who  thereby  grievously  discourages
merit  and  emulation  in  others,  commits,  I  am  ner-
suaded,  a  much  greater  crime,  than  if  he  filched
a  book  out  of  a  library,  or  picked  a  pocket  of  a
hnndkerchief ;  though  in  the  one  case  he  violates
only  an  imperfect  right,  in  the  other  a  perfect  one.

As  positive  precepts  are  often  indeterminate  in
their  extent  ana  as  the  indetenninateness  of  an  ob-
lionisthat


w  t  which  makes  it  imperfect ;  it  comes

fcTpass,  that  positive  precepts  commonly  produce
aa  imperfect  obfigation.

Negative  precepts  or  prohibitions,  being  general-
ly precise,  constitute  accordingly  perfect  oWiga-


The  fifth  commandment  is  positive,  and  the
duty  which  results  from  it  is  imperfect

The  sixth  commandment  is  negative,  and  im-
poses a  perfect  obligation.

Religion  and  virtue  find  their  principal  exercise
among  the  imperfect  obligations ;  the  laws  of  ci-
vil society  taking  pretty  good  care  of  the  rest


CHAPTER  XL

The  General  Rights  qf  Mankind.

By  the  General  righto  of  Mankind,  I  mean  the
rights  wfakh  belong  to  the  species  collectively ;


the  original  stock,  as  I  may  say,  which  they  have
since  distributed  among  themselves.  -
These  are,

1.  A  right  to  the  fruits  or  vegetable  produce  of
the  earth.

The  insensible  parte  of  the  creation  are  inca-
pable of  injury ;  and  it  is  nugatory  to  inquire  in-
to the  right,  where  the  use  can  be  attended  with
no  injury.  But  it  may  be  worth  observing,  for
the  sake  of  an  inference  which  will  appear  below,
that,  as  God  had  created  us  with  a  want  end  de-
sire of  food,  and  provided  things  suited  by  their
nature  to  sustain  and  satisfy  us,  we  may  fairly  pre-
sume, that  he  intended  we  should  apply  these
things  to  that  purpose.

2.  A  right  to  the  flesh  of  animals.  / \/
This  is  a  very  different  claim  from  the  former.

Some  excuse  seems  necessary  for  the  pain  and
loss  which  we  occasion  to  brutes,  by  restraining
them  of  their  liberty,  mutilating  their  bodies,  ana,
at  last,potting  an  end  to  their  lives  (which  we  sup-
pose to  be  the  whole  of  their  existence,)  for  our
pleasure  or  conveniency.

The  reasons  alleged  in  vindication  of  this  prac-
tice, are  the  following :  that  the  several  species  of
brutes  being  created  to  prey  upon  one  another,
affords  a  kind  of  analogy  to  prove  that  the  human
species  were  intended  to  feed  upon  them;  that,  if
let  alone,  they  would  over-run  the  earth,  and  ex-
clude mankind  from  the  occupation  of  it;  that
they  are  requited  for  what  they  suffer  at  our  hands,
by  our  care  and  protection.

Upon  which  reasons  I  would  observe,  that  the
analogy  contended  for  is  extremely  lame;  since
brutes  have  no  power  to  support  life  by  any  other
means;  ind  since  we  have ;  for  the  whole  human
species  might  subsist  entirely  upon  fruit  pulse,
herbs,  and  roots,  aa  many  tribes  of  Hindoos  ac-
tually do.  The  two  other  reasons  may  be  valid
reasons,  as  for  as  they  go;  for,  no  doubt,  if  man
had  been  supported  entirely  by  vegetable  food,  a '
great  part  or  those  animals  which  die  to  furnish
his  table,  would  never  have  lived :  but  they  by  no
means  justify  our  right  over  the  fives  of  brutes
to  the  extent  in  which  we  eftercise  it.  What
danger  is  there,  for  instance,  of  fish  interfering
with  us,  in  the  occupation  of  their  element?  or
what  daise  contribute  to  their  support  or  preser-
vation 1

It  seems  to  me,  that  it  would  be  difficult  to  de-
fend this  right  by  any  arguments  which  the
light  and  order  of  nature  afford ;  and  that  we  are
benolden  for  it  to  the  permission  recorded  in  Scrip-
ture, Gen.  ix.  1,2,3:  "And  God  blessed  Noah
and  his  sons,  and  said  unto  them,  Be  fruitful,  and
multiply,  and  replenish  the  earth :  and  the  fear  of
you,  ana  the  dread  of  you,  shall  be  upon  every
beast  of  the  earth,  and  upon  every  fowl  of  the  air.
and  upon  all  that  moveth  upon  the  earth,  ana
upon  all  the  fishes  of  the  sea;  into  your  hand
are  they  delivered ;  every  moving  thing  shall  be
meat  for  you ;  even  as  the  green  herb,  have  I
given  you  all  things."  To  Adam  and  his  •pos-
terity had  been  granted,  at  the  creation,  '1  every
green  herb  for  meat,"  and  nothing  more.  In  the
last  clause  of  the  passage  now  produced,  the  old
grant  is  recited,  end  extended  to  the  flesh  of  ani-
mals ;  "  even  as  the  green  herb,,  have  I  given  you
all  things."  But  this  was  not  till  after  the  flood :
the  inhabitants  of  the  antediluvian  world- had
therefore  no  such  permission,  that -we  know  of.
Whether  they  actually  refrained  from  die  flesh


*/


44


MORAL  AND  POLITICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


of  animak,  is  another  question.  Abel,  we  read,
wh  a  keeper  of  sheep;  and  for  what  purpose  he
kept  them,  except  for  food,  is  difficult  to  say,  (un-
less it  were  sacrifices :)  might  not,  however,  some
of  the  stricter  sects  among  the  antediluvians  be
scrupulous  as  to  this  point!  and  might  not  Noah
and  his  family  be  of  -this*  description  I  for  it  is  not
probable  that  God  would  publish  a  permission,  to
authorise  a  practice,  which  had  never  bean  dis-
puted.

Wanton;  and,  what  is  worse,  studied  cruelty
to  brutes,  is  certainly  wrong,  as  eoming  within  one
of  these  reasons.


From  reason  then,  or  revelation,  or  from  both
together,  it  appears  to  be  God  Almighty's  inten-
tion, that  the  productions  of  the  earth,  should  be
applied  to  the  sustentation  of  human  life.  Con-
sequently all  waste  and  noisapplication  of  these  pro-
ductions, is  contrary  to  the  Divine  intention  and
will ;  and  therefore  wrong,  for  the  same  reason
that  any  other  crime  is  so.  Such  as,  what  is  re-
lated of  William  the  Conqueror,  the  converting
of  twenty  manors  into  a  forest  for  hunting ;  or,
which  is  not  much  better,  sunering  them  to  con-
tinue in  that  state;  or  the  letting  of  large  .tracts  of
land  he  barren,  because  the  ownercannot  cultivate
them,  nor  will  part  with  them  to  those  who.  can;
or  destroying,  or  suffering  to  perish,  great  part  of
an  article  of  human  provision,  in  order  to  enhance
the  price  of  the  remainder,  (which  is  said  to  have
been,  till  lately,  the  case  with  fish  caught  upon
the  English  coast ;)  or  diminishing  the  breed  of
animate,  by  a  wanton,  or  improvident,  consump-
tion of  the  young,  as  of  the  spawn  of  shell-fish,  or
the  fry  of  salmon,  by  the  use  of  unlawful  net*,  or
at  improper  seasons :  to  this  head  may  also  be  re-
ferred, what  is  the  same  evil  in  a  smaller  way,
the  expending  of  human  food  on  superfluous  dogs
or  horses ;  and,  lastly,  the  reducing  of  the  quanti-
ty, in  order  to  alter  the  quality,  and  to  alter  it  ge-
nerally for  the  worse;  as  the  distillation  of  spirits
from  bread-corn,  the  boiling  down  of  solid  meat
for  sauces,  essence^  <Stc

This  seems  to  be  the  lesson  which  our  Saviour,
after  bis  manner,  inculcates,  when  he  bids  bis
disciples  "  gather  up  the  fragments  that  nothing
be  lost."  And  it  opens  indeed  a  new  field,  of
duty.  Schemes  of  wealth  or  profit,  prompt  the  ac-
tive part  of  mankind  to  cast  about,  how  they  may
convert  their  property  to  the  most  advantage ;  and
their  own  advantage,  and  that  of  the  pubuc,  com-
monly concur.  But  it  has  not  as  yet  entered  into  the.
minds  of  mankind  to  reflect  that  it  is  a  duty,  to  add
what  we  can  to  the  common  stock  of  provision,  by
extracting  out  of  our  estates  the  most  they  will  yielo;
or  that  it  is  any  sin  to  neglect  this.

From  the  same  intention  of  God  Almighty,  we
also  deduce  another  conclusion,  namely  "  that  no-
thing ought  to  be  made  exclusive  property,  which
can  be  conveniently  enjoyed  in  common.

It  is  the  general  intention  of  God  Almighty,  that
the  produce  of  the  earth  be  applied  to  the  use  of
man.  This  appears  from  the  constitution  of  na-
ture ;  or,  if  you  will,  from  his  express  declaration ;
and  this  is  all  that  appears  at  first.  Under  this
general  donation,  one  man  has  the  same  right  as
another.  You  pluck  an  apple  from  a  tree,  or
take  a  lamb  from  a  flock,  for  your  immediate  use
and  nourishment,  and  1  do  the  same ;  and  we  both
plead  for  what  we  do,  the  general  intention  of  the


.Supreme  Proprietor.  So  for  all  is  right:  but  you
cannot  claim  the  whole  tree,  or  the  whole  flock,
and  exclude  me  from  any  share  of  them,  and
plead  this  general  intention  for  what  you  do.  The
plea  will  not  serve  you ;  you  musUhow  something
more.  You  must  show ,  by  probable  arguments  at
least,  that  it  is  God's  intention,  that  these  things
should  be  parcelled  out  to  individuals;  and  that
the  established  distribution,  under  which  you
claim,  should  be  uphoiden.  Show  me  this,  and  I
am  satisfied.

But  until  this  be  shown,  the  general  intention,
which  has  been  made  appear,  and  which  is  all
that  does  appear,  must  prevail ;  and.  under  that,
my  title  isas  good  as  yours.  Now  then  is  no  ar-
gument to  induce  such  a  presumption,  but  one ;
that  the  thing  cannot  be  enjoyed  at  all,  or  enjoy-
ed with  the  same,  or  with  nearly  the  same  advan-
tage, while  it  continues  in  common,  as  when  ap-
propriated. This  is  true,  where  there  is  not
enough  for  all,  or  where  the  article  in  question
requires  care  or  labour  in  the  production  or  pre-
servation :  but  where  no  such  reason  obtains,  and
the  thing  is  in  its  nature  capable  of  being  enjoyed
by  as  many  as  will,  it  seems  an  arbitrary  usurpation
upon  the  rights  of  mankind,  to  confine  the  use  of
it  to  any.

If  a  medicinal  spring  were  discovered  in  a  piece
of  ground  which  was  private  property,  copious
enough  for  every  purpose  to  which  it  could  be  ap-
plied, I  would  award  a  compensation  to  the  owner
of  the  field,  and  a  liberal  profit  to  the  author  of  the


discovery,  especially  if  he  had  bestowed  pains  or  ex
pense  upon  the  search :  but  I  question  whether  any
human  kws  would  be  justified,  or  would  justify  the
owner,  in  prohibiting  mankind  from  the  use  of  the
water,  or  setting  such  a  price  upon  it  as  would  almost
amount  to  a  prohibition.

If  there  be  fisheries,  which  are  inexhaustible,
as  the  cod-fishery  upon  the  Banks  of  Newfound-
land, and  the  berrinc-fishery  in  the  British  seas,
are  said  to  be;  then  aD  those  conventions,  by  which
one  or  two  nations  claim  to  themselves,  and  gua-
ranty to  each  other,  the  exclusive  enjoyment  of
these  fisheries,  are  so  many,  encroachments  upon
the  general  righto  of  mankind.

Upon  the  same  principle  may  be  determined  a
question,  which  makes  a  great  figure  in  books  of
natural  law,  utrum  mart  tit  liberum  ?  that  is,  as  I
understand  it,  whether  the  exclusive  right  of  navi-
gating particular  seas,  or  a  control  over  the  naviga-
tion of  these  seas,  can  be  claimed,  consistently
with  the  law  of  nature,  by  any  nation  ?  What  is
necessary  for  each  nation's  safety,  we  allow :  as
their  own  bays,  creeks,  and  harbours,  the  sea  con-
tiguous to,  that  is  within  cannon  ahot,  or  three
leagues  of  their  coast  and  upon  this  principle  of  safe-
"upon  any  principle,)  must  be  defended  the


claim  ot  the  Venetian  State  to  the  Adriatic,  of  Den-
mark to  the  Baltic  Sea,  and  of  Great  Britain,  to  the
seas  which  invest  the  island.  But,  when  Spain
asserts  a  right  to  the  Pacific  Ocean,  or  Portugal
to  the  Indian  Seas,  or  when  any  nation  extends
its  pretensions  much  beyond  the  limits  of  its  own
territories,  they  erect  a  claim  which  interferes  with
the  benevolent  designs  of  Providence,  and  which
no  human  authority  can  justify.  '

3.  Another  right,  which  may  be  called  a  gene-l
ral  right,  as  it  is  incidental  to  every  man  who  is  in
a  situation  to  claim  it,  is  the  right^CexUenie  new
ceesity ;  by  which  is  meant,  a  right  to  use  or  desJ
troy  another's  property  when  it  is  necessary  fot


RELATIVE  DUTIES:


mirosre  preservation  to  do  so;  as  a  right  to  take,
without  or  against  the  owner's  leave,  the  first  food,
clothes,  or  shelter,  we  meet  with,  when  we  are  in
danger  of  perishing  through  want  of  them ;  §  right
to  throw  goods  overboardto  save  the  ship ;  or  to
poll  down  a  house,  in  order  to  stop  the  progress  of
a  fire ;  and  a  few  other  instances  of  the  same  kind.
Of  which  right  the  foundation  seems  to  be  this:
that  when  property  was  first  instituted,  the  insti-
tution was  not  intended  to  operate  to  the  destruc-
tion of  any ;  therefore  when  such  consequences
would  follow,  all  regard  to  it  issnperseded.  Or
rather,  perhaps,  these  an  thefew  cases,  where  the
particular  consequence  exceeds  the  general  con-
sequence; where  the  remote  mischief  resulting
from  the  violation  of  the  general  rule,  is  overba-
lanced by  the  immediate  advantage.

Restitution,  however,  is  due,  when  in  our  power ;
because  the  laws  of  property  are  to  be  adhered  to,
so  mr  as  consists  with  safety;  and  because  restitu-
tion, which  Is  one  of  those  laws,  supposes  the  dan-
ger to  be  over.  But  what  is  to  be  restored?  Not  the
mil  value  of  the  property  destroyed,  but  what  h
was  -worth  at  the  time  of  destroying  it ;  which,
considering  the  danger  it  was  in  of  perishing,  might
be  very  title.


BOOKIII.
RELATIVE  DUTIES.


PART  I.


OF  IBLATTOB  DUTIES  WHICH  AXE  DETER-
MINATE.


CHAPTER  I.


CHAPTER  IT.


CQf  Property.
If  you  should  see  a  flock  of  pigeons  in  afield  of
rn :  and  if  (instead  of  each  picking  where  and
what  it  liked,  taking  just  as  much- as  it  wanted,
and  no  more)  you  should  see  ninety-nine  of  them
gathering  all  they  got.  into  a  heap ;  reserving
nothing  for  themselves,  but  the  chaff  and  the  refuse ;
keeping  this  heap  for  one.  and  that  the  weakest,
perhaps  worst,  pigeon  of  the  flock:  sitting  round,
and  looking  on,  aU  the  winter,  whilst  this  one  was
devouring,  throwing  about,  and  wasting  it;  and  if  a
pigeon  more  hardy  or  hungry  than  the  rest,  touched
a  grain  of  the  hoard,  all  the  others  flying  upon  it,
and  tearing  it  to  pieces;  if  you  should  see  this,  you
would  see  nothing  more  than  what  is  every  day
practised  and  established  among  men.  Among
men,  you  see  the  ninety-and-nine  toiling  and  scrap-
ing together  a  heap  of  superfluities  for  one  (and
this  one  too,  oftentimes  the  feeblest  and  worst  of
the  whole  set,  a  child,  a  woman,  a  madman,  or  a
fool ;)  getting  nothing  for  themselves  all  the  while,
but  a  little  of  the  coarsest  of  the  provision,  which
their  own  industry  produces ;  looking  quietly  on,
while  they  see  the  fruits  of  all  their  labour  spent
or  spoiled ;  and  if  one  of  the  number  take  or  touch
.  a  particle  of  the  hoard,  the  others  joining  against


The  Uat  of  the  Institution  of  Property.

There  must  be  some  very  important  advantages
to  account  for  an  institution,  which,  in  the  view  of
it  above  given,  is  so  paradoxical  ana  unnatural.

The  principal  of  these  advantages  are  the  fot-
lowing:

I.  ft  increases  the  produce  of  the  earth.

The  earth,  in  cflmitwi  like  ours,  produces  fitde
without  cultivation :  and  none  would:  be  found  wil-
1  cultivate  the  ground,  if  others  were  to  Be  ad-
mitted to  an  equal  snare  of  the  produce.  The  same
is  true  of  the  care  of  flocks  and  herds  of  tame  animals.

Crabs  and  acorns,  red  deer,  rabbits,  same,  and
fish,  are  all  which  we  should  have  to  subsist  upon
in  this  country,  if  we  trusted  to  the  spontaneous
productions  of  the  soil :  and  it  feres  not  much  bet-
ter with  other  countries.  A  nation %  of  North
American  savages,  consisting  of  two  or  three  hun-
dred, will  take  up,  and  be  half  starved  upon,  a
tract  of  land,  which  in  Europe,  and  with  European
management,  would  be  sufficient  for  the  mainte-
nance of  as  many  thousands.

In  some  fertile  soils,  together  with  great  abun-
dance of  fish  upon  their  coasts,  and  m  regions,
where  clothes  are  unnecessary,  a  considerable  de-
gree of  population  may  subsist  without  property
in  land :  which  is  the  case  in  the  islands  of  Otaherte ;
but  in  less  favoured  situations,  as  in  the  country
of  New  Zealand,  though  this  sort  of  property  ob-
tain hi  a  small  degree,  the  inhabitants,  for  want
of  a  more  secure*  and  regular  establishment  of  it,
are  driven  oftentimes  by  the  scarcity  of  provision
to  devour  one  another.

II.  It  preserves  the  produce  of  the  earth  to  ma-
turity.

We  may  judge  what  would  he  the  effects  of  a
community  of  right  to  the  productions  of  the  earth,
from  the  trifling  specimens  which  we  see  of  it  at
present  A  cherry-tree  in  a  hedge-row,  nuts  in  a
wood,  the  grass  or  an  unstinted  pasture,  are  sel-
dom of  much  advantage  to  any  body,  because  peo-
ple do  not  wait  for  the  proper  season  of  reaping
them.  Corn,  If  any  were  sown,  would  never  ripen;
lambs  and  calves  would  never  grow  up  to  sheep
and  cows,  because  the  first  person  that  met  them
would  reflect,  that  he  had  better  take  them  aa  they
are,  than  leave  them  for  another.

III.  It  prevents  contests.

War  and  waste,  tumult  and  confusion,  must  be
unavoidable  and  eternal,  where  there  is  not  enough
for  all,  and  where  these  are  no  rules  to  adjust  the
division.

IV.  It  improves  the,conveniency  of  living.
This  it  does  two  ways. It  enables  mankind  to

divide  themselves  into  distinct  professions ;  which
is  impossible,  unless  a  man  can  exchange  the  oro-
ductions  of  his  own  art  for  what  he  wants  from
others  ;  and  exchange' implies  property.  Much
of  the  advantage  of  civilized  over  savage  life,  de-
pends upon  this.  When  a  man  is  from  necessity
his  own  tailor,  tent-maker,  carpenter,  cook,  hunts-
man, and  fisherman,  it  is  not  probable  that  he  will
be  expert  at  any  of  his  callings.  Hence  the  rude
habitations,  furniture,  clothing,  and  implements
•of  savages ;  and  the  tedious  length  of  time  which
all  their  operations  require.

Itlikewise  encourages  those  arts,  by  which  the
accommodations  of  human  life  are  supplied,  by
appropriating  to  the  artist  the  benefit  or  his  die-
[  covenes  and  improvements ;  without  which  appro-


MORAL  AND  POLITICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


mtion,  ingenuity  will  never  be  exerted  with  c£

Upon  these  several  eeeoonU  we  may  venture,
with  a  few  exceptions,  to  pronounce,  that  even
the  poorest  and  the  went  provided,  in.  countries
where  property  and  the  consequences  of  property
prevail,  are  in  a  better  'situation,  with  respect  to
food,  raiment,  houses,  and  what  are  called  the  ne-
cessaries of  life,  than  any  axe  in  placet  where  most
things  remain  in  common.

The  balance,  therefore,  upon  the  whole,  must
preponderate  in  favour  of  property  with  a  manifest
and  great  excess.

Inequality  of  property,  in  the  degree  in  which
it  exists  in  most  countries  of  Europe,  abstractedly
considered,  is  an  evil:  but  it  is  an  evil  which  flows
from  those  rules  concerning  the  acquisition  and
disposal  of  property,  by  which  men  are  incited  to
industry,  and  by  which  the  object  of  their  indus-
try, is  rendered  secure  and  valuable.  If  there  be
any  great  inequality  unconnected  with  this  origin,
it  ought  to  be  corrected.


CHAPTER  m.
The  Hutory  qf  Property .

The  first  objects  of  property  were  the  fruits
which  a  man  gathered,  ana  the  wild  *nim«l«  he
caught ;  next  to  these,  the  tents  or  houses  which
he  built,  the  tools  he  made  use  of  to  catch  or  pre-
pare his  food ;  and  afterwards  weapons  of  war
and  offence.  Many  of  the  savage  tribes  in  North
America  have  advanced  no  further  than  this  yet ;
for  they  are  said  to  reap  their  harvest,  and  return
the  produce  of  their  market  with  foreigners,  into
the  common  hoard  or  treasury  of  the  tribe.  Flocks
and  herds  of  tame  animals  sootf  became  property ;
Abel,  the  second  from  Adam,  was  a  keeper  of
sheep ;  sheep  and  oxen,  camels  and  asses,  composed
the  wealth  of  the  Jewish  patriarchs,  as  they  do
still  of  the  modern  Arabs.  As  the  world  was  first
peopled  in  the  East,  where  there  existed  a  great
scarcity  of  water,  wells  probably  were  next  made
property;  as  we  learn  from  the  frequent  and
serious  mention  of  them  in  the  Old  Testament;
the  contentions  and  treaties  about  them  ;*  and  from
its  being  recorded,  among  the  most  memorable
achievements  of  very  eminent  men,  that  they  dug,
or  discovered  a  well.  Land,  which  is  now  so  im-
portant a  part  of  property,  which  alone  our  laws
call  real  property,  and  regard  upon  all  occasions
with  such  peculiar  attention,  was  probably  not
made  property  in  any  country,  till  long  after  the
institution  of  many  other  species  of  property,  that
is,  till  the  country  became  populous,  and  tillage  ,
began  to  be  thought  of.  The  first  partition  of  an
estate  which  we  read  of,  was  that  which  took
place  between  Abram  and  Lot,  and  was  one  of  the
simplest  imaginable :  "If  thou  wilt  take  the  left
hand,  then  I  willgo  to  the  right;  or  if  thou  depart  to
the  right  hand,  then  I  will  go  to  the  left."  There
are  no  traces  of  property  in  land  in  Cesar's  ac-
count of  Britain  ;  little  of  it  in  the  history  of  the
Jewish  patriarchs ;  none  of  it  found  amongst  the
nations  of  ftorth  America ;  the  Scythians  are  ex-
pressly said  to  have  appropriated  their  cattle  and
nouses,  but  to  have  left  their  land  in  common.

Property  in  immoveables  continued  at  first  no
longer  than  the  occupation :  that  is,  so  long  as  a


•  Genesis  xxk  85  ;xxvi.  18.


man's  family  continued  in  possession  of  a  cave  or
whilst  his  flocks  depastured  upon  a  neighbouring
hill,  no  one  attempted,  or  thought  he  had  alright  to
disturb  or  drive  them  out  but  when  the  man  quitted
his  cave,  or  changed  his  pasture,  the  first  who  found
them  unoccupied,  entered  upon  them,  by  the  same
title  as  his  predecessors ;  and  made  way  in  his  turn
for  any  one  that  happened  to  succeed  him.  All  more
permanent  property  in  land  was  probably  poste-
rior to  civil  government  and  to  laws  ■  and  therefore
settled  by  these,  or  according  to  the  will  of  the  reign-
ing chief.


CHAPTER  IV.
In  vhat  the  Right  qf Property  i»  JFbunded.

We  now  sneak  of  Property  in  Land :  and  there
is  a  difficulty  in  explaining  the  origin  of  this  pro-
perty, consistently  with  the  law  ofnature ;  forms
land  was  once,  no  doubt,  common ;  and  the  ques-
tion is,  how  any  particular  part  of  it  could  justly
be  taken  out  of  the  common,  and  so  appropriated
to  the  first  owner,  as  to  give  him  a  better  right  to
it  than  others ;  and,  what  is  more,  a  right  to  ex-
clude all  others  from  it

Moralists  have  given  many  different  accounts
of  this  matter ;  which  diversity  alone,  perhaps,  is
a  proof  that  none  of  them  are  satisfactory.

One  tells  us  that  mankind,  when  they  suffered
a  particular  person  to  occupy  a  piece  of  ground,  by
tacit  consent  relinquished  their  right  to  it ;  and  ss
the  piece  of  ground,  they  say,  belonged  to  man-
kind collectively,  and  mankind  thus  gave  up  their
right  to  the  first  peaceable  occupier,  it  thencefor-
ward became  his  property,  and  no  one  afterwards
had  a  right  to  molest  him  in  it.

The  objection  to  this  account  is,  that  consent  can
never  be  presumed  from  silence,  where  the  person
whose  consent  is  required  knows  nothing  about
the  matter ;  which  must  have  been  the  case  with  all
mankind,  except  the  neighbourhood  of  the  place
where  the  appropriation  was  made.  And  to  suppose
that  the  piece  of  ground  previously  belonged  to  the
neighbourhood,  arid  that  they  had  a  just  power  of
conferring  a  right  to  it  upon  whom  they  pleased,  is
to  suppose  the  question  resolved,  and  a  partition  of
land  to  have  already  taken  place.

Another  says,  that  each  man's  limbs  and  labour
are  his  ownexclusivejy ;  that,  by  occupying  a  piece
of  ground,  a  man  inseparably  mixes  his  labour
with  it;  by  which  means  the  piece  of  ground  be-
comes thenceforward  his  own,  as  you  cannot  take
it  from  him  without  depriving  him  at  the  same
time  of  something  which  is  indisputably  his.

This  is  Mr.  Cocke's  solution,;  and  seems  in-
deed a  fair  reason,  where  the  value  of  the  labour
bears  a  considerable  proportion  to  the  value  of  the
thing;  or  where  the  thing  derives  its  chief  use
and  value  from  the  labour.  Thus  game  and  fish,
though  they  be  common  whilst  at  large  in  the
woods  or  water,  instantly  become  the  property  of
the  person  that  catches  them;  because  an  animal,
when  caught,  is  much  more  valuable  than  when
at  liberty;  arid  this  increase  of  value,  which  is  in-
separable from,  and  makes  a  great  part'  of,  the
whole  value,  is  strictly  the  property  of  the  fowler
or  fisherman,  being  the  produce  of  his  personal
labour.  For  the  same  reason,  wood  or  iron,
manufactured  into  utensUs/ becomes  the  property
of  the  manufacturer;  because  the  value  of  the
workmanship  for  exceeds  that  of  the  material*


PROPERTY  IN  LAND.


47


And  upon  m  similar  principle,  a  panel  of  unap-
propriated gimmd,  which  a  man  should  pare^  bam.
plough,  harrow,  and  sow.  for  the  production  or
corn,  would  justly  enough  be  thereby  made  hie
own.  But  this  will  hardly  hold,  in  the  manner
it  haa  been  applied,  of  taking  a  oeremonioua  pos-
session of  a  tract  of  land,  as  iiavigators  do  of  new-
discovered  islands,  by  erecting  a  standard,  en-
graving an  inscription,  or  publishing  a  proclama-
tion to  the  birds  and  beasts:  or  of  turning  your
cattle  into  a  piece  of  ground,  setting  up  a  land-
mark, digging  a  ditch,  or  planting  a  hedge  round
it  Nor  will  even  the  clearing,  manuring,  and
ploughing  of  a  field,  give  the  first  occupier  a  right
to  it  m  perpetuity,  and  after  this  cultivation  and
all  effects  of  it  are  ceased.

Another,  and  in  my  opinion  a  better,  account
of  the  first  right- of  ownership,  is  the  following :
that,  as  God  has  provided  these  things  for  the  use
of  all,  he  has  of  consequence  given  each  leave  to
take  of  them  what  he  wants;  by  virtue  therefore
of  this  leave,  a  man  may  appropriate  what  he
1  of  to  his  own  use,  without  asking,


or  waiting  lor,  the  consent  of  others;  in  like  man-
ner as.  wnen  an  entertainment  is  provided  for  the
freeholders  of  a  county,  each  freeholder  goes,  and
eat*  and  drinks  what  he  wants  or  chooses,  without
having  or  wailing  for  the  consent  of  the  other


luxury


i  justifies  property,  as  far  as
,  or,  at  the  most,  as  far  era  com-
petent provision  for  our  natural  exigences.  For,
m  the  entertainment  we  speak  of  Tallowing  the
comparison  to  hold  in  all  points,)  although  every
particular  freeholder  may  ait  down  and  cat  till  he
be  satisfied,  without  any  other  leave  than  that  of
the  master  of  the  feast,  or  any  other  proof  of  that
leave,  than  the  general  invitation,  or  the  manifest
design  with  which  the  entertainment  is  provided;
yet  you  would  hardly  permit  any  one  to  fill  his
pockets  or  his  walkt,  or  to  carry  away  with  him
a  quantity  of  provision  to  be  hoarded  up,  or
wasted,  or  given  to  his  dogs,  or  stewed  down  into
,  or  converted  into  articles  of  superfluous
;  especially  if,  by  so  doing,  he  pinched  the
at  the  lower  end  of  the  table.  . -

These  are  the  accounts  that  have  been  given  of
the  matter  by  the  best  writers  upon  the  subject,
but  were  these  accounts  perfectly  unexceptionable,
they  would  none  of  them,  I  fear,  avail  us  in  vin-
dicating our  present  claims  of  property  in  land,
unless  it  were  more  probable  than  it  is,  that  our
estates  were  actually  acquired  at  first,  in  some  of
the  ways  which  these  accounts  suppose;  and  that
a  regular  regard  had  been  paid  to  justice,  in  every
successive  transmission  of  them  smce ;  for,  if  one
link  in  the  chain  fail,  every  title  posterior  to  it
finis  to  the  ground.

The  real  foundation  of  our  right  is,  the  law

OP  THE  LAND.

It  is  the  intention  of  God,  that  the  produce  of
jthe  earth  be  applied  to  the  use  of  man:  this  in-
Itention  cannot  be  fulfilled  without  establishing
'property;  it  is  consistent,  therefore,  with  his  will,
that  property  be  established.  The  land  cannot
'be  divided  into  separate  property,  without  leaving
it  to  the  law  of  the  country  to  regulate  that  divi-
sion: it  is  fonsistont  therefore  with  the  same  will,
that  the  law  should  regulate  the  division;  and,
consequently.  M  consistent  with  the  will  of  God,"
•r,  u  rigM,"  that  I  ahould  possess  that  share  which
these  regulations


By  whatever  circuitous  train  of  reasoning  yout  ;
attempt  to  derive  this  right  it  must  terminate  at]
last  in  the  will  of  God;  the  straightest  there-'
fore,  and  shortest  way  of  arriving  at  this  will,  is
the  best

Hence  it  appears,  that  my  right  to  an  estate
does  not  at  all  depend  upon  the  manner  or  justice
of  the  original  acquisition;  nor  upon  the  justice
of  each  subsequent  change  of  possession.  It  is
not,  for  instance,  the  less,  nor  ought  it  to  be  im-
peached, because  the  estate  was  taken  possession
of  at  first  by  a  family  of  aboriginal  Britons,  who
happened  to  be  stronger  than  their  neighbours;
nor  because  the  British  possessor  was  turned  out
by  a  Roman,  or  the  Roman  by  a  Saxon  invader;
nor  because  it  was  seized,  without  color'  of  right
or  reason,  by  a  follower  of  the  Norman  adventurer :
from  whom,  after  many  interruptions  of  fraud  and
violence,  it  has  at  length  devolved  to  me.

Nor  does  the  owner's  right  depend  upon  the
expediency  of  the  law  which  gives  it  to  nun.  On
one  side  of  a  brook,  an  estate  descends  to  the  eldest
son;  on  the  other  side,  to  all  the  children  alike.
The  right  of  the  claimants  under  -both  laws  of
inheritance  is  equal;  though  the  expediency  of
such  opposite  rules  must  necessarily  be  different.

The  principles  we  have  laid  down  upon  this
subject  apparently  tend  to  a  conclusion  of  which  f
a  bad  use  is  apt  to  be  made.  As  the  right  of  pro-  j
perty  depends  upon  the  law  of  the  land,  it  seems  j
to  follow,  that  a  man  has  a  right  to  keep  and  take  \
every  thing  which  the  law  will  allow  him  to  keep.  .'
and  take;  which  in  many  cases  will  authorize  the
most  flagitious  chicanery.  If  a  creditor  upon  a
simple  contract  neglect  to  demand  his  debt  tor  six
▼ears,  the  debtor  may  refuse  to  pay  it;  would  it
be  right  therefore  to  do  so,  where  he  is  conscious
of  the  justice  of  the  debt?  If  a  person,  who  B  I
under  twenty-one  years  of  age,  contract  a  bargain
(other  than  for  necessaries,)  he  may  avoid  it  br  ;
pleading  his*  minority :  but  would  this  be  a  fair
plea,  where  the  bargain  was  originally  just  1 — Tht
a1stmcu«n  to  be  tal^nm  such  cases  is  this:  Witk
the  law,  we  acknowledge,  resides  the  disposal  of
property:  so  long,  therefore,  as  we  beep  within
the  design  and  intention  ofa  law,  that  law  will
justify  us  as  well  inforo  conocientia,  as  in  faro
kumano,  whatever  be  the  equity  or  expediency  of
the  law  itself  But  when  we  convert  to  one  pur-
pose, a  rule  or  expression  of  law,  which  is  intended
for  another  purpose,  then  we  plead  in  our  justifi-
cation, not  the  intention  of  the  iaw(  but  the  words ;
that  is,  wo  plead  a  dead  letter,  which  can  signify
nothing;  for  words  without  meaning  or  intention,
have  no  force  or  effect  in  justice;  much  less,
words  taken  contrary  to  the  meaning  and  inten-
tion of  the  speaker  or  writer.  To  apply  this  dis-
tinction to  the  examples  just  now  proposed : — in
order  to  protect  men  against  antiquated  demands,
from  which  it  is  not  probable  they  should  have
preserved  the  evidence  of  their  discharge,  the  law
prescribes  a  limited  time  to  certain  species  of  pri-
vate securities,  beyond  which  it  will  not  enforce
them,  or  lend  its  assistance  to  the  recovery  of  the
debt  If  a  man  be  ignorant  or  dubious  of  the
justice  of  the  demand  made  upon  him,  he  may
conscientiously  plead  this  limitation;  because  he


applies  the  rule  of  law  to  the  purpose  for  which
it  woe  intended.  But  when  he  refuses  to  pay  a
debt,  of  the  reality  of  which  he  is  conscious,  he
cannot,  as  before,  plead  the  intention  of  the  statute,
and  the  supreme  authority  of  law,  unless  he  couk1


-V


48


MORAL  AND  POLITICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


show,  that  the  firor intended  to  interpose  its  su-
preme authority,  to  acquit  men.  of  debts,  of  the
existence  and  justice  of  which  they  were  them-
selves sensible.  Again,  to  preserve  youth  from
the  practices  and  impositions  to  which  their  inex-
perience exposes  them,  the  law  compels  the  pay-
ment of  no  debts  incurred  within  a  certain  age,
nor  the  performance  of  any  engagements,  except
for  such  necessaries  as  are  suited  to  their  condition
and  fortunes.  If  a  young  person  therefore  per-
ceive that  he  has  been  practised  or  imposed  upon,
he  may  honestly  avail  himself  of  the  privilege  of
his  nonage,  to  defeat  the  circumvention.  But,  if
he  shelter  himself  under  this  privilege,  to  avoid  a
but  obligation,  or  an  equitable  contact,  he  extends
the  privilege  to  a  case,  in  which  it  is  not  allowed
by  intention  of  law,  and  in  which  consequently  it
does  not,  in  natural  justice,  exist


As  property  is  the  principal  subject  of  justice,
or  of  "  the  determinate  relative  duties  "  we  have
put  down  what  we  had  to  say  upon  it  in  the  first
place:  we  now  proceed  to  state  these  duties  in  the
Wet  order  we  can.


CHAPTER  V.

Promises.
L  From  whence  the  obligation  fo  perform  pro-


II.  In  what  tense  promisee  are  to  be  interpreted.

III.  In  what  eases  promises  are  not  binding.

I:  From  whence  the  obligation  to  perform  pro-
mises arises.

They  who  argue  from  innate  moral  principles,
suppose  a  sense  of  the  obligation  of  promises  to  be
one  of  them;  but  without  assuming  this,  or  any
thing  else,  without  proof,  the  obligation  to  perform
promises  may  be  deduced  from  the  necessity  of
such  a  conduct  to  the  well-being,  or  the  existence
Indeed,  of  human  society.

Men  act  from  expectation.  Expectation  is  in
most  cases  determined  by  the  assurances  and  en-
gagements which  we  receive  from  others.  If  no
dependence  could  be  placed  upon  these  assurances,
it  would  be  impossible  to  know  what  judgment  to
form  of  many  future  events,  or  how  to  regulate
our  conduct  with  respect  to  them.  Confidence
therefore  in  promises,  is  essential  to  the  intercourse
of  human  life;  because,  without  it,  the  greatest
part  of  our  conduct  would  proceed  upon  chance.
But  there  could  be  no  confidence  in  promises,  if
men  were  not  obliged  to  perform  them;  the  obli-
gation therefore  to  perform  promises,  is  essential
to  the  same  ends,  and  in  the  same  degree.

Some  may  imagine,  that  if  this  obligation  were
suspended,  a  general  caution  and  mutual  distrust
would  ensue,  which  might  do  as  well:  but  this  is
imagined,  without  cons£iering>how,  every  hour  of
our  lives,  we  trust  to,  and  depend  upon,  others;
and  how  impossible  it  is,  to  star  a  step,  or,  what  is
worse,  to  sit  still  a  moment,  without  such  trust
and  dependence.  I  am  now  writing  at  my  ease.
not  doubting  (or  rather  never  distrusting,  and
therefore  never  thinking  about  it)  that  the  butcher
will  send  in-  the  joint  of  meat  which  I  ordered ;
that  his  servant  will  bring  it:  that  my  cook  will
dress  it;  that  my  footman  wffl  serve  it  up:  that  I
shall  find  it  upon  table  si  one  o'clock, Yet  have


1  nothing  for  all  this,  but  the  pronase  of  the
butcher,  and  the  implied  pronnse  of  bis  servant
and  nine.  And  the  same  holds  of  the  most  im-
portant as  well  as  the  most  fiuniuar  occurrences  of
-social  life.  In  the  one,  the  intervention  of  pro-
mises is  formal,  and  is  seen  and  acknowledged;
our  instance,  therefore,  is  intended  to  show  it  in
the  other,  where  it  is  not  so  distinctly  observed.

II.  In  what  sense  promises  are  to  be  interpreted.

Where  the  terms  of  promise  admit  of  more
senses  than  one,1  the  promise  is  to  be  performed
"  in  that  sense  in  which  the  praniser  apprehended,
at  the  time  that  the  promisee  received  it"

Itisno^t^sensemwbichtheproniisersctoaUy
intended  it,  that  always  governs  the  interpretation
of  an  equivocal  promise;  because,  at  that  rats,
you  might  excite  expectations,  which  you  never
meant,  nor  would  be  obliged  to  satisfy.  Much
less  is  it  the  sense,  in  which  the-  promisee  actually
received  the  promise;  for,  according  to  that  rule,
you  might  be  drawn  into  engagements  which  vou
never  designed  to  undertake.  It  must,  therefore,
be  the  sense  (for  there  is  no  other  lenisining)  in
which  the  promiser  believed  that  the  promise*
accepted  bis  promise.

Tins  will  not  differ  from  the  actual  intention  of
the  promiser,  where  the  promise  is  given  without
collusion  or  reserve :  but  we  put  the  rvM  in  the
above  form,  to  exclude  evasion  in  cases  in  which


the  popular  meaning  of  a  phrase,  and  the  strict
grammatical  sicnincation  or  the  words  differ;  or,
m  general,  wherever  the  promiser  attempts  to
make  his  escape  through  some  ambiguity  in  the
expressions  which  he  used.

Temures  promised  the  garrison  of  Sebasua,
that,  if  they  would  surrender,  no  blood  should  be
shed.  The  garrison  surrendered ;  and  Temures
buried  them  all  alive.  Now  Temures  fulfilled  the
pronnse  in  one  sense,  and  in  the  sense  too  in
which  he  intended  it  at  the  time;  but  not  the
sense  in  which  the  garrison  of  Sebastia  actually
received  it,  nor  in  the  sense  in  which  Temures
himself  knew  that  the  garrison  received  it:  which
last  sense,  aaxmJing  to  our,  role,  was  the  sense  in
which  he  was  in  conscience  bound  to  have  per-
formed it

From  the  account  we  have  given  of  the  obtiffe-
tion  of  promises,  it  is  evident,  thai  this  obligation  de-
pends upon  the  expectations  which  we  knowingly
and  voluntarily  excite.  Consequently,  any  action
or  conduct  towards  another,  which  we  are  sensible
excites  expectations  in  that  other,  w  as  much  a
promise,  and  creates  as  strict  an  obligation,,  as  the
most  express  assurances.  Taking,  for  in«*"^*,
a  kinsman's  child,  and  educating  him  for  a  liberal
profession,  or  in  a  manner  suitable  only  for  the
heir  of  a  large  fortune,  as  much  obliges  us  to  place
him  in  that  profession,  or  to  leave  him  such  a  for-
tune, as  if  we  had  given  him  a  promise  to  do  so
under  our  hands  and  seals.  In  like  manner,  a
great  man,  who  ejKsourages  an  indigent  retainer:
or  m  minister  of  state,  who  distinguishes  ana
caresses  at  his  levee  one  who  is  in  a  situation  to
be  obliged  by  his  patronage;  engages,  by  such
behaviour,  to  provide  for  hun.<~-Thia  is  the  foun-
dation of  tacit  promise*.

You  may  either  simply  declare  your  present
intention,  or  you  may  accompany  your  declaration
with  an  engagement  to  abide  by  it.  which  con-
stitutes a  complete  promise.  In  the  first  case,  the
duty  is  satisfied,  if  you  were  sincere  at  the  time,
that  is  if  vou  entertained  at  the  time  the  intention


PROMISES.


you  exposed,  however  soon,  or  for  whatever
,  you  afterwards  change  it. In  the  latter


case,  you  have  parted  with  the  liberty  of  changing.
All  uis  is  plain :  but  it  must  be  observed,  that
most  of  those  forms  of  speech,  which,  strictly  taken,
amount  to  no  more  than  declarations  of  present
intention,  do  yet,  in  the  usual  way  of  understand-
ing them,  excite  the  expectation,  and  therefore
carry  with  them  the  force  of  absolute  promises.
Such  as,  " I  intend  you  this  place"—1'  I  design  to
leave  you  this  estate"—"  I  purpose  giving  you  my


p"^?™^0"


vote"— "I  mean  to  serve" you."— In  which,  al-
though the  "  intention,"  the  "  design,"  the  "  pur-
pose/' the  "  meaning,"  be  expressed  in  words  of
the  present  time;  yet  you  cannot  afterwards  recede
from  them  without  a  breach  of  good  faith.  If 'you
choose '  therefore  to  make  known  your  present
intention,  and  yet  to  reserve  to  yourself  the  liberty
of  changing  it,  ydu  must  guard  your  expressions
by  an  aditional  clause;  as,  "  I  intend  at  present,"
—"&  I  do  not  alter,"— or  the  like.  And  after  all,
as  there  can  be  no  reason  for  communicating  your
intention,  but  to  excite  some  degree  of  expectation
or  other,  a  wanton  change  of  an  intention  which
is  once  disclosed,  always  disappoints,  somebody;
and  is  always,  for  that  reason,  wrong.

There  is,  in  some  men,  an  infirmity  with  regard
to  promises,  which  often  betrays  them  into  great
distress.  From  the  confusion,  or  hesitation,  or
obscurity,  with  which  they  express  themselves,
especially  when  overawed  or  taken  by  surtorise,
they  sometimes  encourage  expectations,,  and  bring
upon  themselves  demands,  which,  possibly,  they
never  dreamed  of.  This  is  a.  want,  not  so  much
of  integrity,  as  of  presence  of  mind.

III.  In  what  cases  promises  are  not  binding .
/ 1.  Promises  are  not  binding,  where  the  perfor-
mance is  impossible.

But  observe,  that  the  promiser  is  guilty  of  a
fraud,  if  he  be  secretly  aware  of  the  impossibility,
at  the  time  of  making  the  promise.  For,  when
any  one  promises  a  thing,  he  asserts  his  belief,  at
least,  of  the  possibility  of^erforming  it;  as  no  one
can  accept  or  understand  a  promise  under  any
other  supposition.  Instances  of  this'  sort  are  the
following:  The  minister  promises  a  place,  which
he  knows  to  be  engaged,  or  not  at  his  disposal : —
A  father,  in  settling  marriage-articles,  promises  to
leave  his  daughter  an  estate,  which  he  knows  to
be  entailed  upon  the  heir  male  of  his  family : — A
merchant  promises  a  ship,  or  share  of  a  ship,
which  he  m  privately  advised  is  lost  at  sea: — An


these  cases  are  not  obliged  to-  perform  what  the
promise  requires,  because  they  were  under  a  prior
obligation  to  the  contrary.  From  which  prior
obligation  what  is  there  to  discharge  them  ?  Their
promise, — their  own  act  and  deed. — But  an  obli-
gation, from  which  a  man  can  discharge  himself
by  his  own  act,  is  no  obligation  at  all.  The  guilt
therefore  of  such  promises  lies  in  the  making,  not
in  the  breaking  of  them ;  and  if,  in  the  interval
betwixt  the  promise  and  the  performance,  a  man
so  far  recover  his  reflection,  as  to  repent  of  his
engagements,  he  ought  certainly  to  break  through
them.

The  other  case  is,  where  the  unlawfulness  did
not  exist,  of  was  not  known,  at  the  time  of  making
the  promise;  as  where  a  merchant  promises  his
correspondent  abroad,  to- send  him  a  ship  load  of
corn  at  a  time  appointed,  and  before  the  time
arrive*  an  embargo  is  laid  upon  the  exportation  of
corn: — A' woman  gives  a  promise  of  marriage:
beforethemarriage,  she  discovers  that  her  intended
husband  is  too  nearly  related  to  her,  or  that  he  has
a  wife  yet  living.  In  all  such  cases,  where  the
contrary  does  not  appear,  it  must  be  presumed
that  the  parties  supposed  what  they  promised  to
be  lawful,  and  that  the  promise  proceeded  entirely
upon  this  supposition.  The  lawfulness  therefore
becomes  a  condition  of  the  promise;  which  con-
ation failing,  the  obligation  ceases.  Of  the  same
nature  was  Herod's  promise  to  his  daughter-in-law,
"  that  he  would  give  herwhatever  she  asked,  even
to  the  half  of  his  kingdom.0  The  promise  was
not  unlawful  in  the  terms  in  which  Herod
delivered  it;  and  when  it  became  so  by  the
daughter's  choice,  by  her  demanding  "John  the
Baptist's  heady1  Herod  was  discharged  from  the
obligation  of  it,  for  the  reason  now  bid  down',  as
well  as  for  that  given  in  the  last  paragraph.

This  rule,  "  that  promises  are  void,  where' the
performance  is  unlawful,"  extends  also  to  imper-
fect obligations :  for,  the  reason  of  the  rale  holds
of  all  obligations.  Thus,  if  you  promise  a  man  a
place,  or  your  vote,  and  he  afterwards  render
himself  unfit  to  receive  either,  you  are  absolved
from  the  obligation  of  your  promise;  or,  if  a  better
candidate  appear,  and  ft  be  a  case  in  which  you
are  bound  by  oath,  or  otherwise,  to  govern  yourself
by  the  qualification,  the  promise  must  be  broken
through.


viousry  assured  that  his  resignation  will  not  be
accepted  by  the  bishop.  The  promiser,  as  in  these
cases,  with  knowledge  of  the  impossibility,  is
justly  answerable  in  an  equivalent :  but  other-
wise not

When  the  promiser  himself  occasions  the  im-
possibility, it  is  neither  more  nor  less  than  a  direct
breach  of  the  promise;  as  when  a  soldier  maims,
or  a  servant  disables  himself,  to  get  rid  of  his


Promises  are  not  binding,  where  the  per-
formance is  unlawful.

There  are  two  cases  of  this :  one,  where  the
unlawfulness  is  known  to  the  parties,  at  the  time
of  making  the  promise;  as  where  an  assassin  pro-
mises his  employer  to  despatch  his  rival  or  his
enemy;  a  servant  to  betray  his  master;  a  pimp  to
procure  a  mistress;  or  a  friend  togive  his  as-
» in  a  scheme  of  seduction,  The  parties  in
G


And  here  I  would  recommend,  to  young  persons
especially,  a  caution,  from  the  neglect  or  which

K many  involve  themselves  in  embarrassment  and

incumbent  promises  to  resign  a  living,  being  pre-  disgrace ;  and  that  is,  "  never  to  give  a'  promise,


which  may  interfere,  in  the  event  with  their
duty  j"  for,  if  it  do  so  interfere,  their  duty  must
be  .discharged,  though  at  the  expense  of  their
promise,  and  not  unusually  of  their  good  name.

The  specific  performance  of  promises  is  reck-
oned a  perfect  obligation.  And  many  casuists
have  laid  down,  in  opposition  to  what  has  been
here  asserted,  that,  where  a  perfect  and  an  imper-
fect obligation  clash,  the  perfect  obligation  is  to  be
preferred.  For  which  opinion,  however,  there
seems  to  be  no  reason,  but  what  arises  from  the
terms  "perfect"  and  "imperfect/'  the  impropriety
of  which  has  been  remarked  above.  The  truth
is,  of  two  contradictory  obligation*,  that  ought  to
prevail  which  is  prior  in  point  of  time.

It  is  the  performance  oeing  unlawful,  and  not
unlawfulness  in  the  subjeet  or  motive  of  the  pro-
mise, which  destroys  its  validity :  therefore  a  bribe,
after  the  vote  is  given ;  the  wages  of  prostitution  j
5


50


MORAL  AND  POLITICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


y


y


the  reward  of  any  crime,  after  the  crime  is  com-*
mitted;  ought,  if  promised,  to  be  paid.  For  the
■in  and  mischief  by  this  supposition,  are  over;
and  will  be  neither  more  nor  leas  for  the  perfor-
mance of  the  promise.

In  like  manner,  a  promise  does  not  lose  its
obligation  merely  because  it  proceeded  from  an
unlaytful  motive.  A  certain  person,  in  the  life-
time of  his  wife,  who  was  then  sick,  had  paid  hk
addresses,  and  promised  marriage,  to  another
woman;— -the  wife  died;  and  the  woman  demanded
performance  of  the  promise.  The  man,  who,  it
seems,  had  changed  his  mind,  either  felt  or  pre-
tended doubts  concerning  the  obligation  of  such  a
promise,  and  referred  his  case  to  Bishop  Sander-
son, the  most  eminent,  in  this  kind  of  knowledge,
of  his  time.  Bishop  Sanderson,  after  writing  a
dissertation  upon  the  question,  adjudged  the  pro-
mise to  be  void.  In  which,  however,  upon  our
principles,  he  was  wrong ;  for,  however  criminal
the  affection  might  be,  which  induced  the  promise,
the  performance,  when  it  was  demanded,  was
lawful;  which  is  the  only  lawfulness  required.

A  promise  cannot  be  deemed  unlawful,  where
it  produces,  when  performed,  no  effect,  beyond
what  would  have  taken  place  had  the  promise
never  been  made.  And  this  is  the  single  case,  in
which  the  obligation  of  a  promise  wflj  justify  a
conduct,  which,  unless  it  had  been  promised,
would  be  unjust  A  captive  may  lawfully  recover
his  liberty,  by  a  promise  of  neutrality;  for  his
conductor  takes  nothing  by  the  promise,  which  he
mignt  not  have  secured  by  his  death  or  confine-
ment; and  neutrality  would  be  innocent  in  him,
although  criminal  in  another.  It  is  manifest,
however,  that  promises  which  come  into  the  place
of  coercion,  can  extend  no  further  than  to  passive
compliance;  for  coercion  itself  could  compel  no
morev  Upon  the  same  principle,  promises  of
secrecy  ought  not  to  be  violated,  although  the
public  would  derive  advantage  from  the  discovery.
Bach  promises  contain  no  unlawfulness  in  them,
to  destroy  their  obligation :  for,  as  the  information
would  not  have  been  imparted  upon  any  other
condition,  the  public  lose  nothing  by  the  promise,
which  they  would  have  gained  without  it

3.  Promises  are  not  binding)  where  they  con-
tradict a  former  promise.

Because  the  performance  is  then  unlawful;
which  resolves  this  case  into  the  last

4»  Promises  ait)  not  bindmg  6e/<ms  aooeptencc;
that  is,  before  notice  given  to  the  promisee ;  for,
where  the  promise  is  beneficial,  if  notice  be  given,
acceptance  may  be  presumed.  Until  the  promise
be  communicated  to-  the  promisee,  it  is  the  same
only  as  a  resolution  in  the  mind  of  the  promiser,
wmch  may  be  altered  at  pleasure.  For  np.  ex-
pectation has  been  excited,  therefore  none  can  be
disappointed.

But  suppose  I  declare  my  intention  to  a  third
person,  who.  without  any  authority  from  me,  con-
veys my  declaration  to  the  promisee;  is  that  such
a  notice  as  will  be  binding  upon  me  ?  It  certainly
is  not :  for  I  have  not  done  tnat  which  constitutes
the  essence  of  a  promise ; — I  have  not  voluntarily
excited  expectation.

5.  Promises  are  not  binding  which  me  released
Jfy  the  promisee.

Tins  is  evident:  but  it  may  be  sometimes
doubted  who  the  promisee  is.  If  I  give  a  promise
to  A,  of  a  place  or  vote  for  B;  as  to  a  father  for
mason;  to  an  uncle  for  his  nephew;  to  a  friend


of  mine,  for  a  relation  or  friend  of  his;  then  A  if
the  promisee,  whose  consent  I  must  obtain,  to  be
released  from  the  engagement

If  I  promise  a  place  or  vote  to  B  by  At  that  is,
if  A  be  a  messenger  to  convey  the  promise,  as  if
I  should  say,  "  You  may  tell  B  that  ne  shall  have
this  place,  or  may  depend  upon  my  vote;"  or  if
A  be  employed  to  introduce  B's  request,  and  I
answer  in  any  terms  which  amount  to  a  com-
pliance with  it :  then  B  is  the  promisee.

Promises  to .  one  person,  for  the  benefit  of
another,  are  not  released  by  the  death  of  the  pro-
misee; for,  his  death  neither  makes  the  perfor-
mance impracticable,  nor  implies  any  consent  to
release  the  promiser  from  it.

6.  Erroneous  promises  are  not  binding  in  cer-
tain cases;  as

1.  Where  the  error  proceeds  from  the  mistake
or  misrepresentation  of  the  promisee.

Because  a  promise  evidently  supposes  the  truth
of  the  account,  which  the  promisee  relates  in  order
to  obtain  it.  A  beggar  solicits  your  charity,  by  a
story  of  the  most  pitiable  distress ;  you  promise  to
relieve  him,  if  he  will  call  again : — In  the  interval
you  discover  his  story  to  be  made  up  of  fies; — this
discovery,  no  doubt,  releases  you  from  your  pro-
mise. One  who  wants  your  service,  describes  the
business  or  office  for  which  he  would  engage  you;
— you  promise  to  undertake  it: — wjien  you  come
to  enter  upon  it,  you  find  the  profits  less,  the
labour  more,  or  some  material  circumstance  dif-
ferent from  the  account  be  gave  you:— In  such

se,  you  are  not  bound  by  your  promise.

3.  When  the  promise  is  understood  by  the  pro-
to  proceed  upon  a  certain  supposition)  or
when  the  promiser  .apprehended  it  to  be  so  under-
stood, and  that  supposition  turns  out  to  be  false  j
then  the  promise  is  not  binding.

This  intricate  rule  will  be  best  explained  by  an
example.  A  hither  receives  an  account  from
abroad,  of  the -death  of  his  only  son; — soon  after
which,  he  promises  his  fortune  to  his  nephew. —
The  account  turns  out  to  be  false.— The  fether,
we  say,  it  released  from  his  promise ;  not  merely
because  he  never  would  have  made  it,  had  he
known  the  truth  of  the  case, — for  that  atone  will
not  do; — but  because  the  nephew  also  himself
understood  the  promise  to  proceed  upon  the  sop-
position  of  his  cousin's  death:  or,  at  least  his
uncle  thought  he  so  understood  it;  and  could  not
think  otherwise.  The  promise  proceeded  upon
this  supposition  in  the  promisera  own  apprehen-
sion, apd{  as  be  believed,  in  the  apprehension  of
both  parties;  and  this  belief  of  his,  is  the  precise
circumstance  which  sets  him  free.  The  founda-
tion of  the  rule  is  plainly  this:  a  man  is  bound
only  to  satisfy  the  expectation  which  he  intended
to  excite ;  whatever  condition  therefore  he  intended
to  subject  that  expectation  to,  becomes  an  essential
condition  of  the  promise.

Errors,  which  come  not  within  this  description,
do  not  annul  the  obligation  of  a  promise.  I  pro-
mise a  candidate  my  vote ;— presently  another
candidate  appears,  for  whom  I  certainly  would
have  reserved  it,  had  I  been  acquainted  with  hie
design.  Here  therefore,  as  before,  my  promise
proceeded  from  an  error ;  and  I  never  should  have
given  such  a  promise,'  had  I  been  aware  of  the
truth  of  the  case,  as  it  has  turned  out— But  the
promisee  did  not  know  this; — he  did  not  receive
the  promise,  subject  to  any  such  condition,  or  as
proceeding  from  any  such  supposition;  nor  did  I


CONTRACTS.


51


tttmmneunsjg^he  so  veceiyedit.  This  error,
tbarfore,  of  mme,  must  fall  upon  my  own  head,
and  the  promise  be  observed  notwithstaiiding.  A
■a  certain  fortune  with  his daughter,'
j  b™— Jf  to  be  worth  bo  much— his  cir-
raiMlanem  tarn  out,  upon  examination,  worse
than  he  wear  aware  of.  Xiere  again  the  promise
wi»  erroneous,  but,  for  the  reason  assigned  in  the
hst  case,  win  ne^erthekes  be  obligatory.

The  case  of  erroneous  promises,  a  attended
with  some  difficulty :  for,  to  allow  every  mistake,
or  change  of  circumstances,  to  dissolve  the  obliga-
tion of  a  promise,  would  be  to  allow  a  latitude,
which  might  evacuate  the  force  of  almost  all
and  on  the  other  hand,  to  gird  the
,  so  tight,  as  to  make  no  allowances  for
t  and  fundamental  errors,  would,  in  many
,  be  productive  of  great  hardship  and


It  has  long  been  controverted  amongst  inoraliBtfi.
whether  promises  be  binding,  which  are  extorted
by  violence  or  fear.  The  obligation  of  all  promises
resnllB,  we  have  seen,  from  the  necessity  or  the
use  of  that  confrlence  which  mankind  repose  in
The  Question,  therefore,  whether  these
s  are  binding,  will  depend  upon  this:-
r  "m*™!,  upon  the  whole,  are  benefited
placed  on  such  promises  1 A


1  booty,  threatens  or  prepares  to  murder  you;
— you  jeTaiaWi,  with  many  solemn  asseverations,
that  if  he  wifl.  spare  your  hie,  he  shall  find  a  purse
ofBvmeys^iorbim,ataplaceapix>inted; — upon
use  frith  of  this  promise,  he  forbears  from  further
Now,  jam  fife  was  saved  by  the  con-
reposed  in  a  promise  extorted  by  fear;
I  the  fives  of  many  others  may  be  saved  by  the
This  is  a  good  consequence.  On  the
and.  confidence 'in  promises  like  these,
peany  tarjlitates  the  perpetration  of  robberies:
they  mej  be  made  the  instruments  of  almost  un-
inuted  extortion.  This  ir  a  bad  consequence:
and  in  the  question  between  the  importance  of
these  opposite  consequences,  resides  the  doubt
cenoBrnmg  the  obligations  of  such  promises.
These  are  other  cases  which  are  plainer;  as
a  magistrate  confines  a  disturber  of  the
peace  in  jail,  till  he  promise  to  behave
;  or  a  prisoner  of  war  promises,  if  jet  at
Shertv,  to  retain  within  a  certain  time.  These
pweiiiys,  say  moraHsts,  are  binding,  because  the
violence  or  duress  is  Just;  but,  the  truth  is.  be-
cause there  is  the  same  use  of  confidence  ,in  these
atonnses,  as  of  confidence  in  the  promises  of  a
parson  at  perfect  liberty.


to  God.  The  obligation
cannot  be  made  out  upon  the  same  principle  as
nut  of  other  promises.  The  violation  of  them,
'ess,  implies  a  want  of  reverence  to  the
Being;  which  is  enough  to  make  it


x  here  appears  no  command  or  ex
m  the  Christian  Scriptures  toJrnake
leas  any  authority  to  break  through


r  encouragement

ike  vows;  much

any  authority  to'  break  through  them  when

they  are  made. The  few  instances*  of


•  Aetsxvtti.lfl.xxi.©.


which  we  read  of  in  the^New  Testament,  were
religiously  observed.

The  rules  we  have  laid  down  concerning  pro-
mises, are  applicable  to  vows.  Thus  Jephtna's
vow,  taken  in  the  sense  in  which  that  transaction
is  commonly  understood,  was  not  binding;  because
the  performance,  in  that  contingency,  became
unlawful.


CHAPTER  VI.

Contract*.

A  contract  is  a  mutual  promise.  The  obli-
gation therefore  of  contracts,  the  sense  in  which
they  are  to  be  interpreted,  and  the  cases  where
they  are  not  hinding,  will  be  the  same  as  of


From  the  principle  established  in  the  last  chap-
ter, "that  toe  obligation  of  promises  is  to  be
measured  by  the  expectation  which  the  prouriser
any  how  voluntarily  and  knowingly  excites,"
results  a  rule,  which  governs  the  construction  of
all  contracts,  and  is  capable,  from  its  simplicity,
of  being  applied  with  great  ease  and  certainty,
viz.  That

Whatever  i*  expected  by  oneeide,  and  known
to  be  eo  expected  by  the  other,  is  to  be  deemed  a
part  or  condition  qfthe  contract.

The  several  kinds  of  contracts,  and  the  order
in  which  we  propose  to  consider  them,  may  be
exhibited  at  one  view,  thus


Contracts  of


Sale.
Hazard.

. -.1 .(Tnconsomable
Lending  of  /Money.
(Service.

"-»•  jsssr

(Office*


CHAPTER  VII.

Contracts  of  Sale.  ^

The  rule  of  justice,  which  wants  with  most
anxiety  to  bHnculcated  in  the  making  of  bargains,
is,  that  the  seller  is  bound  in  conscience  to  disclose
the  faults  of  what  he  offers  to  sale.  Amongst
other  methods  of  proving  this,  one  may  be  the


I  suppose  it  will  be  allowed,  that  to  advance  a
direct  falsehood,  in  recommendation  of  our  wares,
by  ascribing  to  them  some  quality  which  we  know
that- they  have  not,  is  dishonest  Now  compare
with  this  the  designed  concealment  of  some  mult,
which  we  know  that  they  have.  The  motives
and  the  effects  of  actions  are  the  only  points  of
comparison,  in  which  their  moral  quality  can
differ;  but  the  motive  in  these  two  cases  is  the
same,  viz.  to  procure  a  higherprice  than  we  expect
otherwise  to  obtain:  the  effect,  that  is,  the  pre-
judice to  the  buyer,  is  also  the  same ;  for  he  finds
mmself  equally  out  of  pocket  by  his  bargain,
whether  the  commodity,  when  he  gets  home  with
it/turn  out  worse  than  he  had  supposed,'  by  the
want  of  some  quality  which  he  expected,  or  the
discovery  of  some  ftnlt  which  he  did  not  expect.
If  therefore  actions  be  the  same,  as  to  all  moral
purposes;  which  proceed  from  the  same  motives,


MORAL  AND  POLITICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


and  produce  the  Mine  effect*;  it  is  making  a  dis-
tinction without  a  difference,  to  esteem  it  a  cheat
to  magnify  beyond  the  truth  the  virtues  of  what
we  have  to  sell,  but  not  to  conceal  its  fruits.

It  adds  to  the  value  of  this  kind  of  honesty,  that
the  faults  of  many  things  are  of  a  nature  not  to  be
known  by  any,  but  by  the  persons  who  have  used
them ;  so  that  the  buyer  has  no  security  from  im-
position, but  in  the  ingenuousness  ana  integrity
of  the  seller.

There  is  one  exception,  however,  to  this  rule ;
namely,  where  the  silence  of  the  seller  implies
some  fault  in  the  thins;  to  be  sokl,  and  where  the
buyer  has  a  compensation  in  the  price  for  the  risk
which  he  runs:  as  where  a  horse,  in  a  London
repository,  is  sold  by  public  auction,  without  war-
ranty; the  want  of  warranty  is  notice  of  some
unsoundness,  and  produces  a  proportionable  abate-
ment in  theprice.

To  this  of  concealing  the  faults  of  what  we
want  to  put-off,  may  be  referred  the  practice  of
passmff  bad  money.  This  practice  we  sometimes
near  defended  by  a  vulgar  excuse,  that  we  have
taken  the  money  for  good,  and  must  therefore  get
rid  of  it  Which  excuse  is  much  the  same  as  if
one,  who  had  been  robbed  upon  the  highway,
should  allege  that  he  had  a  right  to  reimburse
himself  out  of  the  pocket  of  the  first  traveller  he-
met;  the  justice  of  which  reasoning,  the  traveller
possibly  may  not  comprehend.

Where  there  exists  no  monopoly  or  combination,
tile  market-price  is  always  a  fair  price ;  because
it  will  always  be  proportionable  to  the  use  and
scarcity  of  the  article.  Hence,  there  need  be  no
scruple  about  demanding  of  taking  the  market-
price;  and  all  those  expressions,  "  provisions  are
extravagantly  dear,"  *'  corn  bears  an  unreasonable
price,"  and  the  like,  import  no  unfairness  or  un-
reasonsWeness  in  the  seller.

If  your  tailor  or  your  draper  charge,  or  even  ask
ofvou,  more  for  a  suit  of  clothes,  than  the  market-
price,  you  complain  that  you  are  imposed  upon ;
you  pronounce  the  tradesman  who  makes  such  a
charge,  dishonest;  although,  as  the  man's  goods
were  his  own,  and  he  had  a  right  to  prescribe  the
terms  upon  which  he  would  consent  to  part  with
them,  it,  may  be  questioned  what  dishonesty  there
can  be  in  the  case,  or  wherein  the  imposition  con-


Whoever  opens  a  shop,  or  in  any  manner
exposes  goods  to  public  sale,  virtually  engages  to
deal  with This  customers  at  a  market-price ;  because
it  is  upon  the  faith  and' opinion  of  such  an  en-
flagement,  that  any  orfe  comes  within  his  shop
doors,  or  offers  to.  treat  with  him.  This  is  ex-
pected by  the  buyer;  js  known  to  be  so  expected
by  the  seller:  which  is  enough,  according  to  the
role  delivered  above,  to  make  it  a  part  of  the  con-
tract between  them,  though  not  a  syllable  be  said
about  it  The  breach  of  this  implied  contract
constitutes  the  fraud  inquired  after.

Hence,  if  you  disclaim  any  such  engagement,
you  may  set  what  value  you  please  upon  your
property.  If,  upon  being  asked  to  sell  a  house,
you  answer  that  the  house  suits  your  fancy  or
conveniency,  and  that  you  will  not  turn  yourself
out  of  it,  under  such  a  price ;  the  price  iixed  may
be  double  of  what  the  house  cost,  or  would  fetch
at  a  public  sale,  without  any  imputation  of  injus-
tice or  extortion  upon  you.

If  the  thing  sold,  be  damaged,  or  perish,  between
the  sale  and  the  delivery,  ought  the  buyer  to  bear
the  loss,  or  the  seller] Thu  will  depend  upon


-the  particular  construction  of  the  cont^^  Iftha
seller,  either  expressly,  or  by  implication,  or  by
custom,  engage  to  deliver  the  goods;  wif  I  buy
a  set  or  china,  and  the  china-man  ask  ma  to  what
place  he  shall  bring  or  send  them,  and  they  be
broken  in  the  conveyance,  the  setter  must  abide
by  the  loss.  If  the  thing  sold,  remain  with  the)
seller,  at  the  instance,  or  for  the  conveniency  of
the  buyer,  then  the  buyer  undertakes  the  risk ;  as
if  I  buy  a  horse,  and  mention,  that  1  will  send  for
it  on  such  a  day  (which  is  in  effect  desiring  that
it  may  continue  with  the  seller  tiU  I  do  send  lor
it,)  theA,  whatever  misfortune  befalls  the' horse  in
the  meantime,  must  be  at  my  cost  .

And  here,  once  for  all,  l  would  observe,  that
innumerable  questions  of  this  sort  are  determined
solely  by  custom. ;  not  that  custom  possesses  any
proper  authority  to  alter  or  ascertain  the  nature  of
right  or  wrong ;  but  because  the  contracting  par-
ties are  presumed  to  include  in  their  stipulation,
all  the  conditions  which  custom  has  annexed  to
contracts  of  the  same  sort:  and  when  the  usage  fc
notorious,  and  no  exception  made  to  it,  this  pre-
sumption is  generally  agreeable  to  the  fact*

If  I  order  a  pipe  of  port  from  a  wme-inetchant
abroad;  at  what  period!  the  property  passes. from
the  merchant  to  me;  whether  upon  delivery  of
the  wine  at  the  merchant's  warehouse;  upon  its
being  put  on  shipboard  at  Oporto;  upon  the  ar-
rival of  the  ship  in  England  at  its  destined  port;
or  not  till  the  wine  be  committed  to  my  servants,
or  deposited  in  my  cellar;  are  all  questions)
which  admit  of  no  deaskn,  but  what  custom
points  out  Whence,  in  justice,  as  well  as  law,
what  is  called  the  custom  qf  merchants,  regulates
the  construction  of  mercantile  concerns.


CHAPTER  Vm.
Contracts  qf  Hazard.

Br  Contracts  of  Hazard,  I  mean  gaming  and
insurance.  ^

What  some  say  of  this  kind  of  contracts,  "that
one  side  ought  not  to  have  any  advantage  over
the  other,"  is  neither  practicable  nor  true.  It  is
not  practicable;  for  that  perfect  equality  of  akiO
and  judgment,  which  this  rule  requires,  is  seldom,
to  be  met  with.  I  might  not  have  it. in  my  power,
to  play  with  fairness  a  game  at  cards,  bilharda.  or
tennis;  lay  a  wager  at  a,  horse-race;  or  under-
write a  policy  of  insurance,  once  in  a  twelvemonth,
if  I  must  wait  till  I  meet  with  a  person,  whose
ait,  skill,  and  judgment  in  these  matters,  is  neither
greater  nor  less  than  my  own.  Nor  is  this  equality
requisite  to  the  justice  of  the  contract  One  party
may  give  to  the  other  the  whole  of  the  stake,  if  he
please,  and  the  other  party  may  justly  accept  it,
if  it  be  given  him;  much  more  therefore  may
one  give  to  the  other  a  part  of  the  stake ;  or,  what
is  exactly  the  same  thing,  an  advantage  in  the
chance  of  winning  the  whole.


•  It  happens  here,  as  in  many  cases,  that  what  the
parties  ought  to  do,  and  what  s  judge  or  arbitrator
would  award  to  be  done,  may  be  very  different  What
the  parties  ought  to  do  by  virtue  of  their  contract,  de-
pends upon  their  consciousness  at  the  time  of  making  it ; .
whereas  a  third  person  finds  it  necessary  to  found  his
judgment  upon  presumptions,  which  presumptions  maV
be  false,  although  the  most  probable  that  heeould  pro.

dby.  ^


LENDING  OF  MONEY.


The  proper  restriction  fe,  that  neither  ode  have
i  advantage  by  insane  of  which  the  other  is  not
;  for  this  is  an  advantage  taken,  without
being  given.  Although  the  event  be  still  an
usjccrtainty,  your  advantage  in  the  chance  has  a
certain  varae;  and  ao  much  of  the-  stake,  as  that
value  amounts  to,  is  taken  from  your  adversary
without  his  knowledge,  and  therefore  without  his
consent.  If  I  sit  down  to  a  game  at  whist,  and
have  an  advantage  over  the  adversary,  by  means
of  a  better  memory,  closer  attention,  or  a  superior
knowledge  of  the  roles  and  chances  of  the  game,
the  advantage  is  lair ;  because  it  is  obtained  by
means  of  which  the  adversary  is  aware:  for  he  is
aware,  when  he  sits  down  with  me,  that  I  shall
exert  the  skill  that  I  posseai  to  the  utmost  But
if  I  gain  -an  advantage  by  pecking  the  cards,
dancing  my  eye  into  the  adversaries1  hands,  or
by  conceited  signals  with  my  partner,  it.is  a  dis-

which  the  adversary  never  suspects  that  I  make

USB  o£

The  same  distmction  holds  of  all  contracts  into
which  chance  enters.  If  I  lay  a  wager  at  a  horse-
race, sounded  upon  the  conjecture  I  form  from
the  appearance,  and  character,  and  breed,  of  the
horses, 1  am  justly  entitled  to  any  advantage  which
my  indgment  gives  me:*  bus,  if  I  carry  on  aclan-
ftatimi  correspondence  with  the  jockeys,  and  find
eat  from  them,  that  a  trial  has  been  actually
made,  or  that  it  is  settled  beforehand  which  hone
shall  win  the  race;  all  such  information  is  so
much  fraud,  because  derived  from  sources  which
the  other  did  not  suspect,  when  he  proposed  or
accepted  the  wager.

In  speculations  in  trade,  or  in  the  stocks,  if  1
exercise  my  judgment  upon  the  general  aspect  and
pWBpcot  of  pubnc  affairs,  anddeal  with  a  person
who  conducts  himself  by  the  same  sort  or  judg-
ment; tto  contract  hMaH  the  equality  in  hvdiich
is  necessary:  but  if  I  have  access  to  secrets  of
state  sot  home,  or  private  advice  of  some  decisive
5  or  event  abroad,  I  cannot  avail  myself  of
^vantages  with  justice^  because  tney  are
I  by  the  contract,  which  proceeded  upon
_  _  nation  that  I  had  no  such  advantage.

In  insurances,  in  which  the  underwriter  com-
potes his  risk  entirely  from  the  account  given  by
the  person  insured,  it  is  absolutely  necessary  to
the  justice  and  validity  of  the  contract,  that  this
account  be  exact  and  complete.


CHAPTER  IX. .
Contract*  of  Lending  of  Inconsumable  Property.

Whbn  the  identical  loan  is  to  be  returned,  as  a
book,  A  horse,  a  harpsichord,  it  is  called  inconsum-
obit;  in  opposition  to  corn,  wine,  money;,  and
those  things  which  perish,  or  are  parted  with,  in
the  use,  ana  can  therefore  only  be  restored  in  kind.

The  questions  under  this  head  are  few  and
simple.  The  first  is,  if  the  thing  lent  be  lost  or
damaged,  who  ought  to  bear  the  loss  or  damage?
If  it  be  damaged  by  the  use,  or  by  accident  in  the
Use,  for  which  it  was  lent,  the  lender  ought  to
bear  it :  as  if  I  hire  a  job-coach,  the  wear,  tear,
and  soffing  of  the  coach,  must  belong  to  the
lender;  or^a  horse,  to  go  a  particular  journey,
and  in  going  the  proposed  journey,  the  horse  die
or  be  lamed,  the  loss  must  lie  the  lender's:  on  the


contrary,  if  the  damage  be  occasioned  by  the
fault  of  the  borrower,  or  by  accident  in  some  use
for  which  it  wss  not  lent,  then  the  borrower  must
make  it  good ;  as  if  the  coach  be  overturned  or
broken  to  pieces  by  the  carelessness  of  your  coach-
man; or  the  horse,  be  hired  to  take  a  morning's
ride  upon,  and  you  go  a-hunting  with  him,  or
leap  mm  over  hedges,  or  put  him  into  your  cast
or  carriage,  and  he  he  strained,  or  staked,  or  galled,
or  accidentally*  hurt,  or  .drop  down  dead,  whilst
you  are  thus  using  him;  you  must  make  satis-
faction to  the  owner.

The  two  cases  are  distinguished  by  this  dis
cumstance:  that  in  one  case,  the  owner  foresees
the  damage  or  risk,  and  therefore  consents  to
undertake  it;  in  the  other  case  he  does  not

It  is  possible  that  an  estate  or  *  house  may,
during  the  term  of  a  lease,  be  so  increased  or
diminished  in  its  value,  as  to  become  worth  much
more  or  much  less,  than  the  rent  agreed  to  be
paid  for  it  In  some  of  which  cases  it  may  be
doubted,  to  whom,  of  natural  right,  the  advantajge
or  disadvantage  belongs.  .  The  rule  of  justice
seems  to  be  thnr.  If  the  alteration  might  be  ex-
pected by  the  parties,  the  hirer  must  take  the
consequence;  if  it  could  not,  the  owner.  An
orchard,  or  a  vineyard,  or  a  mine,  or  a  fishery,  or
a  decoy,  may  this  year  yield  nothing,  or  next  to
nothing,  yet  the  tenant  shall  pay  his  rent;  and  if
they  next  year  produce  tenfold  the  usualprofit,
no  more  shall  be  demanded ;  because  the  produce
is  in  its  nature  precarious,  and  this  variation
might  be  expected.  If  an  estate  in  the  fens  of
Lincolnshire,  or  the  isle  of  Ely,  be  overflowed
with  water,  so  as  to  be  inoapabVof  occupation,
the  tenant,  notwithstanding,  is  bound  by  his  lease:
because  he  entered  into  it  with  a  knowledge  ana
foresight  of  the  danger.  On  the  other  hand,
if;  by  the  irruption  of  the  sea  into  a -country
where  it  was  never  known  to  have  come  before,
by  the  change.  o£  the  course  of  a  river,  the  fall  of  *
rock,  the  breaking  put  of  *  volcano,  the  bursting
of  a  moss,  the  incursions  of  an  enemy,  or  by  a
mortal  contagion  amongst  the  cattle;  if;  by  means
like  these,  an  estate  change  or  lose  its  value,  the
loss  shall  foil  upon  the  owner;  that  is,  the  tenant
shall  either  be  discharged  from  his  agreement,  or
be  entitled  to  an  abatement  of  rent.  A  house  in
London,  by  the  building  of  a  bridge,  the  opening
of  a  new  road  or  street  may  become  of  ten  times
its  former  value;  and,  by  contrary  causes,  may  be
as  much  reduced  in  value:  here  also,  as  before,
the  owner,  not  the  hirer,  shall  be  affected  by  the
alteration.  The  reason  upon  which  our  deter-
mination proceeds  is  this ;  that  changes  such  m
these,  being  neither  foreseen,  nor  provided  for,  'bj
the  contracting  parties,  form  no  part  or  condition
of  the  contract;  and  therefore  ought  to  have  the
same  effect  as  if  no  contract  at  all  had  been  made,
(for  none  was  made  with  respect  to  them,)  that  is,
ought  to  foil  upon  the  owner.


CHAPTER  X.

Contract*  concerning  the  Lending  qfJMmey.

There  exists  no  reason  in  the  law  of  nature,
why  a  man  should  not  be  paid  for  the  lending  off


his  money,  as  well  as  of  any  other  property  into
which  the  moneyinight  be  converted.
The  samples  that  have  been  entertained  upon


64


MORAL  AND  POLITICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


this  head,  and  upon  the  foundation  of  which,  the
receiving  of  interest  or  usury  (for  they  formerly
meant  the  same  thing)  was  once  prohibited  in  al-
most all  Christian  countries  *  arose  from  a  pas-
sage in  the  law  of  Moses,  Deuteronomy,  xxiiL
19,  90:  "  Thou  shall  not  lend  upon  usury  to  thy
brother;  usury  of  money,  usury  of  victuals,  usury
of  any  thing  that  is  fent  upon  usury:  unto'  a
stranger  thou  mayest  lend  upon  usury;  but  unto
thy  brother  thou  shalt  not  lend  upon  usury."
This  prohibition  is  now  generally  understood


This  prohibition  is  now  generally
to  have  been  intended  for  the  Jews  alone,  as  pert
of  the  civil  or  political  law  of  that  nation,  and  cal-
culated to  preserve  amongst  themselves  that  dis-
tribution of  property,  to  which  many  of  their  in-
solutions  were  subservient;  as  the  marriage  of  an
heiress  within  her  own  tribe;  of  a  widow  who
was  left  childless,  to  her  husband's  brother;  the
year  of  jubilee,  when  alienated  estates  reverted  to


the  family  of  the  original  proprietor :— regulations
which  were  never  thought  to  be  binding  upon  any
but  the  commonwealth  of  Israel.

This  interpretation  is  confirmed,  I  think,  be-
yond all  controversy,  by  the  distinction  mads  in
the  law,  between  a  Jew  and  a  foreigner:— "unto
a  stranger  thou  mayest  lend  upon  usury,  but  unto
thy  brother  thou  mayest  not  lend  upon  usury;"  a
distinction  which  could  hardly  have  been  admitted
into  a  law,  which  the  Divine  Author  intended  to
be  of  moral  and  of  universal  obligation.
*  Theoate  of  interest  has  in  most  countries  been
regulated  by  law.  The  Roman  law  allowed  of
twelve  pounds  per  cent  which  Justinian  reduced
at  one  stroke  to  four  pounds.  A  statute  of  the
thirteenth  year  of  dueen  Elizabeth,  which  was
the  first  that  tolerated  the  receiving  of  interest  in
England  at  aU,  restrained  it  to  ten  pounds  per
xent.:  a  statute  of  James  the  first,  to  eight  pounds;
of  Charles  the  Second,  to  six  pounds  •  or  Gtueen
Anne,  to  &f9  pounds,  on  pain  of  forfeiture  of  tre-
ble the  value  of  the  money  lent:  at  which  rate
and  penalty  the  matter  now  stands.  The  policy
of  these  regulations  is.  to  check  the  power  of  ac-
cumulating wealth  without  industry ;  to  give  en-
couragement to  trade,  by  enabling  adventurers  in
it  to  borrow  money  at  a  moderate  price :  and  of  late
years  to  enable  the  state  to  borrow  the  subject's
money  itself

Compound  interest,  though  forbidden  by  the
law  of  England,  is  agreeable  enough  to  natural
equity;  for  interest  detained  after  it  is  due,  be-
comes, to  all  intents  and  purposes,  part  of  the  sum
lent.

It  is  a  .question  which'  sometimes  occurs,  how
money  borrowed  in  one  country  ought  to  be  paid
in  another,  where  the  relative  value  of  the  pre-
cious metals  is  not  the  same.  For  example,  sup-
pose'I  borrow  a  hundred  guineas  in  London,
where  each  guinea  is  worth  one-and-twenty  shil-
lings, and  meet  my  creditor  in  the  East  Indies
where  a  guinea  is  worth  no  more  perhaps  than
nineteen;  is  it  a  satisfaction  of  the  debt  to  return
a  hundred  guineas,  or  must  I  make  up  so  many
'' one-and-twenty  shillings  1  I  should  think


the  latter;  for  it  must  be  presumed,  that  mv  cre-
ditor, had  he  not  lent  me  his  guineas,  would  have
disposed  of  them  in  such  a.  manner,  as  to  have

r  a  statute  of  Jambs  the  First,  interest  above  eight
Js  per  cent,  was  prohibited,  (and  consequently  tin-
_r  that  rate  allowed,)  with  this  sage  provision :  That
tsfe.ststai*  »k*U  not  U  emutnud  or  expounded  to  a/few
IS*  srsctkf  t/««sry  i*  point  (tfrdigion  or  MMtctssec


now  had.  in  the  place  of  them,  so  many  one-end-
twenty  shillings:  and  the  question  supposes  that
he  neither  intended,  nor  ought  to  be  a  sufferer,  by
parting  with  the  boseeeskm  of  his  money  to  me.

When  the  relative  value  of  coin  is  altered
by  an  act  of  the  state,  if  the  alteration  would  have
extended  to  the  identical  pieces  which  were  lent,
it  is  enough  to  return  an  equal  number  of  pieces
of  the  same  denomination,  or  their  present  value
in  any  other.  As,  if  guineas  werereouced  by  act.
of  parliament  to  twenty  shillings,  so  many  twenty
shillings,  as- 1  borrowed  guineas,  would  be-a  just
repayment  It  would  be  otherwise,  if  the  reduc-
tion was  owing  to  a  debasement  of  the  coin ;  far
then  respect  ought  to  be  had  to  the  comparative
value  of  the  old  guinea  and  the  new.

Whoever  borrows  money,  is  bound  in  con-
science to  repay  it  This,  every  man  can  see  ;
but  every  man  cannot  see,  or  does  not  however
reflect,  that  he  is,  in  consequence,  also  bound  to
to  use  the  means  neeessaryto  enable  himself  to
repay  it  M  If  he  pay  the  money  when  he  has  it,
or  has  Utospare.be  does  all  that  an  honest  man
can  do,"  and  all,  he  imagines,  that  is  required  of
him;  whilst  the  previous  measures,  which  are  ne-
cejsary  to  furnish  him  with  that  money,  he  makes
no  part  of  his  care,  nor  observes  to  be  as  much
his  doty  as  the  other ;  such  as  selling  a  family-
seat  or  a  family  estate,  contracting  his  plan  of  ex-
pense, laying  down  bis  equipage,  reducing  the
number  of  his  servants,  or  any  of  those  humiliating
sacrifices,  which  justice  requires  of  a  man  in  debt,
the  moment  he  perceives  that  he  has  no  reasona-
ble prospect  of  paying  his  debts  without  then.
An  expectation  which  depends  upon  the  con-
tinuance of  his  own  life,  will  not  satisfy  an  honest
man,  if  a  better  provision  be  in  his  power;  for  it »
a  breach  of  faith  to  subject  a  creditor ;  when  we
can  help  it,  to  the  risk  of  our  life,  be  the  event
what  it  will  j  that  not  being  the  security  to  which
credit  was  given.

I  know  few  subjects  which  have  been  more  mie-
undeistobd,  than  the  law  winch  authorises  the
imprisonment  of  insolvent  debtors.  It  has  been
represented  as  a  gratuitous  cruelty,  which  oon^
tnbutod  nothing  to  the  reparation  of  the  creditor's
loss,  or  to'  the  advantage  of  the  community.  This
prejudice  arises  principally  from  considering  the
sending  of  a  debtor  to  gaol,  as  an  act  of  private
satisfaction  to  the  creditor,  instead  of  a  public  pun-
ishment As  an  act  of  satisfaction  or  revenge,  it
is  always  wrong  in  the  motive,  and  often  intem-
perate  and  undistinguishingm  the  exercise.  Con-
sider it  as  a  public  punishment;  founded  upon
the  same  reason,  and  subject  to  the  same  rules,  an
other  punishments ;  and  the  justice  of  it,  together
with  the  degree  to  which  it  should  be  extended,
and  the  objects  upon  whom  it  may  be  inflicted,
will  be  apparent  There  are  frauds  relating  to
insolvency,  against  which  it  is  as  necessary  to  pro-
vide punishment,  as  for  any  public  crimes  what-
ever :  as  where  a  man  gets  your  money  into  his
possession,  and  forthwith  runs  away  with  it;  or.
what  is  little  better,  squanders  it  in  vicious  ex-
penses; or  stakes  it  at  the  gaming-table;  in  the
Alley;  or  upon  wild  adventures  in  trade;  or  is
conscious  at  the  time  he  borrows  it,  that  he  can
never  repay  it ;  or  wilfully  puts  it  out  of  his  pow-
er, by  profuse  living;  or  conceals  his  effects,  or
transfers  them  by  collusion  to  another:  not  to
mention  the  obstinacy  of  some  debtors,  who  had
rather  rot  in  a  gaol,  than  deliver  up  their  estates 5


SERVICE.


55


for,  to  say  the  troth,  the  first  absurdity  is  in  the
law  itself,  which  leaves  it  in  a  debtor's  power  to
withhold  any  part  of  his  tiroperty  from  the  claim
of  his  creditors.  The  only  question  is,  whether
the  punishment  be  properly  placed  in  the  hands
of  an  exasperated  creditor:  for  which  it  may  be
said,  that  these  frauds  are  so  subtile  and  versatile,
that  nothing  but  a  discretionary  power  can  over-
take them;  *nd  that  no  discretion  is  likely  to  be
so  well  informed,  so  vigilant,  or  so  active,  as  that
of  the  creditor.

It  must  be  remembered,  however,  that  the  con-
finement of  a  debtor  in  a  jail  is  a  punishment ;  and
that  every  punishment  supposes  a  crime.  To  pur-
sue, therefore,  with  the  extremity  of  legal  rigour,
a  sufferer,  whom  the  fraud  or  failure  of  others,  hi*
own  want  of  capacity,  or  the  disappointments  and
miscarriages  to  which  all  human  affairs  are  sub-


ject, have  reduced  to  ruin,  merely  because  we  are
provoked  by  our  loss,  and  seek  to  Jelieve  the  pain
we  feel  by  that  which  we  inflict,  is  repugnant  not
only  to  humanity,  but  to  justice:  for  it  is  to  per-
vert a  provision  of  law,  designed  for  a  different
and  a  salutary  purpose,  to  the  gratification  of  pri-
vate spleen  and  resentment.  Any  alteration  in
theoe  laws,  which  could  distinguish  the  degrees  of
guilt,  or  convert  the  service  of  the  insolvent  debtor
to  some  public  profit,  might  be  an  improvement ;
bat  any  considerable  mitigation  of  their  rigour,
under  colour  of  relieving  the  poor,  would  increase
their  hardships.  For  whatever  deprives  the  ere-,
oitor  of  his  power  of  coercion'  deprives  him  of  his
security ;  and  as  this  must  add  greatly  to  the  dif-
ficulty of  obtaining  credit,  the  poor,  especially  the
fewer  sort  of  tradesmen,  are  the  first  who  would
suffer  by  such  a  regulation..  As  tradesmen  must
hay  before  they  sell,  you  would  exclude  from  trade
two  thirds  of  those  who  now  carry  it  on,  if  none
were  enabled  to  enter  into  it  without  a  capital  suf-
ficient for  prompt  payments.  An  advocate,  there-
fore, for  the  interests  of  this  important  class  of  the
community,  will  deem  it  more  eligible,  that  one
out  of  a  thousand  should  be  sent  to  jail  by  his
creditors,  than  that  the  nine  hundred  and  ninety-
nine  should  be  straitened  and  embarrassed,  and
many  of  them  lie  idle  by  the  want  of  credit.


CHAPTER  XL

Contracts  vf  labour.


Scbvicb  in  this  country  is,  as  it  ought  to  be,
voluntary ,  and  by  contract ;  and  the  master's  au-
thority extends  no  further  than  the  terms  or
equitable  construction  of  the  contract  will  justify.

The  treatment  of  servants,  as  to  diet,  disci-
pline, and  accommodation,  the  kind  and  quantity
of  work  to  be  reauired  of  them,  the  intermission,
liberty,  and  indulgence  to  be  allowed  them,  must
be  determined  in  a  great  measure  by  custom ;  for
where  the  contract  involves  so  many  particulars,
the  contracting  parties  express  a  few  perhaps  of
the  principal,  ana,  by  mutual  understanding,  re-
fer the  rest  to  the  known  custom  of  the  country
moke  cases.

A  servant  hi  not  bound  to  obey  the  unlawful


mmands  of  his  master  ;.to  minister,  for  instance,
his  unlawful  pleasures;  or  to  assist  him  by  un-
wM  practices  in  his  profession;  as  in  smog-  [


to
lawful


_  or  adulterating  the  articles  in  which  he
leals.  For  the  servant' is  bound  by  nothing  but
bis  own  promise ;  and  the  obligation  of  a  promise
extends  not  to  things  unlawful.
-  For  the  same  reason,  the  master's  authority  is
no  justification  of  the  servant  in  doing  wrong ;
for  the  servant's  own  promise,  upon  rwhich  that
authority  is  founded,  would  be  none.

Clerks  and  apprentices  ought  to  be  employed
entirely  in  the  profession  or  trade  which  they  are
intended. to  learn.  Instruction  is  their  hire;  and
to  deprive  them  of  the  opportunities  of  instruct
tion;  by  taking  up  their  tune  with  occupations
foreign  to  their  business,  is  to  defraud  them  of
their  wages.

The  master  is  responsible  for  what  a  servant
does  in  the  ordinary  course  of  his  employment:
for  it  is  done  under  a  general  authority  committed
to  him,  which  is  in  justice  equivalent  to  a  specific
direction.  Thus,  if  I  pay  money  to  a  banker's
clerk,  the  banker  is  accountable ;  but  not  if  I  had
paid  it  to  his  butler  or  his  footman,  whose  busi-
ness it  is  not  to  receive  money.  Upon  the"  same
principle,  if  I  once  send  a  servant  to  take  up
goods  upon  credit,  whatever  goods  he  afterwards
takes  up  at  the  same  shop,  so  long'  as  he  con-
tinues in  my  service,  are  justly  chargeable  to  my
account

.The  ilaw  of  this  country  goes  great  lengths  in
intending  a  kind  ©Concurrence  in  the  master,  so
as  to  charge  him  with  the  consequences  of  his
servant's  conduct.  If  an  innkeeper's  servant  rob
his  guests,  the  inn-keeper  must  make  restitution;
if  a  farriers  servant  lame  a  horse,  the  farrier  must
answer  for  the  damage;  and  still  further,  if  your
coachman  or  carter  drive  over  a  passenger  in  the  ■
road,  the  passenger  may  recover  from  you  a  satis-
faction for  the  hurt  he  suffers.  But  these  deter-
minations stand,  I  think,  rather  upon  the  authority
of  the  law,  than  any  principle  of  natural  justice.

There  is  a  carelessness  and  laritity  in  "  giving
characters,"  as  it  is  called,  of  servants,  especially
when  given  in  writing,  or  according  to  some  es-
tablished form,  which-  to  speak  plainly  of  it,  is  a
cheat  upon  those  who  accept  them. They  are

S'ven  with  so  little  reserve  and  veracity,  "  that  I
lould  as  soon  depend,"  says  the  author  of  the
Rambler,  "  upon  an  acquittal  at  the  Old  Bailey,
by  way  of  recommendation  of  a  servant's  honesty,
as  upon  one  of  these  characters."  It  is  sometimes
carelessness;  and  sometimes  also  to  get  rid  of  a
had  servant  without  the  uneasiness  ofa  dispute ;
for  which  nothing  can  be  pleaded  but  the  most
ungenerous  of  all  excuses,  mat  the  person  whom
we  deceive  is  a  stranger.

There-  is  a  conduct  the  reverse  of  this,  but  more
Injurious,  because  the  injury  falls  where  there  is
no  remedy;  I  mean  the  obstructing  of  a  servant's
advancement,  because  you  are  unwilling  to  spare
his  service.  To  stand  in,  the  way  of  your  servant's
interest,  is  a  poor  return  for  his  fidelity;  and  af-
fords slender  encouragement  for  good  behaviour,
in  this  numerous  and  therefore  important  part  of
the  community.  It  is  a  piece  of  injustice  which,
if  practiced  towards  an  equal  the  law  of  honour
would  lay  hold  of;  as  it  is,  it  is  neither  ancom-
mon  nor  disreputable.

A  master  of  a  feraily  is  culpable,  if  he  permit
any  vices  among  his  domestics,  which  he  might
restrain  by  due  discipline,  -and  a  proper  inter-
ference. '  Thk.results.rrom  the  general  obligation
to  prevent  misery  when  in  our  power;  and  th^


66


MORAL  AND  POLITICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


assurance  which  we  hare,  that  vice  and  misery  at
the  long  ran  go  together.  Care  to  maintain  in  his
family  a  sense  of  virtue  and  religion,  received  the
Divine  approbation  in  the  person  of  Abraham,
Geir.  xvin.  19 :  "I  know  him,  that  he  will  com-
mand his  children,  and  his  household  after  him ;
and  they  shafl  keep  the  way  of  the  Lord,  to  do
justice  and  judgment71  And  indeed  no  authority
seems  so  well  adapted  to  this  purpose,  as  that  of
toasters  of  families;  because  none  operates  upon
the  subjects  of  it  with  an  influence  so  immediate
and  constant.

What  the  Christian  Scripture*  have  delivered
concerning  the  relation  and  reciprocal  duties  of
masters  and  servants,  breathes  a  spirit  of  liberality,
very  little  known  in  ages  when  servitude  was
slavery ;  and  which  flowed  from  a  habit  of  con-
templating  mankind  under  the  common  relation
in  which  they  stand  to  their  Creator,  and  with
respect  to  their  interest  in  another  existence;*
".Servants,  be  obedient  to  them  that  are  your
masters,  according  to  the  flesh,  with  fear  and  trem-
bling ;  in  singleness  of  your  heart,  as  unto  Christ ;
not  with  eve-service,  as  men-pleasers,  but  as  the
servants  or  Christ,  doing  the  will  of  God  from  the
heart;  with  good  will,  doing  service  as  to  the
Lord,  and  not  to  men  ;  knowing  that  whatsoever
good  thing  any  man  doeth,  the  same  shall  he  re-
ceive of  the  Lord,  whether  he  be  bond  or  free.
And  ye  masters,  do  the  sals*)  thing  unto  them,
forbearing  threatening ;  knowing  that  your  Mas-
ter also  is  in  heaven  ;  neither  is  there  respect  of
persons  with  him."  The  idea'  of  referring  their
service  to  God,  of  considering  him  as  having  ap-
pointed them  their  task,  that  they  were  doing  his
will,  and  were  to  look  to  him  for  their  reward,  was
new ;  and  affords  a  greater  security  to  the  master
than  any  inferior  principle,  because  it  tends  to  pro-
duce a  steady  and  cordial  obedience,  in  the  puce
of  that  constrained  service,  which  can  never  be
trusted  out  of  sight,  and  which  is  justly  enough
called  eye-service.  The  exhortation  to  masters,  to
keep  in  view  their  own  subjection  and  accountable-
ness,  was  no  less  seasonable.


CHAPTER  XII.
Contracts  of  Labour.

COMMISSIONS.

Whoever  undertakes  another  man's  business,
makes  it  his  own,  that  is,  promises  to  employ  upon
H  the  same  cam,  attention,  and  diligence,  that  he
would  do  if  it  were  actually  his  own:  for  he
knows  that  the  business  was  committed  to  him
with  that  expectation.  And  he  promises  nothing
more  than  this.  Therefore  an  agent  is  not  obliged
to  wait,  inquire,  solicit,  ride  about  the  country.
toU,  or  study,  whilst  there  remains  a  possibility  or
benefiting  his  employer.  If  he  exert  so  much  of
bis  activity,  and  use  such  caution,  as  the  value  of
the  business,  in  his  judgment,  deserves;  that  is,
as  he  would  have  thought  sufficient  if  the  same
interest  of  his  own  had  been  at  stake,  he  has  dis-
charged his  duty,  although  it  should  afterwards
tarn  out,  that  by  more  activity,  arid  longer  perse-
verance, he  might  have  concluded  the  business
with  greater  advantage.

•Eph.vi.5-e.


This  rale  defines  the  duty  of  fectors,  stswaife,
attorneys,  and  advocates.

One  of  the  chief  difficulties  of  an  agent's  situa-
tion is,  to  know  how  far  he  may  depart  from  his
instructions,  when,  from  some  change-  or  disco-
very in  the  circumstances  of  bis  commission,  he
sees  reason  to  believe  that  his  employer,  if  be
were  present,  would  alter  his  intention.  The
latitude  allowed  to  agents  in  this  respect,  will  be
different,  according  as  the  commission  was  con-
fidential or  ministerial;  and  according  as  the
general  rule  and  nature  of  the  service  require  a
prompt  and  precise  obedience  to  orders,  or  not
An  attorney,  sent  to  treat  for  an  estate,  if  he
found  out  a  flaw  in  the  title,  would  desist  from
proposing  the  price  he  was  directed  to  propose;
and  very  properly.  On  the  other  hand,  if  the
commander-in-chief  of  an  army  detach,  an  officer
under  him  upon  a  particular  service,  which  ser-
vice turns,  out  more  difficult,  or  less  expedient,
than  was  supposed ;  insomuch  that  the*  officer  is
convinced,  that  his  commander,  if  he  were  ao-

?|uainted  with  the  true  state  in  which  the  affair  is
ound,  would  recall  his  orders;  yet  must  this
officer,  if  he  cannot  wait  for  fresh  directions  with-
out prejudice  to  the  expedition  he  is  sent  upon,
pursue  at  all  hazards,  those  which  he  brought  out
with  him.

What  is  trusted  to  an  agent,  may  be  lost  or
damaged  in  his  hands  by  misfortune.  An  agent
who  acts  without  pay{  is  clearly  not  answerable
for  the  loss ;  for  if  he  give  his  labour  for  nothing,
it  cannot  be  presumed  that  he  gave  also  his
security  for  the  success  of  it  If  the  agent  be
hired  to  the  business,  the  question  will  depend
upon  the  apprehension  of  the  parties]  at  the  time
of  making  the  contract ;  which  apprehension  of
theirs  must  be  collected  chiefly  from  custom,  by
which  probably  it  was  guided. '  Whether  a  public
carrier  ought  to  account  for  goods  sent  by  him;
the  owner  or  master  of  a  ship  for  the  cargo ;  the
post-office,  for  letters,  or  bills  enclosed  in  let-
ters, where  the  loss'is  not  imputed  to  any  fault  or
neglect  of  theirs;  are  questions  of  this  sort.  Any
expression  which  fry  implication  amounts  to  a
promise,  will  be  binding  upon  the  agent,  without
custom ;  as  where  the  proprietors  of  a  stage-coach
advertise  that  they  will  not  be  accountable  for
money,  plate  or  jewels,  this  makes  them  account-
able for  every  thing  else;  or  where  the  price  is  too
much  for  the  labour,  part  of  it  may  be  considered
as  a  premium  for  insurance.  On  the  other  hand,
any  caution  on  the  part  of  the  owner  to  guard
against  danger,  is  evidence  that  he  considers  the
risk  to  be  his:  as  cutting  a  bank-bill  in  two,  to
send  by  the  post  at  different  times.

Universally,  unless  a  promise,  either  express  or
tach\  can  be  proved  against  the  agent,  the  loss
must  fall  upon  the  owner.

The  agent  may  be  a  sufferer  in  his  own  person
or  property  by  the  business  which  he  undertakes;
as  where  one  goes  a  journey  for  another,  and
lames  his  horse,  or  is  hurt  himself  by  a  fail  upon
the,  road ;  can  the  agent  in  such  a  case  claim  a
compensation  for  the  misfortune?  Unless  the
same  be  provided  for  by  express  stipulation,  the
agent  is  not  entitled  to  any  compensation  from
his  employer  on  that  account :  for  where  the  dan-
ger is  not  foreseen,  there  can  be1  no  reason  to  be-
lieve that  the  employer  engaged  to  indemnify  the
agent  against  it;  still  less  where  it  m  foreseen:
for  whoever  knowingly  undertakes  a  dangerous


OFFICES.


57


employment,  in  common  coBstniction,.takes  upon
himself  the  danger  and  the  consequences;  as
where  a  fireman  undertakes  for  a  reward  to  rescue
a  box  of  writing  from  the  flames;  or  a  sailor  to
bring  off  a  passenger  from  a  ship  in  a  storm.


CHAPTER  XIII.
Contract*  of  Labour.

PARTNERSHIP.

I  know  nothing  upon  the  subject  of  partnership
that  require*  explanation,  but  in  what  manner  the
profits  are  to  be  divided,  where  one  partner  con-
tributes money,  and  the  other  labour;  which  is  a

Rule.  From  the  stock  of  the  partnership  deduct
the  sum  advanced,  and  divide  the  remainder  be-
tween the  monied  partner  and  the  labouring
partner,  in  the  proportion  of  the  interest  of  the
money  to  the  wages  of  the  labourer,  allowing  such
a  rate  of  interest  as  money  might  be  borrowed  for
upon  the  same  security,  and  such  wages  as  a
journeyman'  would  require  for  the  same  labour
and  trust.

Rxample.  A.  advances  a  thousand  pounds,  but
knows  nothing  of  the  business ;  B.  produces  no
money,  but  has  been  brought  up  to  the  business,
and  undertakes  to  conduct  it.  At  the  end  of  the
jear,  the  stock  and  the  effects  of  the  partnership
amount  to  twelve  hundred  pounds;  consequently
there  are  two  hundred  pounds  to  be  divided. —
Now,  nobody  would  lend  money  upon  the  event
of  the  business  succeeding,  which  is  A*b  security,
under  six- per  cent.; — therefore  A.  must  be  allowed
sixty  pounds  lor  the  interest  of  his  money.  B,
before  he  engaged  in  the  partnership,  earned  thirty
Bounds  a  year  in  the  same  .employment;  his
Ebour,  therefore,  ought  to  be  valued  at  thirty
pounds:  and  the  two  hundred  pounds  must  be
<Bvkfed  between  'the  partners  in  the  proportion  of
sixty  to  thirty ;  that  is,  A.  must  receive  one  hun-
dred and  thirty-three  pounds  six  shillings  and
eight  pence,  and  B.  sixty-six  pounds  thirteen
«£jK*y  and  four  pence.

If  there  be  nothing  gained,  A.  loses  his  interest,
and  B.  his  labour;  which  is  right.  If  the  original
stock  be  dhuiiushed,  by  this  rule  B.  loses  only  his
labour,  as  before;  whereas  A.  loses  his  interest,
of  the  principal;  for  which  eventual
tase  A.  is  compensated,  by  having  the
\  ofms  money  computed  at  six  per  cent,  in
the  (fiviaaoo  of  the- profits,  when  there  are  any.

It  is  true  that  the  division  of  the  profit  is  seldom
fsjgotCen  in  the  constitution  of  the  partnership,
and  is  therefore  commonly  settled  by  express
arreements:  but  these  agreements,  to  be  equit-
t£ft»  should  pursue  the  principle  of  the  rule  here
sad  down.

All  the  partners  are  bound  to  what  any  one  of
them  docs  in  the  course  of  the  business ;  for,
fassot  hoe,  each  partner  is  considered  as  an  au-
\  agent  for  the  rest.


N


CHAPTER  XIV.
Contracts  of  Labour,

OFFICES.

offices,  as  schools,  fellowships  of  col-
'  ips  of  -universities,  and  the  like,
H


there  is  a  two-fold  contract ;  one  with  the  founder,
the  other  with  the  electors.

The  contract  with  the  founder  obliges  the  in-
cumbent of  the  office  to  discharge  every  duty
appointed  by  the  charter,  statutes,  deed  of  gift,  or
will  of  the  founder;  because  the  endowment  was
given,  and  consequently  accepted,  for  that  purpose,
and  upon  those  conditions.

The  contract  with  the  electors  extends  this
obligation  to  all  duties  that  have  been  customarily
connected  with  and  reckoned  a  part  of  the  office,
though  not  prescribed  by  the  founder;  for  the
electors  expect  from  the  person  they  choose,  all
the  duties  which  his  predecessors  have  discharged :
and  as  the  person  elected  cannot  be  ignorant  or
their  expectation,  if  he  meant  to  have  refused  this  .
condition,  he  ought  to  have  apprised  them  of  his
objection.

And  here  let  it  be  observed,  that  the  electors
can  excuse  the,  conscience  of  the  person  elected,
from  this  last  class  of  duties  alone ;  because  this
class  results  from  a  contract  to  which  the  electors
and  the  person  elected  are  the  only  parties. —
The  other  class  of  duties  results  from  a  different
contract.

It  is  a.  question  of  some  magnitude  and  diffi-
culty, what  offices  may  be  conscientiously  supplied
by  a  deputy. '

We  will  state  the  several  objections  to  the  sub-
stitution of  a  deputy ;  and  then  it  will  be  under-
stood, that  a  deputy' may  be  allowed  in  all  cases
to  which  these  objections  do  not  apply.

An  office  may  not  be  discharged  oy  deputy,

1.  Where  a  particular  conlidence  is  reposed  in
the  judgment  and  conduct  of  the  }>crson  appoint-
ed to  it;  as  the  office  of  a  steward,  guardian,
judge,  commander-in-chief  by  land  or  sea.  }

2.  Where  the  custom  hinders ;  as  in  the  case
of  schoolmasters,  tutors,  and  of  commissions  in  the
army  or  navy.

3.  Where  the  duty  cannot,  from  its  nature,  be
so  well  performed  by  a  deputy ;  as  the  deputy-
governor  of  a  province  may  not  possess  the  legal
authority,  or  the  actual  influence,  of  his  princi[>al.

4.  When  some  inconveniency  would  result  to
the  service  in  general  from  the  permission  of
deputies  in  such  cases :  for  example,  it  is  probable
that  military  merit  would  be  much  discouraged,
if  the  duties  belonging  to  commissions  in  the
army  were  generally  allowed  to  be  executed  by
substitutes. w  "

The,  non-residence' of  the  parochial  clergy,  who
supply  the  duty  of  their  benefices  by  curates,  is
worthy  of  a  more  distinct  consideration*.  And  in
order  to  draw  the  question  upon  this  case  to  a
point,  we  will  suppose  the  officiating  curate  to
discharge  every  duty  which  his  principal,  were  he
present,  would  be  liound  to  discharge,  and  in  a
manner  equally  beneficial  to  the  parish :  '"Under
which  circumstances,  the  only  objection  to  the
absence  of  the  principal,  at  least  the  only  one  of
the  foregoing  objections,  is  the  last

And,  in  my  judgment,  the  force  of  this  objection
will  be  much  diminished,  if  the  alwent  rector  or
vicar  be,  in  the  meantime,  engaged  in  any  function
or. employment  of  equal,  or  of  greater,  importance
to  the  general  interest  of  religion.  For  the  whole
revenue  of  the  national  church  may  properly
enough  be  considered  as  a  common  "fund  for  the
support  of  the  national  religion ;  and  if  a  clergy-
man be  serving  the  cause  of  « hritfianity  and  pro-
testantism, it  can  make  Utile  diilerencc,  out  of


58


MORAL  AND  POLITICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


what  particular  ration  of  this  fund,  that  is,  by
the  tithes  and  glebe  of  what  particular  pariah,  his
service  be  requited;  any  more  than  it  can  pre-
judice the  king's  service  that  an  officer  who  has
signalised  his  merit  in  America,  should  be  re-
warded with  the  government  of  a  fort  or  castle
in  Ireland,  which  he  never  saw;  but 'for  the
custody  of  which,  proper  provision  is  made,  and
can  taken.

Upon  the  principle  thus  explained,  this  indul-
gence is  due  to  none  more  than  to  those  who  are
occupied  in  cultivating  or  communicating  re-
knowledge,  or  the  sciences  subsidiary  to


This  way  of  considering  the  revenues  of  the
church  as  a  common  fund  lor  the  same  purpose,
is  the  more  equitable,  as  the  value  of  particular
preferments  bears  no  proportion  to  the  particular
charge  or  labour.

But  when  a  man  draws  upon  this  fund,  whose
studies  and  employments  bear  no  relation  to  the
object  of  it,  ana  who  is  no  further  a  minister  of
the  christian  religion  than  as  a  cockade  makes  a
soldier,  it  seems  a  misapplication  little  better  than
a  robbery.

And  to  those  who  have  the  management  of
such  matters  I  submit  this  question,  whether  the
impoverishment  of  the  fund,  by  converting  the
best  share  of  it  into  annuities  for  the  gay  and
illiterate  youth  of  great  families,  threatens  not  to
starve  and  stifle  the  little  clerical  merit  that  ia  left
amongst  us?

Alflegal dispensations  from  residence, proceed
upon  the  supposition,  that  the  absentee  is  detained
from  his  living  by  some  engagement  of  equal  or  of
greater  public  importance.  Therefore,  if,  in  a
case  where  no  such  reason  can  with  truth  be
pleaded,  it  be  said  that  this  question  regards  a
right  of  property,  and  that  all  right  of  property
awahs  the  disposition  of  law ;  that,  therefore,  if
the  law  which  gives  a  man  the  emoluments  of  a
firing,  excuse  him  from  residing  upon  it,  he  is
excused  m  conscience ;  we  answer  that  the  law
does  not  excuse  him  by  intention,  and  that  all
other  excuses  are  fraudulent


CHAPTER  XV.
Lees.

A  lii  m  a  breach  of  promise:  for  whoever
;  seriously  addresses  his  discourse  to  another,  tacitly
1  promises  to  speak  the  truth,  because  he  knows
that  the  truth  Is  expected.

Or  the  obligation  of  veracity  may  be  made  out
from  the  direct  ill  consequences  of  lying  to  social
happiness.  Which  consequences  consist,  either
in  some  specific  injury  to  particular  individuals,
or  in  the  destruction  of  that  confidence  which  is
essential  to  the  intercourse  of  human  lifej  for
which  latter  reason,  a  lie  may  be  pernicious  m  its
general  tendency,  and  therefore  criminal,  though
it  produce  no  particular  or  visible  mischief  to
anf  one.

There  jure  falsehoods  which  are  not  lies;  that
is,  which  are  not  criminal:  as,

1.  Where  no  one -is  deceived;  which  is  the
case  in  parables,  tables,  novels,  jests,  tales  to  create
mirth,  ludicrous  embellishments  of  a  story,  where
the  declared  design  of  the  speaker  is  not  to  inform.
but  to  divert  \  compliments  in  the  subscription  or


a  letter,  a  servant's  denying  his  master,  a  prison-
er's pleading  not  guilty,  an  advocate  asserting  the
justice,  or  his  belief  of  the  justice  of  his  client's
cause.  In  such  instances,  no  confidence  is  de-
stroyed, because  none  was  reposed ;  no  promise
to  speak  the  truth  is  violated,  because  none  was
given,  or  understood  to  be  given.

2.  Where  the  person  to  whom  you  speak  has
no  right  to  know  the  truth,  or,  more  properly,
where  little  or  no  inconveniency  results  from  the
want  of  confidence  in  such  cases;  as  where  you
tell  a  falsehood  to  a  madman,  for  his  own  ad-
vantage ;  to  a  robber,  to  conceal  your  property ;
to  an  assassin,  to  defeat  or  divert  him  from  hie
purpose.  The  particular  consequence  is  bv  the
supposition  beneficial ;  and,  as  to  the  general  con-
sequence, the  worst  that  can  happen  is,  that  the


madman,  the  robber,  the  assassin,  will  not  trust
you  again ;  which  (beside  that  the  first  is  incapable
of  deducing  regular  conclusions  from  having  been


once  deceived,  and  the  last  two  not  likely  to  <
a  second  time  in  your  way)  is  sufficiently  com-
pensated by  the  immediate  benefit  which  you
propose  by  the  falsehood.

It  is  upon  this  principle,  that,  by  the  kws  of
war,  it  is  allowed  to  deceive  an  enemy  by  feints,
false  colours,*  spies,  false  intelligence,  and  the
like;  but  by  no  means  in  treaties,  truces,  signals
of  capitulation,  or  surrender :  ana  the  difference
is,  that  the  former  suppose  hostilities  to  continue,
the  latter  are  calculated  to  terminate  or  suspend
them.  In  the  conduct  of  war,  arid  whilst  the  wax
continues,  there  is  no  use,  or  rather  no  place,  for
confidence  betwixt  the  contending  parties;  but  in
whatever  relates  to  the  termination  of  war.  the
most  religious  fidelity  is  expected,  because  without
it  wars  could  not  cease,  nor  the  victims  be  secure,
but  >y  the  entire  destruction  of  the  vanquished.

Many  people  indulge,  in  serious  discourse,  a
habit  of  fiction  and  exaggeration,  in  the  accounts
they  give  of  themselves,  of  their  acquaintance,  or
of  the  extraordinary  things  which  they  have  seen
or  heard:  and  so  long  as  the  facts  they  relate  are
indifferent,  and  their  narratives,  though  false,  are
inoffensive,  it  may  seem  a  superstitious  regard  to
truth  to  censure  them  merely  for  truth's  sake.

In  the  first  place,  it  is  almost  impossible  to  pro-
nounce beforehand,  with  certainty,  concernins;  any
lie.  that  it  is  inoffensive.  Volat  irrtvocabUe ;  and
collects  sometimes  accretions  in  its  flight,  which
entirely  change  its  nature.  It  may  owe  possibly
its  mischief  to  the  officiousness  or  mJsrepjese&tsv-
tion  of  those  who  circulate  it ;  but  the  mischief  ia,
nevertheless,  in  some  degree  chargeable  upon  the
original  editor.

In  the  next  place,  this  liberty  in  conversation
defeats  its  own  end.  Much  of  the  pleasure,  end
all  the  benefit,  of  conversation,  depends  upon  our
opinion  of  the  speaker's  veracity ;  for  which  this
rule  leaves  no  foundation.  The  faith  indeed  of  a
hearer  must  be  extremely  perplexed,  who  con-
siders the  speaker,  or  believes  that  the  speaker
considers  himself  as  under  no  obligation  to  adhere


*  There  have  been  two  or  three  instances  of  late,  of
English  ships  decoying  an  enemy  into  their  power,  by
counterfeiting  signals  of  distress;  an  artifice  which
ought  to  be  reprobated  by  the  common  indignation  of
mankind !  for  a  few  examples  of  captures  effected  by
this  stratagem,  would  put  an  end  to  that  promptitude
in  affording  assistance  to  ships' In  distress,  which  ia  the
best  virtue  in  a  seafaring  character,  and  by  which  the
perils  of  navigation  are  diminished  to  aH— A.  D.  1775.


OATHS.


to  Mb.  Vol  arrsjunng  to  the  particular  impor-
tance of  what  he  relates.

But  beads  end  above  both  these  reasons,  while
fies  always  introduce  others  of  a  darker  com-
plexion. I  have  seldom  known  any  one  who  de-
serted truth  in  trifles,  that  could  be  trusted  in
matters  of  importance.  Nice  distinctions  are  out
of  the  question,  upon  occasions  which,  like  those
of  apeoch,  return  every  hour.  The  habit,  there-
to, of  tying,  when  once  farmed,  is  easily  ez-
tawW,  to  serro  the  deswM  of  nialice  or  interest; —
Eke  ail  habit*,  it  spreads  indeed  of  itself.

jPfinw  frauds,  as  they  are  improperly  enough
called,  pretended  mspiratjons,  fbrlpd  books,  coun-
terfeit mi— A»f  are  impositions  of  a  more  serious
nature.  It  is  possible  that  they  may  sometimes,
though  seldom,  have  been  set  up  and  encouraged,
with  a  design  to  do  good :  but  the  good  they  aim
at,  requires  that  the  belief  of  them  should  be  per-
petoaL  which  is  hardly  possible ;  and  the  detec-
tioa  of  the  fraud  is  sure  to  disparage  the  credit  of
all  pretensions  of  the  same  nature.  Christianity
has  suffered  more  injary  from  this  cause,  than
from  am  ether  causes  put  together.

As  there  may  be  falsehoods  which  are  not  ties,
an  these  maybe  hes  without  literal  or  direct  false-
hood. An  opening  is  always  left  for  this  species
of  prewmatipn,  when  the  literal  and  grammati-
cal signification  of  a  sentence  is  different  from
the  nspniar  and  customary  meaning.  It  is  the
wflful  deceit  that  makes  the  lie;  and  we  wilfully
deceive,  when  our  expressions  are  not  true  in  the
in  which  we  believe  the  hearer  to  appre-
xsides  that  it  is  absurd  to  contend
i  of  words,  in  opposition  to  usage ;
■of  all  words  are  founded  upon  usage,
and  wpon  nothing  else.

Or  a  man  may  act  a  he;  as  by  pointing  his  fin-
ger hi  a  wrong  direction,  when  a  traveller  inquires
of  him  hk  road;  or  when  a  tradesman  shuts  up
his  windows,  to  induce  bis  creditors  to  believe
that  he  is  abroad :  for,  to  all  moral  purposes,  and
thuUuiu  at  to  veracity,  speech  and  action  are  the
awns;  speech  being  only  a  mode  of  action.

Or,  bmsIt,  there-  may  he  hes  of  omission.  A<
writer  of  Kngfish  history,  who- in  his  account  of
me  ream  of  Charles  the  First,  should  wilfully
>  any  evidence  of  that  prince's  despotic
i  and  designs,  might  be  said  to  he ;  for,
ng  his  book  a  History  of  England,  he
» to  relate  the  whofe  truth  of  the  history,
or,  at  least,  aB  that  he  knows  of  it.


CHAPTER  XVL

Oaths.
t  Fhrms  of  Oaths.

n.  .-
m.

IT.  Obligation.
V.  What  Oaths  do  not  bind.
VL  Mm  what  sense  Oaths  are  to  be  interpreted.

L  The  forms  of  oaths,  tike  other  religious  cere-
sll  ages  been


any


in  all  ages  been  various;  consisting
\  fat  the  most  part,  of  some  bodily  action,*


and  of  a  prescribed  form  of  words.  Amongst  the
Jews,  the  juror  held  up  his  right  hand  towards
heaven,  which  explains  a  passage  in  the  144th
Psalm;  "Whose  mouth  speaketh  vanity,  and
their  right  hand  is  a  right  hand  of  falsehood."
The  same  form  is  retained  in  Scotland  still.
Amongst  the  same  Jews,  an  oath  of  fidelity  was
taken,  hv  the  servant's  putting  his  hand  under
the  thigh  of  his  lord,  as  Eliezer  did  to  Abraham,
Gen.  xxiv.  & ;  from  whence,  with  no  great  varia-
tion, is  derived  perhaps  the  form  of  doing  homage
at  this  day,  by  putting  the  hands  between  the
knees,  and  within  the  hands,  of  the  liege.

Amongst  the  Greeks  and  Romans,  the  form
varied  with  the  subject  and  occasion  of  the  oath
In  private  contracts,  the  parties  took  hold  of  each
other's  hand,  whilst  they  swore  to  the  perform-
ance; or  they  touched  the  altar  of  the  god  by
whose  divinity  they  swore.  Upon  more  solemn
occasions,  it  was  the  custom  to  slay  a  victim;  and
the  beast  being  struck  down  with  certain  ceremo-
nies and  invocations,  gave  birth  to  the  expressions
Ti^n.r  of  nor,  ferire  pactum  ;  and  to  our  English
phrase,  translated  from  these,  of  "striking  a  bar-
gain."

The  forms  of  oaths  in  Christian  countries  are
also  very  different;  but  in  no  country  in  the  world,
I  believe,  worse  contrived,  either  to  convey  the
meaning,  or  impress  the  obligation  of  an  oath,
than  in  our  own.  The  juror  with  us,  after  re-
peating the  promise  or  affirmation  which  the  oath
is  intended  to  confirm,  adds,  "  So  help  me-God :"
or  more  'freouently  the  substance  of  the  oath  is
repeated  to  the  juror  by  the  officer  or  magistrate
who  administers  it: adding  in  the  conclusion,  "So
help  you  God."  The  energy  of  the  sentence  re-
sides in  the  particle  so  ;  so,  that  is.  hoc  lege,  upon
condition  otmy  speaking  the  truth,  or  performing
this  promise,  and  not  otherwise,  may  God  help
me.  The  juror,  whilst  he  hears  or  repeats  the
words  of  the  oath,  holds  his  right  hand  upon  a
Bible,  or  other  book  containing  the  four  Gospels.
The  conclusion  of  the  oath  sometimes  runs,  "  Its
me  Deus  sdjuvet,  et  hiec  sancta  evangefia,"  or
"  So  help  me  God,  and  the  contents  of  this  book ;"
which  last  clause  forms  a  connexion  between  the
words  and  action  of  the  juror,  that  before  was
wanting.  The  juror  then  kisses  the  book:  the
kiss,  however,  seems  rather  an  act  of  reverence
to  the  contents  of  the  book,  (as,  in  the  popish
ritual,  the  priest  kisses  the  Gospel  before  he  readi
it,)  than  any  part  of  the  oath.

This  obscure  and  elliptical  form,  together  with
the  levity  and  frequency  with  which  it  is  sdminis-
tered,  has  brought  about  a  general  inadvertency
to  the  obligation  of  oaths :  which,  both  In  a  re-
ligious and  political  view,  is  much  to  be  lamented:
and  it  merits  pubue  consideration,  whether  the
requiring  of  oaths  on  so  many  frivolous  occasions,
especially  in  the  Customs,  and  in  the  qualification
for  petty  offices,  has  any  other  effect,  than  to
make  them  cheap  in  the  minds  of  the  people.  A
pound  of  tea  cannot .  travel  regularly  from  the
ship  to  the  consumer,  without  costing  naif  a  dozen
oaths  at  the  least  j  and  the  same  security  for  the
due  discharge  of  their  office,  namely,  that  of  an
oath,  is  required  from  a  churchwarden  and  an


•It  Si


«Jy  thought  that  oaths  are  denominated
«_•*»•  from  the  bodily  action  which  aocompa-
sam,  of  laying  the  right  bond  upon  a  book  con-
the  fbsr  Gospels. This  opinion,  however,  ap-


pears to  be  a  mistake;  for  the  term  is  borrowed  from
the  sncient  usage  of  touching,  on  these  occasions,  the
corporate,  or  cloth  which  covered  the  consecrated  ele-
ments.


MORAL  AND  POLITICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


archbishop,  from  a  petty  constable  and  the  chief
justice  of  England.  Let  the  law  continue  its  own
sanctions,  if  tney  be  thought  requisite ;  but  let  it
spore  the.  solemnity  of  an  oath.  And  where,  from
the  want  of  something  better  to  depend  upon,  it
|s  necessary  to  accept  men's  own  word  or  own
account,  let  it  annex  to  prevarication  penal-
ties proportioned  to  the  public  mischief  of  the  of-
fence.

II.  But  whatever  be  the  form  of  an  oath,  the
aupiification  is  the  same.  It  is  "  the  calling  upon
God  to  witness,  i.  e.  to  take  notice  of,  what  we
say ;"  and  it  is  "  invoking  his  vengeance,  or  re-
nouncing his  favour,  if  what  we  say  be  false,  or
what  we  promise  be  not  performed."

III.  Quakers  and  Moravians  refuse  to  swear
upon  any  occasion ;  founding  their  scruples  con-
cerning the  lawfulness  of  oaths  upon  our  Sa-
viour's prohibition,  Matt.  v.  34.  "  I  say  unto  you,
Swear  not  at  all."

The  answer  which  we  give  to  this  objection
cannot  be  understood,  without  first  stating  the
whole  passage ;  "  Ye  have  heard  that  it  hath  been
said  by  them  of  old  time,  Thou  ahalt  not  forswear
thyself,  but  shalt  perform  unto  the  Lord  thine
oaths.  But  I  say  unto  you,  Swear  not  at  all ;
neither  by  heaven,  for  it  is  God's  throne;  nor  by
the  earth,  for  it  is  his  footstool ;  neither  by  Jeru-
salem, for  it  is  the  city  of  the  great  King.  Nei-
ther shalt  thou  swear  by  thy  head,  because  thou
canst  not  make  one  hair  white  or  black.  But  let
your  communication  be,  Yea,  yea;  Nay,  nay:  for
whatsoever  is  more  than  these,  cometh  of  evil."

To  reconcile  with  this  passage  of  Scripture  the
practice  of  swearing,  or  of  taking  oaths,  when  re-
quited by  law,  the  following  observations  must  be
attended  to:

1.  It  does  not  appear  that  swearing  "  by  hea-
ven," "  by  the  earth,"  ?« by  Jerusalem,"  or  "  by
their  own  head,"  was  a  form  of  swearing'  ever
made  use  of  amongst  the  Jews  in  judicial  oaths:
and  consequently,  it  is  not  probable  that  they
were  judicial  oaths,  which  Christ  had  in  his  mind
when  he  mentioned  those  instances.

2.  As  to  the  seeming  universality  of  the  prohi-
bition, "  Swear  not  at  all,"  the  emphatic  clause
"  not  at  all"  is  to  be  read  in  connexion  with  what
follows;  "not  at  all,"  t.  e.  neither  "by  the  hea-
ven," nor  "by  the  earth,"  nor  "by  Jerusabin,"
nor  " by  thy  head ;"  "  not  at  all,"  cloes  not  mean
upon  no  occasion,  but,  by  none  of  these  forms.
Our  Saviour's  argument  seems  to  suppose,  that
the  people  to  whom  he  spake,  made  a  distinction
between  swearing  directly  by  the  "  name  of  GrooV-
and  swearing  by  those  inferior  objects  of  venera-
tion, "the  heavens,"  "the  earth/'  "Jerusalem,"
or  "their  own  head."  In  opposition  to  which
distinction,  he  tells  them,  that  on  account  of  the
relation  which  these  things  bore  to  the  Supreme
Being,  to  swear  by  any  of  them,  was  in  efiect  and
substance  to  swear  by  him  ;  "  bv  heaven,  for  it  is
his  throne ;  hy  the  earth,  for  it  is  his  footstool ;  by
Jerusalem,  for  it  is  the- city  of  the  great  King;  by
thy  head,  for  it  is  his  workmanship,  not  thine, —
thou  canst  not  make  one  hair  white  or  black ;"  for
which  reason  he  says,  "  Swear  not  at  all"  that  is,
neither  directly  by  frod,  nor  indirectly  by  any  thing
related  to  him.  This. interpretation  Is  greatly  con-
firmed by  a  passage  in  the  twenty-third  chapter
of  the  same  Gospel,  where  a  similar  distinction,
made  by  the  Scribes  and  Pharisees,  is  replied  to
in  the


3.  Oar  Saviour  himself  being  "adjured  bv  the
living  God,"  to  declare  whether  ne  was  the  Christ,
the  Son  of  God,  or  not,  condescended  to  answer  the
high-priest,  without  making  any  objection  to  the
oath  (for  such  it  was)  upon  which  ne  examined
him. — "  God  is  my  witness"  says  St.  Paul  to  the
Romans,  "  that  without  ceasing  I  make  mention
of  you  m  my  prayers :"  and  to  the  Corinthians
still  more  strongly.  "/  call  God  for  a  record
upon  my  soul,  that  to  spare  you,  I  came  not  as
yet  to  Corinth."  Both  these  expressions  contain
the  nature  of  oaths.  The  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews
speaks  of  the  custom  of  swearing  judicially,  without
any  mark  of  censure  or  disapprobation;  "Men
verily  swear  by  the  greater:  and  an  oath,  for  con-
firmation, is  to  them  an  end  of  all  strife.

Upon  the  strength  of  these  reasons,  we  explain
our  Saviour  s  words  to  relate,  not  to  judicial  oaths,
but  to  the  practice  of  vain,  wanton,  and  unau-
thorised swearing,  in  common  discourse.  St.
James's  words,  chap.  v.  12.  are-  not  so  strong  as
our  Saviour's,  and  therefore  admit  the  same  ex-
planation with  more  ease.

IY.  Oaths  are  nugatory,  that  is,  carry  with
them  no  proper  force  or  obligation,  unless  we
believe  that  God  will  punish'  false  swearing  with
more  severity  than  a  simple  lie,  or  breach  of  pro-
mise ;  for  which  belief  there  are  the  following
reasons :  ^

1.  Perjury  is  a  sin  of  greater  deliberation.  The
juror  has  the  thought  of  God  and  of  religion  upon
his  mind  at  the  time ;  at  least  there  are  very  few
who  can  shake  them  off  entirely.  He  offends,
therefore,  if  he  do  offend,  with  a  high  hand;  in
the  face,  that  is,  and  in  defiance  of  the  sanctions
of  religion.  His  offence  implies  a  disbelief  or
contempt  of  God's  knowledge,  power,  and  justice ;
which  cannot  be  said  of  a  lie,  where  there  is
nothing  to  carry  the  mind  to  any  reflection  upon
the  Deity,  or  the  Divine  Attributes  at  all

2.  Perjury  violates  a  superior  confidence-
Mankind  must  trust  to  one  another:  and  they
have  nothing  better  to  trust  to  than  one  another*
oath.  Hence  legal  adjudications,  which  govern  and
affect  every  right  and  interest  on  this  side  of  the
grave,  of  necessity  proceed  and  depend  upon  oaths.
Penury,  therefore,  in  its  general  consequence
strikes  at  the  security  of  reputation,  property,  and
even  of  life  itself.  A  he  cannot  do  the  same  mis-
chief, because  the  same  credit  is  not  given  to  it*  •

3.  God  directed  the  Israelites  to  swear  by  his
name;t  and  was  pleased,  "  in  order  to  show  the
immutability  of  his  own  counsel,"?:  to  confirm  his
covenant  with  that  people  by  an  oath :  neither  of
which  it  is  probable  he  would  have  done,  had  he
not  intended  to  represent  oaths  as  having  some
meaning  and  effect  beyond  the  obligation  of  a  bare
promise;  which  effect  must  be  owing  to  the
severer  punishment  with  which  he  will  vindicate
the  authority  of  oaths.

V.  Promissory  oaths  are  not  binding  where  the
promise  itself  would  not  be  so :  for  the  several
cases  of  which,  see  the  Chapter  of  Promises.

VI.  As  oaths  are  designed  for  the  security  of
the  imposer,  it  is  manifest  that  they  must  be  in-
terpreted and  performed  in  the  sense  in  which  the
imposer  intends  them ;  otherwise,  they  afford  no


*  Except,  indeed,  where  a  Quakers  or  Moravian's
affirmation  is  accepted  in  the  place  of  an  oath;  in
which  case,  a  lie  partakes,  so  far  as  this  reason  extends,
and  guilt  c~- * —


of  the  nature  and  guilt  of  perjury.
.' f  Deal- v.  13.x.  ».


.  vi.  17.


OATH  OF  ALLEQIANCE.


61


•eorkj  to  Ua.  And  this)  is  the  meaning  and
reason  of  the  role,  "  jurare  in  animum  knponen-
ut"  *hich  rale  the  reader  is  desired  to  cany
•long  with  hiin,  whilst  we  proceed  to  consider
certain  particular  oaths,  which  are  either  of  greater
importance,  or  more  likely  to  fall  in  our  way,
than  others.


CHAPTER  XVIL
Oath  in  Evidence,


The  witness  swears  "to  speak  the  troth,  the
whole  truth,  and  nothing  but  the  truth,  touching
the  matter  in  question."

Upon  which  it  may  be  observed,  that  ihe  de-
signed concealment  of  any  truth,  which  relates  to
the  matter  in  agitation,  is  as  much  a  violation  of
the  oath,  as  to  testify  a  positive  falsehood ;  and
this,  whether  the  witness  be  interrogated  as  to
that  particular  point  or  not  For  .when  the  per-
son to  be  exaxmned  is  sworn  upon  a  voir  dire,
that  is,  in  order  to'inquire  whether  he  ought  to  be
admitted  to  give  evidence  in  the  cause  at  all,  the
sbrm  runs  thus :  "  Ton  shall  true  answer  make  to
all  such  questions  as  shall  be  asked  you:",  but
when  he  comes  to  be  sworn  in  chief,  he  swears
"to, sneak  the  whole  truth,"  without  restraining
B,  as  before,  to  the  questions  that  shall  be  asked :
which  difference  shows,  that  the  law  intends,  in
this  latter  case,  to  require  of  the  witness,  that  he
nve  a  complete  and  unreserved  account  of  what
he  knows  of  the  subject  of  the  trial,  whether  the
\  proposed  to  him  reach  the  extent  of  his
je  or  not  So  that  if  it  be  inquired  of  the
afterwards,  why  he  did  not  inform  the
court  so  and  so,  it  is  not  a  sufficient,  though  a
aery  common  answer,  to  say,  "because  it  was


1  know  but  one  exception  to  this  rule ;  which
k,  when  a  full  discovery  of  the  truth  tends  to
accuse  the  witness  himself  of  some  legal  crime. —
The  law  of  England  constrains  no  man  to  become
ms  own  accuser ;  consequently  imposes  the  oath
of  testhnony  with  this  tacit  reservation.  But  the
fTrffrlnn  must  be  confined  to  legal,  cranes  A
point  of  honour,  of  dehcacy,  or  of  reputation,  may
make  a  witness  backward  to  disclose  some  circum-
stance wsh  which  be  is  acquainted ;  but  will  in
po  wise  justify  his  concealment  of  the  truth,  unless
it  could  be  shewn,  that  the  law  which  imposes  the
•nth,  intended  to  allow  this  indulgence  to  such
motives.  The  exception  of  which  we  are  speak-
ing, is  aim  withdrawn  by  a  compact  between  the
majastnte  and.  the  witness,  when  an  accomplice
is  admitted  to  give  evidence  against  the  partners
sf  his  crime.

Tenderness  to  the  prisoner,  although  a  specious
•nolegy  for  concealment,  is  no  just  excuse :  for
■  this  plea  he  thought  sufficient,  it  takes  the  ad-
mbnstxation  of  penal  justice  out  of  the  hands  of
!»!*■  *nd  juries,  and  makes  it  depend  upon  the
~r  of  prosecutors  and  witnesses.

ns  may  be  asked,  which  are  irrelative

e,  which  affect  the  witness  himself,-  or

third  person; in  which,  and  in  all  cases

the  witness  doubts  of  the  pertinency  and

of  the  question,  he  ought  to  refer  his

to  the  court. The  answer  of  the  court,  in

on  of  the  oath,  is  authority  enough  to  the

J  for  the  law  which  imposes  the  oath,  may


to  the*


doubts  to


remit  what  it  will  of  the  obligation :  and  it  be-
longs to  the  court  to  declare  what  the  mind  of  the
law  is.  Nevertheless,  it  cannot  be  said  universally,
that  the  answer  of  the  court  is  conclusive  upon  the
conscience  of  the  witness ;  for  his  obligation,  de-
pends upon  what  he  apprehended,  at  the  time  of
taking  the  oath,  to  be  the  design  of  the  law  in
imposing  it,  and  no  after-requisvion  or  explana-
tion by  the  court  can  carry  the  obligation  beyond


CHAPTER  XVin.
Oath  of  Allegiance.

"  I  do  sincerely  promise  and  swear,  that  I  will
be  faithful,  and  bear  true  allegiance  to  his  Ma-
jesty King  George."  Formerly  the  oath  of  al-
legiance ran  thus :  "  I  do  promise  to  be  true  and
faithful,  to  the  king  and  his  heirs,  and  truth  and
faith  to  bear,  of  life,  and  limb,  and  terrene  honour;
and  not  to  know  or  hear  of  any  .ill  or  damage  in-
tended him,  without  defending  him  therefrom :"
and  was  altered  at  the  Revolution  to  the  present
form.  So  that  the  present  oath  is  a  relaxation  of
the  old  one.  And  as  the  oath  was  intended  to
ascertain,  not  so  much  the  extent  of  the  subjects
obedience,  as  the  person  to  whom  it  was  due,  the
legislature  seems  to  have  wrapped  up  its  meaning
upon  the  former  point,  in  a  word  purposely  made
choice  of  for  its  general  and  indeterminate  sig-
nification.

It  will  bo  most  convenient  to  consider,  first,
what  the  oath  excludes  as  inconsistent  with  it;
secondly,' what  it  permits.

1.  The  oath  excludes  all  intention  to  support
the  claim  or  pretensions  of  any  other  person  or
persons  to  the  crown  and  government,  than  the
reignim?  sovereign.  A  Jacobite,  who  is  persuaded
of  the  Pretender's  right  to  the  crown,  and  who
moreover  designs  to  join  with  the  adherents  to
that  cause  to  assert  this  right,  whenever  a  proper
opportunity,  with  a  reasonable  prospect  of  suc-
cess, presents  itself,  cannot  take  the  oath  of  al-
legiance ;  or,  if  he  could,  the  oath  of  abjuration
follows,  which  contains  an  express  renunciation
of  all  opinions  in  favour  of  the  claim  pf  the  exiled
family.

2.  The  oath  excludes  all  design,  at  the  time,
of  attempting  to  depose  the  reigning  prince,  for
any  reason  whatever.  .Let  the  justice  of  the
Revolution  be  what  it  would,  no  honest  man
could  have  taken  even  the  present  oath  of  alle-
giance to  James  the  Second,  who  entertained,  at
the  time  of  taking  it,  a 'design  of  joining  in  the
measures  which  were  entered  into  to  dethrone  him.

3.  The  oath*  forbids  the  taking  up  of  arms
against  the  reigning  prince,  with,  views  of  private
advancement,  or  from  motives  of  personal  resent-
ment or  dislike.  It  is  possible  to  happen  in  this,
what  frequently  happens  in  despotic  governments,
that  an  ambitious  general,  at  the  head  of  the  mili-
tary force  of  the  nation,  might,  by  a  conjuncture
of  fortunate  circumstances,  and  a  great  assendency
over  the  minds  of  the  soldiery,  depose  the  prince
upon  the  throne,  and  make  way  to  it  for  himself,
or  for  some  creature  of  his  own.  A  person  in  this
situation  would  be  withholtlen  from  such  an  at-
tempt by  the  oath  of  allegiance,  if  he  paid  regard
to  it.  If  there  were  any  who  engaged  in  the  re-
bellion of  the  year  forty-five,  with  the  expectation
of* titles,  estates,  or  preferment;  or  because  thej

6


63


MORAL  AND  POLITICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


were  disappointed,  and  thought  themselves  ne-
glected and  ill-used  at  court;  or  because  they
entertained  a  family  animosity,  or  personal  resent-
ment, against  the  king,  the  favourite,  or  the  minis-
ter;-—iT  any  were  induced  to  take  up  arms  by
these  motive*,  they  added  to  the  many  crimes  of
an  unprovoked  rebellion,  that  of  wilful  and  cor-
rupt perjury.  If,  in  the  late  American  war,  the
same  motives  determined  others  to  connect  them-
selves with  that  opposition,  their  part  in  it  was
chargeable  with  perfidy  and  folsehood  to  their  oath,
whatever  was  the  justice  of  the  opposition  itself,
or  however  well-rounded  their  own  complaints
might  be  of  private  injury.

We  are  next  to  consider  what  the  oath  of  al-
legiance permits,  or  does  not  require.

I.  It  permits  resistance  to  the  king,  when  his
ill  behaviour  or  imbecility  is  such,  as  to  make  re-
sistance beneficial  to  the  community .  It  may  fairly
fie  presumed  that  the  Convention  Parliament
which  introduced  the  oath  in  its  present  form,  did
not  intend,  by  imposing  it,  to  exclude  all  resist-
ance, since  tne  members -of  that  legislature  had,
many  of  them,  recently  taken  up  arms  against
James  the  Second,  and  the  very  authority  by
which  they  sat  together  was  itself  the  effect  of  a
successful  opposition  to  an  acknowledged  sove-
reign. Some  resistance,  therefore,  was  meant  to
be  allowed;  and,  if  any,  it  must  be  that  which
has  the  public  interest  for  its  object

9.  The  oath  does  not  require  obedience  to  such
commands  of  the  king  as  are  unauthorized  by  law.
No  such  obedience  is  implied,  by  the  terms  of  the
oath;  the  fidelity  there  promised,  is  intended  of
fidelity  in  opposition  to  nas  enemies,  and  not  in
Opposition  to  law;  and  allegiance,  at  the  utmost,
can  only  signify  obedience  to  lawful  commands.
Therefore,  if  the  king  should  issue  a  proclama-
tion, levying  money,  or  imposing  any  service  or
restraint  upon  the  subject  beyondwhat  the  crown
is  empowered  by  law  to  enjoin,  there  would  exist  no
sort  of  obligation  to  obey  such  a  proclamation,  in
fjonsequence  of  having  taken  the  oath  of  allegiance.

3.  The  oath  does  not  require  that  we  should
continue  our  allegiance  to  the  king,  after  he  is
actually  and  absolutely  deposed,  driven  into  exile,
carried  away  captive,  or  otherwise  rendered  in-
capable of  exercising  the  regal  office,  whether  by
his  fault  or  without  it  The  promise  of  allegiance
implies,  and  is  understood  by  ail  parties  to  sup-
pose, that  the  person  to  whom  tne  promise  is
made,  continues  king ;  continues,  that  is,  to  ex-
ercise the  power,  and  afford  the  protection  which
belongs  to  the  office  of  king :  lor,  it  is  the  pos-
session of  this  power,  which  makes  such  a  par-
ticular person  the  object  of  the  oath ;  without  it,
why  should  I  swear  allegiance  to  this  man,  ra-
ther than  to  any  man  in  the  kingdom  ?  Beside
which,  the  contrary  doctrine  is  burthened'  with
this  consequence,  that  every  conquest  revolution
of  government,  or  disaster  which  bends  the  per-
son of  the  prince,  must  be  followed'  by  perpetual
and  irremediable  anarchy.


CHAPTER  XIX.

Oath  against  Bribery  in  the  Election  of  Mem-
bers of  Parliament.

V I  no  swear,  1  have  not  received,  or  had,  I  my-
self, or  any  person  whatsoever,  in  trust  for  me,  or


for  my  use  and  benefit,  directly  or  indirectly,  any
sum  or  sums  of  money,  office,  place,  or.  employ-
ment, gift  or  reward,  or  any  promise  or  security,
for  any  money,  office,  employment,  or  gift,  in  or-
der to  give  my  vote  at  this  election."

The  several  contrivances  to  evade  this  oath,
such  as  the  electors  accepting  money  under  colour
of  borrowing  it,  and  giving  a  promissory  note,  or
other  security,  for  it,  which  is  cancelled  after  the
election;  receiving  money  from  a  stranger,  or  a
person  in  disguise,  or  out  of  a  drawer,  or  purse,
left  open  for  tne  purpose ;  or  promises  of  money
to  be  paid  after  the  election;  or  stipulating  for  a
place,  living,  or  other  private  advantage  of  any
kind ;  if  they  escape  the  legal  penalties  or  perjury,
incur  the  moral  guilt;  for  they  are  rnaniiesuy
within  the  mischief  and  design  of  the  statute
which  imposes  the  oath,  and  within  the  terms  in-
deed of  the  oath  itself ;  for  the  word  "indirectly*
is  inserted  on  purpose  to  comprehend  such  eases
as  these.


CHAPTER  XX.
Oath  against  Simony,


From  ai

the  purchase  of  a  "oenence,  and  Simon  Magus's
attempt  to  purchase  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost,
(Acts  vm.  19,)  the  obtaining  of  eorJfsaasncsl  pre-
ferment by  pecuniary  considerations  has  been
termed  Simony.

The  sale  of  advowsons  is  inseparable  from
the  allowance  of  private  patronage ;  as  patronage
would  otherwise  devolve  to  the  most  indigent,  and
for  that  reason  the  most  improper  hands  it  could
be  placed  in.  Nor  did  the  law  ever  intend  to  pro-
hibit the  passing  of  advowsons  from  one  patron
to  another;  but  to  restrain  the  patron,  who  pos-
sesses the  right  of  presenting  at  the  vacancy,
from  being  influenced,  in  the  choice  of  his  presen-
tee, by  a  bribe,  or  benefit  to  himself.  It  is  the  same
distinction  with  that  which  obtains  in  a  free-
holder's vote  for  bis  representative  in  parliament
The  right  of  voting,  that  is,  the  freehold  to  which
the  right  pertains,  may  be  bought  and  sold  as
freely  as  any  other  property;  but  the  exercise
of  mat  right  the  vote  itseb*  may  not  be  pur-
chased, or  influenced  by  money.

For  this  purpose,  tne  law  imposes  upon  the
presentee,  who  is  generally  concerned  in  the  si-
mony, if  there  be  any,  the  following  oath :  M I  do
swear,  that  I  have  made  no  sinumiaccU  payment,
contract,  or  promise,  directly  or  indirectly,  by  my-
self, or  by  any  other  to  my  knowledge,  or  with  my
consent,  to  any  person  or  persons  whatsoever,  for
or  concerning  the  procuring  and  obtaining  of  this
ecclesiastical  place,  e\c. :  nor  will,  at  any  tune  here-
after, perform,  or  satisfy ;  any  such  kind  of  pay-
ment, contract,  or  promise,  made  by* any  other
without  my  knowledge  or  consent:  so  help  me
God,  through  Jesus  Christ !"

It  is  extraordinary  that  Bishop  Gtihson  should
have  thought  this  oath  to  be  against  all  promises
whatsoever,  when  the  terms  of  the  oath  expressly
restrain  it  to  nmontacal  promises  \  and  tne  law
alone  must  pronounce  what  promises,  an  well  as
what  payments  and  contracts,  are  simoniacal,  and
consequently  come  within  the  oath;  and  what  do
not  so.

Now  the  law  adjudges  to  be  simony,


SUBSCRIPTION  TO  ARTICLES  OP  RELIGION,


I.  AA  -payment*,  contracts,  or
any  person  lor  a  benefice


She"


demode
y  vacant.
i  of  a  ▼oid  turn,  by  law,  cannot  be
transferred  from  one  patron  to  another;  there-
Ion,  if  the  -rod  torn  be  procured  by  money,  it
moat  be  bye  pecuniary  influence  upon  the  then
*&+*v*&  patron  in  the  choice  of  nis  presentee,
which  is  the  'very  practice  the  law  condemns.

%.  A  clergyman's  purchasing  of  the  next  turn
fcr  a  henence./br  himself,  "  directly  or  indirectly,"
tint  is,  by  himself,  or  by  another  person  with  nis
aeney.  ft  does  not  appear  that  the  law  prohibits
a  clergyman  from  purchasing  the  perpetuity  of
a  patronage,  more  than  any  other  person:  but  pur-
chasing the  perpetuity!  and  forthwith  selling  it
asm  with  the  reservation  of  the  next  turn,  and
wan  no- "Otter  design  than  to  possess  himself  of
the  next  torn,  ta  tnjramdem,  legit f  and  inconsis-
tent with  the  oath.

3.  The  procuring  of  a  piece  of  prejerment,  by
eafing  to  the  patron  any  rights,  or  probable  rights,
belonging  to  it.  This  is  simony  of  the  worst  kino";
far  it  is  not  only  baying  preferment,  but  robbing
the  sueeeanoa  to  pay  far  it.

4.  PraniMMs  to  the  nation  of  a  portion  of  the
p*ofit,of  a  iniiammnn  of  tithes  and  dues,  at  other
Mt  of  the  produce  of  the  benefice;
I  of  compact  is  a  pernicious  conde-
in  the  clergy ,  independent  of  the  oath ;
far  it  aends  to  introduce  a  practice,  which  nary
way  aeon  become  general,  of  giving  the  revenue
of  churches  to  the  lay  patrons,  and  supplying  the

d  General  bonds  of  resignation,  4hat  is,  bonds


I  doubt  not  but  that  the  oath  against  simony  is
aiaamgnpan  the  consciences  of  those  who  take
it^thoiaA  I^oncstion  much  the  expediency  of  re-
qummgit.  It  is  very  fit  to  debar  public  patrons,
such  as  the  lung,  the  lord  chancellor,  bishops,  ec-
caassstical  corporations,  and  the  like,  from  this
kind  of  traffic:  because  from  them  may  be  ex-
regard  to  the  qualifications  of  the

, i  whom  they  promote. But  the  oath  lays

a  anus  far  the  integrity  of* the  clergy;  and  I  do
— — ,  that  tEe  requiring  of  it  in  cases  of
produces  any  good  effect  suf-
ite  far  this  danger.  -
Where  advowsons  are  holden  along  with  ma-
principal  estates,  it  would  be  an  easy
fcrbid  that  they  should  ever  hereafter
;  and  would,  at  least,  keep  church-
out  of  the  hands  of  brokers.


CHAPTER  XXI.
Oaths  to  Observe  Local  Statutes.


i  of  colleges  in  the  Universities,  and
of  other  ancient  foundations,  are  required  to  swear
to  the  shorn  nance  of  their  respective  statutes;
which  observance  is  become  in  some  cases  un-
srwmf,  in  others  impracticable,  in  others  useless,


Unlawful  directions  are  countermanded  by  the
r  which  made  them  unlawful.

directions  are  dispensed  with  by

/of  the  case.

The  onhr  question  is,  how  far  the  members  of

these  sorhiirs  may  take  upon  themselves  to  judge

•f  the  momwenkney  of  any  particular  direction ,


and  make  that  a  reason  far  laying  aside  the  ob-
servation of  it \

The  animus  imponentis,  which  is  the  mea-
sure of  the  juror's  duty,  seems  to  be  satisfied,
when  nothing  is  omitted,  but  what,  from  some
change  in  the  circumstances  under  which  it  was
prescribed,  it  may  fairly  be  presumed  that  the
founder  himself  would  have  dispensed  with.

To  bring  a  case  within  this  rule,  the  incenve-
niency  must —

1.  Be  manifest;  concerning  which  there  is  no
doubt.

2.  It  must  arise  from  some  change  in  the  cir-
cumstances of  the  institution :  far,  let  the  inoon-
veniency  be  what  it  will,  if  it  existed  at  the  time
of  the  foundation,  it  must  be  presumed  that  the
founder  did  not  deem  the  avoiding  of  it  of  suf-
ficient importance  to  alter  his  plan.  »

3.  The  direction  of  the  statute  must  not  only
be  inconvenient  in  the  general  (for  so  may  the
institution  itself  be,)  but  prejudicial  to  the  particu-
lar end  proposed  by  the  institution:  for,  it  is  this
last  circumstance  which  proves  that  the  founder
would  have  dispensed  with  it  in  pursuance  of  his
own  purpose.

The  statutes  of  some  colleges  forbid  the  speak-
ing of  any  language  but  Latin,  within  the  walls
of  the  college ;  direct  that  a  certain  number,  and
not  fewer  than  that  number,  be  allowed  the  use  of
an  apartment  amongst  them;  that  so  many  hours
of  each  day  be  employed  in  public  exercises,  lec-
tures, or  disputations;  and  some  other  articles  of
dw.jpJirM»  aaapted  to  the  tender  years  of  the  stu-
dents who  in  former  times  resorted  to  universi-
ties. Were  colleges  to  retain  such  rules,  nobody
now-e-days  would  come  near  them.  They  are
laid  aside  therefore,  though  parts  of  the  statutes,
and  as  such  included  within  the  oath,  not  merely
because  they  are  inconvenient,  but  because  there
is  sufficient  reason  to  believe,  that  the  founders
themselves  would  have  dispensed  with  them,  as
subversive  of  then*  own  designs.


CHAPTER  XXII.
Subscription  to  Article*  of  Religion.

Subscription  to  articles  of  reUnon,  though  no  '
monrthan  a  declaration  of  the  subscriber's  assent,
may  properly  enough  be  considered  in  connexion
with  the  subject  of  oaths,  because  it  is  governed
by  the  same  rule  of  interpretation :

Which  rule  is  the  animus  imponenlis.

The  inquiry,  therefore1,  concerning  subscription,
will  be,  quia  imposuit,  et  quo  animo  ?

The  bishop  who  receives  the  subscription,  is
not  the  imposer,  any  more  than  the  crier  of  a  court,
who  administers  the  oath  to  the  jury  and  wit-
nesses, is  the  person  that  imposes  it;  nor,  conse-
auentlv,  is  the  private  opinion  or  interpretation  of
le  bishop  of  any  signification  to  the  subscriber
one  way  or  other.

The  compilenof  the  Thirty-nine  Articles  are
not  to  be  considered  as  the  imposers  of  subscrip-
tion, any  more  than  the  framer  or  drawer  Up  of  a
law  is  tne  person  that  enacts  it.

The  legislature  of  the  13th  Eliz.  is  the  im-
poser, whose  intention  the  subscriber  .is  bound  to
satisfy.

They  who  contend,  that  nothing  less  can  jus-
tify subscription  to  the  Thirty-nine  Articles!  than


64


MORAL  AND  POLITICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


the  actual  belief  of  each  and  every  separate  pro-
position contained  in  them,  must  suppose,  that  the
legislature  expected  the  consent  of  ten  thousand
men,  and  that  in  perpetual  succession,  not  to  one
controverted  proposition,  but  to  many  hundreds.
It  is  difficult  to  conceive  how  thia  could  be  ex-
pected by  any,  who  observed  the  incurable  diver-
sity of  human  opinion  upon  all  subjects  short  of
demonstration.

If  the  authors  of  the  law  did  pot  intend  this,
what  did  they  intend  ?

They  intended  to  exclude  from  offices  in-  the
church,

1.  All  abettors  of  popery:

2.  Anabaptists;  who  were  at  that  time  a  pow-
erful party  on  the  Continent.

3.'  The  puritans;  who  were  hostile  to  an  epis-
copal constitution :  and  in  general  the  members
of  such'  leading  sects  or  foreign  establishments  as
threatened  to  overthrow  our  own.

Whoever  finds  himself  comprehended  within
these  descriptions,  ought  not  to  subscribe.  Nor
can  a  subscriber  to  the  Articles  take  advantage  of
any  latitude  which  our  rule  may  seem  to  allow,
who  is  not  first  convinced  that  he  is  truly  and
substantially  satisfying  the  intention  of  the  legis-
lature.

During  the  present  state  of  ecclesiastical  pa-
tronage, m  which  private  individuals  are  per-
mitted to  impose  teachers  upon  parishes  with
which  they  are  often  little  or  not  at  all  connected,
some  limitation  of  the  patron's  choice  may  be  ne-
cessary to  prevent  Uneuifying  contentions  between
neighbouring  teachers,  or  between  the  teachers,
and  their  respective  congregations.  But  this
danger,  if  it  exist,  may  be  provided  against  with
equal  effect,  by  converting  the  articles  of  faith
into  articles  of  peace!


CHAPTER  XXni.
Wills.

The  fundamental  Question  upon  this  subject  is,
whether  Wills  are  of  natural  or  of  adventitious
right?  that  is,  whether  the  right  of  directing  the
disposition  of  property  after  his  death  belongs  to
a  man  in  a  state  of  nature,  and  by  the  law  of  na-
ture, or  whether  it  be  riven  him  entirely  by  the
positive  regulations  of  the  country  he  lives  in  ?

The  immediate  produce  of  each  man's  personal
labour,  as  the  tools,  weapons,  and  utensils,  which
he  manufactures,  the  tent  or  hut  that  be  builds,
and  perhaps  the  flocks  and  herds  which  he  breeds
and  rears,  are  as  much  his  own  as  the  labour  was
which  he  employed  upon  them ;  that  is,  are  his
property  naturally  and  absolutely;  and  conse-
quently he  may  give  or  leave  them  to  whom  he
pleases,  there  being  nothing  to  limit  the  con-
tinuance of  his  right,  or  to  restrain  the  alienation
of  it.

But  every  other  species  of  property,  especially
property  in  land,  stands  upon  a  different  founda-
tion.

We  have  seen,  in  the  Chapter  upon  Property,
that,  in  a  state  of  nature,  a  man's  right  to  a  par-
ticular spot  j»f  ground  arises  from  bis  using  it  and
his  wanting  it;  consequently  ceases  with  the  use
and  want :  so  that  at  his  death  tiie  estate  reverts
*to  the  community,  without  any  regard  to  the  last
owner's  will,  or  even  any  preference  of  his  family,


further  than  as  they  become  the  first  <
after  him,  and  succeed  to  the  same  want  a

Moreover,  as  natural  rights  cannot,  like  rights
created  by  act  of  parliament,  expire  at  the  end  of
a  certain  number  of  years ;  if  tne  testator  have  a
right,  by  the  law  of  nature,  to  dispose  of  his
property  one  moment  after  his  death,  he  has  the
same  right  to  direct  the  disposition  of  it  for  a  mil-
lion of  ages  after  him :  which  is  absurd.

The  ancient  apprehensions  of  mankind  upon
the  subject  wera  conformable  to  this  accountof  it:
for,  wills  have  been  introduced  into  most  coun-
tries by  a  positive  act  of  the  state  ;«s  by  the  Laws
of  Solon  into  Greece;  by  the  Twelve  Tables
into  Rome ;  and  that  not  till  after  a  considerable
progress  had  been  made  in  legislation,  and  in
the  economy  of  civil  life.  Tacitus  relates,  that
amongst  the  Germans  they  were  disallowed ;  and
what  is  more  remarkable,  in  this  ♦  country,  since
the  Conauest,  lands  could  not  be  devised  by  will,
till  within  little  more  than  two  hundred  years
agOj  when  this  privilege  was  restored  to  the
subject,  by  an  act  of  parliament,  in  the  latter  end
of  the  reign  of  Henry  the  Eighth.

No  doubt,  many  beneficial  purposes  are  at-
tained by  extending  the  owner  s  power-  over  his
property  beyond  his  life,  and  beyond  his  natural
right.  It  invites  to  industry ;  it  encourages  mar-
riage ;  it  secures  the  dutifulness  and  dependency
of  children :  but  a  limit  must  be  assigned  to  the
duration  of  this  power.-  The  utmost  extent  to
which,  in  any  case,  entails  are  allowed  by  the
laws  of  England  to  operate,  is  during  the  lives  in
existence  at  the  death  of  the  testator,  and  one-and-
twenty  years  beyond  these;  after  .which, -there
are  ways  and  means  of  setting  them  aside.

From  the  consideration  that  wills  are  the  crea-
tures of  the  municipal  law  which  gives  theni  their
efficacy,  may  be  deduced  a  determination  of  the
question,  whether  the  intention  of  the  testator  in
an  informal  will,  be  binding  upon  the  conscience
of  those,  who,  by  operation  of  law,  succeed  to  his
estate.  By  an  informal  will,  I  mean  a  will  void  in
law  for  want  of  some  requisite  formality,  though
no  doubt  be  entertained  of  its  meaning  or  authen-
ticity: as,  suppose  a  man  make  his  will,  devising
his  freehold  estate  to  his  sister's  eon,  and  the
will  be  attested  by  two  only,  instead  of  three,  sub-
scribing witnesses:  would  the  brother's  son,  who
is  heir  at  law  to  the  testator,  be  bound  in  con-
science to  resign  his  claim  to  the  estate,  out  of
deference  to  his  uncle's  intention  1  or,  on  the  con-
trary, would  not  the  devisee  under  the  will  be
bound,  upon  discovery  of  this  flaw  in  it,  to  sur-
render the  estate,  suppose  he  hsjfl  gained  posses-
sion of  ity  to  the  heir  at  law  1

Generally  speaking,  the  heir  at  law  is  not  bound
by  the  intention  of  the  testator :  for  the  intention
can  signify  nothing,  unless  the  person  intending
have  a  right  to  govern  the  descent  of  the  estate.
That  is  tne  first  question.  Now  this  right  the
testator  can  only  derive  from  the  law  of  the  land:
but  the  law  confers  the  right  upon  certain  con-
ditions, with  which  conditions  he  has  not  com-
plied ;  therefore,  the  testator  can  lay  no  chum  to
the  power  which  he  pretends  to  exercise,  as  he
hath  not  entitled  himself  to  the  benefit  *of  that
law,  by  virtue  of  which  alone  the  estate  ought  to
attend  his  disposal.  Consequently,  the  devisee
under  the  will,  who,  by  concealing  this  flaw  in  it,
keeps  possession  of  the  estate,  is  in  the  situation
of  any  other  person -who  avails  himself  *  of  his


W1U-S.


ft


nogfchcHgVignfliyHre  to  detain  from  him  his  pro-
perty. The  will  k  so  nnach  WB8t&~papef,  from  the
defect  of  right  in  the  person  who  made  it  Nor  is
this  catching  at  an  exxvession  of  law  to  pervert  the
substantial  design  of  it :  'for  I  apprehend  it  to  be
thefeiitegBte  mind  of  the  legislature,  that  no  will
should  take  effect  upon  real  estates,  unless  au-
thenticated in  thejpnjcwe  manner  which'  the  sta-
tute describes.  Had  testamentary  dispositions
been  founded  rin  any  natural  Tight,  independent
of  pqsinve  constitotions'I  tshouftf  have  thought
dUfereully  of  this  question :  fijr  then  I  should  have
oouadered  the  law  rather  aa  refusing  its  assistance
to  enforce  the  right  of  the  devisee,  than  as  ex-
I  or  working  any  alteration  in  the  right


/Lnd  after  aB,  I  should  choose  to  propose  a
esse,  where  no  consideration  of  pity  to  distress,
of  (hay  to  a  parent,  orof  gratitude  to  a  benefactor,
izterfered  with  the  general  rule  of  justice.  -

The  regard  due  to  'kindred  in  the  disposal  of
ear  fortune  (except  th/e  case  of  lineal  kindred,
winch  is  different)  arises  either  from  the  respect
we  owe  to  the  presumed  intention  of  the  ancestor
from  whom  we  received  our  fortunes,  or  from  the
ions  which  we  have  encouraged.'  The
i  of  the  ancestor  is  presumed  with  greater
T,  as  well  as  entitled  to  more  respect,  the
(egreea  he  k  removed  from  us.;  which
I  the  difference  in  the  different  degrees  of
ad.  For  instance,  it  may  be  presumed  to  be
a  fother*s  mtention  and  desire,  that  the  inheritance
winch  he  leaves,  after  it  has  served  the  turn  and
■im  i  alii  m  of  one  son,  should  remain  a  provision
vsr  the  *"»4K**  of  his  other  children,  equally,  re-
lated and  dear  to  him  as  the  oldest  Whoever,
thetease,  without  cause,  gives  away  his  patrimony
from  his  brothel's  or  sister's  family,  is  guilty  not
so  much  of.  an  injury  to  them,  as  of  ingratitude
to  his  parent.  The  deference  due  from  the  poe-
r  of  a  fortune  to  the  nresumed  desire  of  his
*  r,  will  also  vary  with  this  circumstance :
the  ancestor  earned  the  fortune  by  his'
,  industry,  acquired  it  by  accidental  sue-  <
.or  only  transmitted  ,the  inheritance  which
■e  naeerveu.

When  a  man's  fortune  is  acquired  by' himself,
and  he  has  done  nothing  to  excite  expectation,
ar  has  refrained  from,  those  particular
i  which  ten4  to  cherish  expectation,  he
"  r  disengaged  from  the  force  of  the  above
ad  at  UDerty  to  leave  his  fortune  to  his
/to  charitable  or  public  purposes,  or  to

he  will: the  same  Mood*  proximity  of

bjoeo*  and  the  like,  am  merely  modes  of  speech,
hsprying  nothing  real,  nor  any  obligation  pf  them-
selves.
There  is  always,  however,  a  reason  for  pro-
~"  for  our  poor  relations,  in  preference  to
_  who  may  ne  equally  necessitous,  which  is,
if  we  do  not,  no  one  else  will:  mankind,
m  catshfiffKrd  consent,  -leaving  the  reduced
daas  of  good  famines  to  the  bounty  of  their


The  not  making  -a  will,  is  a  very  culpable

i,  where  it  is  attended  with  the  following

where  it  leaves  daughters,  or  younger

raaVlirn,  at  the  mercy  of  the  oldest  son;  where  it

es  a  personarfiptune  equally  amongst  the

,  although  there  be  no  equality  in  their

■  or  sta&iis;  where  it  leaves  an  open-

fasf  fitisjslfcfr;  or  lasthr,  and  principally,  where


nts:  not  to  mention
ly  of  collateral  kin-


foundation  in  the,,  laws


it  defrauds  creditors^  for,  by  a  defect  in  our  laws,
which  has  been  long  and  strangely  overlooked,
real  estates  tire  not  subject -to  the  payment  o?
debts  by -simple  contract,  unless  made  so  by  will;
although  credit  is,  in  fact/generally  given  to  the
^possession  of  such  estates :  he,  therefore,  who'ne-
glects  to  niake  the  necessary  appointments' for  the
payment  of  his  debts,  as  for  as  ins  effects  extend,
sins,  as  it  has  been  justly  said,  in  his  grave ;  ana
if  he  omits  this  on  purpose  to  defeat  the  demands
of  his  creditors,  he  dies  with  a  deliberate  fraud  in
his  heart.  -

Anciently,  when  any  one  died  without  a  wiB,
the  bishop  of  the  diocese  took  possession  of  his
personal  fortune,!  in  order  to  dispose  of  it  for  the
benefit  of  his  soul,  that  is,  to  pious  or  charitable
uses.  It' became  necessary,  therefore,  that  the
bishop  should  be  satisfied  of  the  authenticity  of
the  will,  when  there  was  any,  before  he  resigned
the  right  which  he  had  to  take  possession  of  the
dead  man's  fortune  in  case  of  intestacy.  In  this
way  wills  and 'controversies  relating  to  wills,  came
within  the  cognizance  of  ecclesiastical  courts-';  un-
der the  jurisdiction  of  winch,  wills  of  personals
(the  only  will*  that  were  made  formerly)  still  con-
tinue, though  in  .truth,  no  more  now-a-days  con-
nected with  religion,  than  any  other  instruments
of  conveyance.  This  is  a.peculiarity  in  the  En*
glish  lawB.  %

Succession  to  intestates  mast  be  regulated  by
positive  rules  of 'law,  there  being  no  principle  of
natural  justice  whereby  to  ascertain  (he.propor*


tion  of  the  different

that  t|ie  claim  itself,  esi

dred,  seems  to  have  littl

of  nature.  ' .*

These  regulations  should  be  guided  by  the  duty
and  presumed  inclination  of  the  deceased,~so  far  as
these  considerations  can  be  consulted  by  general
rules.  The  statutes  of  Charles  the  Second,  com-
monly called  the  Statutes  of  Distribution,  Which
adopt  the  rules  6(  the  Roman  law  in  the  dis-
tribution of  personals,  are  sufficiently  equitable.
They  assign  one-third  to  the  wjdow,  and  two-
thirds  to  the  children ;  in  case  of  no  children,  one
half  to  the  widow,  and  the  other  half  to  the  next  of
kin ;  where  neither  widow  nor  lineal  descendants
survive,  the" whole*  to  the  next  of  kin,  and  to  be
equally  divided  amongst  kindred  of  equal  degree,
without  distinction  of  wholefood  and  half  blood,
or  df  consanguinity  by  the  father's  or  mother's
side.

The  descent  of  real '  estates{  of  houses,  that  is.
and  land,. havings  been  settled  in  more  remote  ana
in  ruder  times,  is  less,  reasonable.  There  never
can  be  much  to  complain  of  in  a  rule  whicfr  every
person  may  Avoid,  by  so  easy  a  provision  as  that
of  making  his  will :  otherwise,  our  law  m  thiare-
.spect  ib  chargeable  with  some  flagrant  absurdities;
such  as,  that  an  estate  shall  in  no-wise  go  to  the
"brother  or  sister  of  the  half  blood,  though  it  came
to  the  deceased  from  the  common  parent ;  that  it
shall  go  to  the' remotest  .relation  the  intestate  has
in  the  world,  rather  than  to  his  own  father  or
mother;  or  even  be  forfeited  for  want  of  an  heir,
though  both  parents  survive ;  that  the  most  dis-
tant paternal  relation  shall  be  preferred  to  an  un-
cle, or  own  cousin,  Vy  the  mother's  side,  notwith-
standing the  estate  was*  purchased  and  acquired
by  the  intestate  himself.
-  Land  not  being  so^divisjble  as  money,  may  be  a
reason  for  making  a  difference  in  the  course  or
6*


66


MORAL  AND  POLITICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


inheritances  tat  there  ought  to  be  no  dlflerence
bui  what  is  fbunbW  upon  tWjeason."  TheRo-
jnan  law  made  none.  *  >


BOOK  III.


PARTIL,

Of  ULAXIVJ5  DUTIES  WHICH  A|tB  HfDETHK-
MINAT&


CHAPTER  I.

Charity.

I  use  ihe  term  Charity  neither  in  ihe  common
sense  -of  bounty  to  the  poo*,  nor  in  St.  Paul's
sense  of  benevolence  to  all  mankind :  but  I  apply
it  atpreaent,  in  a  sense  mom  commodious  to  .my
purpose,  to  signify  the  promoting  the  happjhcss
«/  our  in/biori.

Charity,  in  this  sense,  I  take  to  he  the  princi-
pal nonnce  of  virtus  and  religion:  fb^  whilst
worldly  prudence  wiH  direct  our  behaviour  to-
wards  our  superiors,  and  politeness  towards  our
equals,  there  is  little  beside  the  consideration  of
duty,  or  an  habitual  humanity  which  comes  into
the  place'  of  consideration,'  to  produce  a  proper
conduct"  towards  those  who  are  beneath  us,  and
dependant  upon  us.

There  are  three  principal  methods  of  promoting
the  happiness  of  our  inferiors.

1.  By  (he  treatment  of  our  domestics  and  de-
pendants.

%  ?y  professional  assistance,
7  &  By  pecuniary  bounty*


, / f. CHAPTER  H. -
-  Charity.

THB  TREATMENT OP OUR  DOMEStlCI AMD  DB-

, ' .  PENDANTS.

A  party  of  friends  setting  out  together  upon
a  journey,  ^soon  find  it  to  be  the  best  for  all  aides,
'  that  whue  they  are  upon  the  road,  one  of  the  com-
pany should  wait  upon  the  rest ;  another  ride  for-
ward to  see.):  out  lodging  and  entertainment;  a
third  carry  the  portmanteau ;  a  fourth  take  charge
of  the  horses  ;"a  fifth  bear  the  purse,  conduct  and
direct  the/route ;  not  forgetting,  however,  that,  as
they  were  equal  and  mofependent  when  they  set
outj  so  they  are  all  to  return .  to  a  level  again  at
x  then*  journey's  end.  The  same  regard  and  re-
,  spect ;  the  same  forbearance,  lenity,  and  Reserve
\in  using  their  service ;  the  same  mildness  in  de-
livering commands ;  the  same  study  to  make  their
journey  comfortable  and  pleasant,  which  he  whose
[lot  it-was  to  direct  the,  rest,  woufd  in  common
decency  think  himself  bound  to  observe  towards
them;  ought 'we  to  show  to  those  who,  in  the
casting  of  the  parts  ef  human  society,  happen  to
.be  plsced  within  our  power,  or  to  depend  upon  us.
Anotipr  reflection,  of  a  like  tendency  with  the


farmer  is,  that  our  obligation- to  than  is  much
greater  than  theirs  to  us.  It  is  a  mistake  to  sup-
pose, that  the  rich  man  maintains  his  servants,
tradesmen,  tenants,  and.  labourers :  the  truth  is,
they  maintain  him.  It  is  their  industry  which
supplies  his  table,  furnishes  his  wardrobe,  builds
his  houses,  adorns  his  equipage,  provides  his
amusements.  It  is  not  the  estate,  butane  labour
employed  upon  it,  that  pays  his  rent  AJJi  that  he
does,  is  to  distribute  what  others.proihice  ;  which
is  the  least  part  of  the  business.

Nor  do  I  perceive  any  foundation  for  an  opinion,
which  is  often  handed  round  in  genteel  company. .
that  good  usage  is  thrown  away  upon  low  ana
ordinary  minds;  that  they  are  insensible  of  kind-
ness, and  incapable  of  gratitude.  If  by  "  low  and
ordinary  minds"  are  meant  the  minds  ef  men  in
low  and  ordinary  stations,  they  seem  to  he  affect-
ed by  benefits  in  the  same  way  that  aA  others  are,
and  to  be  no  less  ready  To  requite  them:  and  it
would  be  a  very  unaccountable  law  of  nature  if  it
were  otherwise.

m  Whatever  uneasiness  we  occasion  to  our  domes*
ticSi  wjiich  neither  promotes  our  service,  hor  an-
swers the  just  ends  of  punishment,  is  mahifesUy
wrong ;  were  it  only  upon  the  general  principle
of  diminishing  the  sum  of  human  happiness).

By  which  rule  we  are.  forbidden,

1.  To  enjoin  unnecessary  labour  or  confine-
merit  from  the  mere  love  and  wantonness  of  domi-
nation.

2.  To  insult  our  servants  by  harsh^  scornful,  or
opprobrious  language.

i.  To  refuse  them' any  harmless  pleasures.

And,  by  the  same  principle,  are  also  forbidden
causeless  or  immoderate  anger,  hnhjtiin]  peevish-
ness, and  groundless  suspicion.


CHAPTER  HL ^
• Slavery.  ^

Tbb  prohibitions  of  the  last  chapter  extend  to
the  treatment  of  slaves,  being  founded  upon  a
principle  independent  of  the  contract  between
masters  and  servants.

I  define  slavery  to  he  "an  obligation  to  labour
for  the  benefit  of  the  master,  without  the  contract
or  consent  of  the  servant."

This  obligation  may  arise,  consistently  with} the
law  of  nature,  "from  three  causes :

1.  From  crimes.

2.-From  captivity.

3.  From  debt

In  the  first  case,  the  continuance  of  the  slavery,
as  of  any  other  punishment,  ought  to  be  propor-
tioned to  the  crime ;  in  the  second  and  third  cases,
it  ought  to  cease,  as  soon  as  the  demand  of  the  in-
jured nation,  or  private  creditor,  is  satisfied.

The  slave-trade  upon  the  coast  of  Africa  is  not
excused  by  these  principles.  When  slaves  in  that
•country  are  brought  to  market,  "no  questions,  I
believe,  are  asked  about  the  origin  or  justice  of  the
vendors-  title.  It  may  lje  presumed,  therefore,
that  this  title  is  not  always,  if  it  be  ever,  founded
in  any  of  the  causes  above  assigned.
v  But  defect  of  right  in  the  firstpurchase,  is  the
least  crime  with  which  this  traffic  is  chargeable.
The  natives  are  excited  to  war  and  mutual  depre-
dation, for  the  sake  of  supplying* their  contracts,
or  furrnahing'the  market  with  sficves. With  this


CHARITY.


67


A, wJt\mP -  - li  m  ■  !■  ■■

IDA  WJCSBOyJBBB  MpDS.


_  The  slaves,  torn  away

from  parents,  www.  children,  from  their  friends
ions,  their


am.  ton
>m  tneir
tod  companions,  their  fields  and  flocks,  their
heme  and  county  axe  transported  to. the  Eu-
ropean settlements  in  America,  with  no.  other,  ac-
commodation on.  shipboard  than  what  is  provided
far  brutes,  Tina  is  the  second  stage  of  cruelty ;
from  which  the  miserable-  exiles*  an  delivered,
only  to  be  placed,  and  that  for  life,  in  subjection
to  a  dominion  and  system  of  laws,  the  most  mer-
cOeat  and  tyrannical  that  ever  were  tolerated  upon
the  free  of  the  earth;  and  from  all  that  can  be
teamed  by  the  accounts  of.  the  people  upon  the
•pot,  the  inordinate  authority  wnieh  the  planta-
tkoa-laws  confer  upon  the  slave-holder  is  exercised,
by  the  fitrfisfceUve-holder  especially,  with  rigour
and  brutality .

Bat  fteaessify'is  pretended;  the  name  under
which  every  enormity  is  attempted  to  be  justified.
And,  after  all,  what  is  the  necessity?  H  has  never
been  proved  .that  the  land  could  not  be  cultivated
there,  as  it  is  here,  by  hired  servants.  It  is  said
that  it  could  not  be  cultivated  with  quite  the  same
eunveniemcy  and  cheapness,  .as  by  the  labour  of
slaves :  by  which  means,  4  pound  of  sugar,  which
the  planter  now  sells  for  'sixpence,  could  not  .be
afibroed  under  sixpence-halfpenny  j— and  this  is
the  necessity.  >

The  great  revolution  which  has  taken  place  in
the  Western  world,  may  probably  conduce  (and
who  knows  hut  that  it  was  designed  1)  to  accele-
rate the  fidl  of  thfc^lrainaMetyranny :  and  now
that  this  contest,  and  thexpt1e«ionfl  which  attend  it,
are  no  more,  there  may  succeed  perhaps  a  season
far  reflecting,  whether  a  legislature  which  had  so
Ions;  lent  its  assistance  to  the  support  of  an  insti-
tataoB  replete  with  human  misery,  was  fit  Co  be
trusted  with -an  empire  the  most  extensive' that
ever  nhfiamed  in  any  age  or  quarter  el  the  world.
•  Slavery  was  a  part  of  the  civil  constitution  of
countries,  when  Christianity  appeared ;  vet
is  to  be  found  in  the  Christian  Serip-


1  tusea,  by  which  it  is  condemned  or  prohibited.
Tins  is  tree ;  for  Christianity,  soliciting  admis-
sion into  ail  nations  of  the  world,  abstained,  as
"it,  from  intermeddling  with  the  civil  in-
vmM  of  any.  But  does  it  follow,  from  the
Bof  Scripture  concerning  them,  that  all  the.
civil  inatiUiiimsi  which  then  prevailed/were  right  1
or  that  the  bad  should  not  be  exchanged  fbrHWt-

■  this,  the  discharging  of  slaves  from  all

i  to  obey  theif  masters;  which  is  the  con-

5  of  pronouncing  slaver^  to  be  unlawful,

rre  had  no  bettor  enact  than  to  let  loose

erne  fceJf  of  mankind  upon  the  other. Slaves

weald  have  been  tempted  to  embrace  a 'religion,

which  serried  their  right  to  freedom;  masters

~  r  have  been  persuaded  to  consent  to

ed  upon  such  authority;  the  most

i  of  all  contests,  a  bellum  aervile,  might

paofaahiy  have  ensued,  to,  the  reproach,  if  not  the'

^extinction,  of  the  Christian, name.

1 The  truth  is,  the  emancipation  of  slaves  should

JW  mrlnal  and  be  carried  on  by  provisions  of  law,

and  under,  the  protection  of  civil  government.

Csjastismity  can  only  operate  as  an  alterative.  By

the  mild  enfarien  of  its  fight  and  influence,  tjie

■ends  of  men  are- insensibly  prepared  to  perceive

_j 1  jj^  ejHjjpjjijgg.  which  folly,  or  wicked-

,  have  introduced  into  their  public.
In  this  war/ the  Greek  and  Ro-


man slavery;  and.  since  these,  the  feudal  tyranny,
has  declined  before  it  -  And  we  trus}  that,  as  the
knowledge  afrf  authority  of  the  same  religion  ad-
vance in  the  world,  they  will  banish  what  remains
of  this  odious  institution*


CHAPTER  IV.

'' . .. ' Charity^  ,  s >

PROFESSIONAL  ASSISTANCE.

This  kind  of  beneficence  is  chiefly  to  be  ex-
pected from  members  of  the  legislature^  magis-
trates^meutcal,  lqral^  and  sacerdotal  professions.

1.  The  care  oi  the  poor  ought  to  be  the  prin-
cipal object  of  all  lawsf  for  this  plain  reason,
that  the  .rich,  are  able  to  take  care  of  themselves.

Much  has.  been,  and  more  might  be.  done  by
the  laws  of  this  country,  towards  the  rehef  of  the
impotent,  and  the  protection  and  encouragement  %
of  the  ^dusttious  poor.  Whoever  applies  him- "
self  to  collect  observations  upon^he  state  and
operation  of  the.  poor  laws,  and  to  contrive  reme-
dies for  the  imperfections'  and  abuses  which  he
observes,  and  digests  .these, remedies  into  acts  of
parliament ;  and  conducts  them,  by  argument  or
influence,  through  the  two  branches  of  the  legisla-
ture, or  communicates  his'  ideas  to  those  who  are
more  likajy  to  cany  them  into  effect,  deserves
well  of  a  class  of  the  community  so  numerous,
that  their  happiness'  forms  a  principal  part  of  the
whole.  The  study  and  activity  thus  employed,
is  charity,  in  the  most  meritorious  sense  of  the
word.  *

2.  The  application  of  parochial  relief  is  in-
trusted, in  the  first  instance,  to  overseers  and  con-
tractors, who  have  an  interest  in  opposition  to
that  of  the  poor,  inasmuch  iks  whatever  they  allow
them  comes  in  part  out  of  their  own  pocket.  For
this  reason,  the  law  has  deposited  with  justices  of
the  peace  a  power  of  superintendence,  and  con-
trol ;  and  the  judicious  interposition  of  this  power
is  a  most  useful  exertion,  of  charity,  and  oft-times
within  the  ability  of  those  who  have  nooCher  way
of  serving  their  generation. A  country  gentle-

of  very  moderate  education,  and  who  has  little


to  spare  from  his  fortune,  by  learning  so  much  of
the  poor-law  as  is  to  be  found  in  Dr.  Burn's  Jus-
tice, and  by  furnishing  himself  with  a  knowledge
of  the  prices  of  labour  and  provision,  so  as  to  be
able  to  estimate  the  exigencies  of  a  family,  and
what  is  to  be  expected  from  their  industry,  may,
in  this  way,  place  out  the  one  talent  committed  to
him,  to  great  account.

3.'  Of  all  private  professions,  that  of  medicine
puts  it  in  a  man's  power  to  do  the  most  good  at
the  least  expense.  Health,  which  is  precious  to
aU,  is  to  the  poor  invaluable :  tand  their  eomplaints.
as  agues,  rheumatisms,  dec.  are  often  such  as  yield
to  medicine.  And,  with  respect  to  the  expense,
drugs  at  first  hand  cost  little,  and  advice  costs  no-
thing, where7  it  is  only  bestowed  upon  those  who
could  not  afford  to  pay  for  iL

4.  The  rights  of  the  poor  are  not  so  important
or  intricate,  as-  their'  contentions  are  violent  and
ruinous. ••  A  lawyer  or -attorney,' of  tolerable
knowledge  in  his  profession,  has  commonly  judg-
ment enough  to  adjust  these  disputes,  with  all  the
effect,  and  without  the  expense,,  ot  a  law-suit ;  and
he  may  be*  said  to  give  a  poor  man  twenty,  pounds}


68


MORAL  AND  POLITICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


who  prevents  hk  throwing  it  away  upon  law.  A
legal  man,  whether  of  the  profession  or  not,  who,
together  with  a  spirit  of  conciliation,  possesses  the
confidence  of  his  neighbourhood,  will  be  much
resorted  to-  lor  this  purpose,  especially  since  the
great  increase  of  costs  has  produced  a  general
oread  of  going  to  law.

Nor  is  this  line  of  beneficence  confined  to  arbi-
tration. Seasonable  counsel,  coming  with  the
Weight' which  the  reputation  of  the  adviser  gives
it,  will  often  keep  or  extricate  the  rash  and  unin-
formed out  of  great  dimculties.

Lastly,- 1  know  not  a  more  exalted  charity  than
that  which  presents  a  shield  against  the-  rapacity
or  persecution  of  a  tyrant »

6.  Betwixt  argument  and  authority  (I  mean
that  authority  which  flows  from  voluntary  respect,
and  attends  upon  sanctity  and  disinterestedness
of  character)  something  .may  be  done,  amongst  the
lower  orders  of  mankind,  towards  the  regulation
of  their-  conduct^  and  the  satisfaction  of  their
thoughts.  This  office  belongs  to  the  ministers  of
religion;  or  rather,  whoever  undertakes  it,  be-,
comes  a  minister  of  religion.  The  inferior  clergy,
who  are  nearly  upon  a  level  with  the  common  sort
of  their  parishioners,  and  who  on  that  account
gain  an  easier  admission  to  their  society  and  con-
fidence, have  in  this  respect  more  in  their  power
than  their  superiors ;  the  discreet  use  of  thufpower
constitutes  one  of  the  most  respectable  functions
of  human  nature.


his  subsistence,  or  the  means  of  preening  it:  ana
a*  no  fixed  laws  for  tfce  regulation  of  property
can  be  so*  contrived,  as  to  .provide  for  the  relief  of
every  case  and-  distress  which  may  arise,  these
cases  and  distresses,  when  their  right  and-shan
in  the  common  stock  were  given  up  or  taken  from
them,  were  supposed  to  be  left  to  the  voluntary
bounty  of  those  who  might  be  acquainted  with  the
exigencies  of  their  situation,  and  in  the  way  of
affording  assistance.  And.  therefore,  when  the
partition  of  property  b  rigidly  maintained  against
the  claims  of  indigence  and  distress,  it  is  main-
tained in  opposition  to  the  intention  of  those  who


CHAPTER  V.

Charily.


PECUNIARY  BOUNTY.

Th&obligation  to  bestow  relief  upon  the  poor.

The  wanner  of  bestowing  it.

The  pretences  by  which  men  excuse  them-


in.

selves  from  it.

1.  The  obligation  to  bestow  relief  upon  the  poor.

They  who  rank  pity  amongst  the  original  im-
pulses of  our  nature,  rightly  contend,  that,  when
this,  principle  prompts  us  to  the  relief  of
misery,  it  indicates  the  Divine  indention,  and  our
duty.  Indeed,  the  same  conclusion '  m  deducible
from  the  existence  of  the  passion,  whatever  ac-
count be  given  of  its  origin.  Whether  it  be  an.
instinct  or  a  habit,  it  is  in  met  a  property  of  our
nature,  which  God  appointed  :.  and  the  final  cause
for  which  it  was  appointed,  ia^to  afford  to  the
miserable,  in  the  compassion  of  their  fellow-crea-
tures, a  remedy  for  those  inequalities  and  distress-
es which  God  foresaw  that  many  must  be  exposed
to,  under  every' general  rule  for  the  distribution  Of


» this,  the  poor  have  a  claim  founded  in
the  law  of  nature,  which  may  be  thus  explained : —
AD  things  were  originally  common.  No  one  be-
ing, able  to  produce  a  charter  from  Heaven,  had
any  better  title  to  a  particular  possession  than  his
next  neighbour.  There  were  reasons  for  man-
kind's agreeing  upon  a  separation  of  this  common
fund ;  and  God  for  these'  reasons  is  presumed  to.
have  ratified  it.  But  this  separation  was  made  and
consented  to,  upon  the  expectation  and  condition
thai  every  one  should  have  left  a  sufficiency  for


it,  and  to  his,  who  is  the  Supreme  Proprietor
of  every  thing,  and  who  has  filled  the  world  with
plenteousness,  for  the  sustentatkm  and  comfort  of
all  whom  he  sends  into  it.  .

The  Christian  Scriptures  are-more  eopfous  and
explicit  upon  this  duty  than  upon  almost  vany
other.  The  description  which  Christ  hath  left
us  of  the  proceedings  of  the  last  day,  — *»"frHft
the  obligation  of  bounty  beyond  controvert
"  When  the- son  of  man  shall  come  in  his  i

and  all  the  holy  angels  with  him.  then  shall  1

upon  the  throne  othis  glory,  and  before  him  shall
be  gathered  all  nations;  and  he  shall  separate
them  one  from  another. — Then  shall  the  King
say  unto  them  on  his  right  hand,  Come,  ye  blessed
ofmy  Father,  inherit  the  kingdom  prepared  for  you
from  the  foundation  of  the  world:  For  I  was:  an
hungered,  and  ye  jgave  me  meat:,  I  waa  thirsty,,
and  ye  gave  me  drink:  I  was  a  stranger,  and  ye
took  me  in:  naked,  and  ye  clothed  me:  l.was
sick,  and  ye  visited  me :  I  waa  in  prison,  and  ye
cams  unto  me. — And  inasmuch  as  ve  have  dona
it  t6  one  of  the  least  of  these  my  brethren,  ye  have
done  it  unto  me."* It  .is  not  necessary  to  under-
stand this  passage  u  a  hteral  account  of  wrfaet  will
actually  pass  an  that  day. Supposing  it  only  %
scenical  description  of  the  rules  and  principles,  by
which  the  Supreme  Arbiter  of  our  destiny  wffl
regulate  Jus  decisions,'  it  conveys  the  same  Uaiimjt
to  us;  it  equally  demonstrates  of  how  greet  value
and  importance  these  duties  in  the  sight  of  God.
are,  and  what  stress  will  belaid  upon  them.  The
apostles  also  describe  this  virtue  as  propitiating
the  Divine  favour  in  an  eminent  degree. An3
these  recommendations  have  produced  their  effect
It  does  not  appear  that,  before  the  times  of  Chris-
tianity, an  infitmarv,  hospital,  or  public  cnarhy
of  any  kind,  existed  in  the  world;  whereas  most
countries  jh- Christendom,  have  long mbounded
with  these  institutions. To  which  may  be  added,
that  a  spirit  of  private  liberality  seems  to  flourish
amidst;  the  decay  of  marry  other  virtue* ;  not  to
mention  the  legal  provision  for  the  poor,  -which
obtains  in  this  country,  and  which  was  unknown
and  unthought  of  by  the  most  humanised  ^^Hotoi
of  antiquity.

St.  Paul  adds  upon  the  subject  an  excellent
direction,  and  which  is  practicable  by all -who
have  any  thing  to  give : — "  Upon  the  first  day  of
the  week  (of  any  other  stated  time)  let  every  one
of  you  lay  by  in  store,  as  God  bath  prospered
him." By  which  I  understand  St.  Paul to  re-
commend what  is  the  very  thing  wanting  with
most  men-,  Me  being  charitable  upon,  <*  f»£o>n  ;  that
is,  upon  a  deliberate  comparison  of  our  fortunes
with  the1  reasonable  expenses  and  expectation  of
our  families,  to  compute  what  we  can  spare and


*  Matthew,  xiv.  31.


PECUNIARY  BOUNTY.


for  charitable  panoses  m  Mime
The  mode  will  be  a  consideration


tohyby
mode  of  other.
sAsrwarda.

The  effect  which  Christianity  produced  upon
•One  of  its  first  concerts,  was  spch-as  might  be
looked  for  fronva  divme  religion,  coining  with  Alii
force  and  miraculous  evidence  upon  the  con-
saepces  of  mankind.  It  overwhelmed  all  worldly
codenerations  in  the  expectation  of  a  more  im-
portant existence : — "  And  the  multitude  of  them
|faat  believed,  were  of  one  heart  and  of  one  soul ;
neither  said  any  of  them  that  aught  of  the  things
which  he  possessed  was  his  own ;  but  they  had
all  things  in  common —Neither  was  there  any
them  that  lacked;  for  as  many  as  were
of  lands  or  houses,  sold  them,  and


ght  the-  prices  of  the  things  that  were  sold,
and  bid  them  down  at  the  apostles1  feet;  and  dis-
tribution was  made  unto  -every  man  according  as
be  had  need."*  Acta  i v.  32.  -

Nevertheless,  this  community  of  goods,  how-
ever it  manifested  the  sincere  zeal  of  the  primitive
Christiana,  is  no  precedent  for  our  i^frffcy  It
was  confined  to  the  church  at  Jerusalem;  con-
tinued not  long  there;  was  never  enjoined  upon
any  (Acts  v.  4. ;)  and  although  it  might  suit  with
the  partjcnhr  circumstances  of  a  small  and  select
' v,  m  altogether  impracticable  in  a  large  and


society,
mixed  <


The  conduct  of  the  apostles  upon  the  occasion,
dummies  to  be  noticed..  Their  followers  laid  down
their  fortunes  at  their  feet:  but  so  far  wen  they

frnm  taking  adrmntagin  of  thia  unlimited  flnnfidpnr»)

to  enrich  themselves,  or  to  establish  their  own  au-
thority, that  they  soon  after  got  rid  of  this  business,
as  inconsistent  with  the  main  object  of  their  mis-
sion, and  transferred  the  custody  and  management
of  the  public  fund  to  deacons  elected  to  that  office
by  the  jpeople  at  large. (Acts  *i)

H.  The  manner  of  bestowing  bounty;  or  the
afferent  kauU  of charity.  ' r

Every  question  between  the  different  kinds
of  chanty,  supposes  the  sum  bestowed  to  be  the

Then  are  three  kinds  of  charity  which  prefer  a
dahn  to  attention.

.  The  h^  and  m  my  judgment  one  of  the  best,
is  to  give  stated  and  considerable  sums,  by  way
of  ranwinri  or  annuity,  tb  individuals  or  families,
whose  behaviour  and  distress,  we  ourselves
"When  I  speak  of  oonrideroble
only  that  Ave  pounds,  or  any  other
or  divided  amongst  five,  or


,  will  do  more  good  than  the  same
sour  distributed  amongst  a  greater  number  jri  shil-
ingsor  hsJ£crowns;  andthat,  because  it  is  more
ikery  to  be  properly  applied  by  the  persons  who
BBcesee  it  A  poor  Mow,  who  can  find  no  bet-
ter one  for  a  smiling  than  to  mink  his  benefactor's
health,  and  purchase  half  an  hour's  recreation  -for
kamoeif,  would  hardly  break  into  a  guinea  for  any
each  e  purpose,  or  be  so  improvident  as  not  to  lay-
it  by  Jot-  an  occasion  of  importance,  e.  g.  for  his
acne,  has  clothing,  fuel,  or  stock  of  winter's  pn>
naon.  It  is  a  stffl  greater  recommendationjof  this
kind  of  charity,  that  pensions  and  annuities,  which
are  paid  regularly,  and, can  be  expected  at  the
lsOBB,^ae  the  only  way  by  which  we  can  prevent
one  peat  of  a  poof  man's  sufferings,— the  drta4
of  want.

SL  But  as  tbb  kind  of  charity  supposes  that
feapar  objects  of  such  egpepaive  benefactions  fall


within  our  private  knowledge  and  observation,
which  does  qo$  happen  to  all,  a  second  method  of
doing  good,  which  is  in  every  one's  power  who
has  toe  money  to  spare,  is  by  subscription  to  pub-
lic charities;  •  Public  charities  admit  of  this  ar-
gument in  their  favour,  that  your  money  goes
farther  towards  Attaining  the  end  for  which  it  is
riven,  than  it  can  do  by  an/ private  and  separate
beneficence.  A  guinea,  far  example,  contributed
to  an  infirmary,  becomes  the  means  of  providing
one  patient  at  least  with  a  phyauaan,  surgeon,
apothecary,  with  medicine,  diet,  lodging,  and  suit-
able attendance ;  which  is  not  the  tenth  part  of
what  the  same*  assistance,  if  it  could  be  procured
at  all,  would  cost  to  %  sick;  person  or  family  in  any
other  situation. .

3.  The  last,  and,  compared  with  the  former,
the  lowest  exertion  of  benevolence,  is  in  the  re-
lief of  beggars. '  Nevertheless;  I  by  no  means
approve  the  ^discriminate  rejection  of  all  who
implore  our  alms  ix).  this  way.  Some  may  perish
by  such,  a  conduct  Men  are  sometimes*  overtaken
by  distress,  for  which  all  other  relief  would  come
too  late.  Beside  which,  resolutions  of  this  kind
compel  us  to  oner  such  violence  to  our  humanity,
as 'may  go  near,  in  a  little  while,  to  suffocate  the
principle  itself;  which  is  a  very  serious  consider**
tion.  A  good  man,  if  he  do  not  surrender  himself
to  his  feejngs  without  reserve,  will  at  least  lend  an
ear  to  importunities  which  come  accompanied  with
outward  attestations  of  distress;  and  after  a  pa-
tient audience  of  the  complaint,  will  direct  him-
self, not  so  much  by  any  previous  resolution  which
he  may  have  formed  upon  the  subject  as  by  the
circumstances  .and  credibility  of  the  account  that
he  receives.  •  ' * v

There  are  other  species  of  charity  well  con-
trived to  make  the  money  expended  go  far:  such-
as  keeping  down  the  price  or  fuel  or  provision,  in
case  of  monopoly  or  temporary  .scarcity,  by  pur-
chasing the  articles  at  the  best  market  and  retail- '
ing  them  at  prime  cost,  or  at  a  small  loss:  or  the
adding  of  a  bounty  to  particular  species  of  labour,
when  the  pace  is  accidentally  depressed.'

The  proprietors  of  large  estates  have  it  in  their
povqer  to  facilitate  the  maintenance;  and  thereby
to  encourage  the  establishment,  of  families,  (which
is  one  of  the  noblest  purposes  to  which  the  rich
and  great  can  convert  their  endeavours,)  try  build-
ings cottage**,  splitting  farms,  erecting  manufacto-
ries, cultivating  wastes,  embanking  the  sea,  drain-
ing marshes,  and  other  expedients,  which  the
situation  of  each  estate  points  out  If  the  profits
of  these  undertakings  do  not  repay  the  expense,
let  the  authors  of  them  place  the  difference  to  the
account  of  charity.  '  It  is  true  of  almost  all  such
projects^  that  the  public  is  a  gainer  by  them,  what-
ever the  owner  be.  '  And  where  the  loss  can  be
spared,  this  consideration'  is  sufficient. '

It  is  become  a  question  of  some  importance,
under  what  circumstances  works  of  chanty  ought
to  be  done  in  private,  and  when  they  may  be  made
public  without  detracting  from  the  merit  of  the
action,  if  indeed  they  ever  may :  the  Author  of  our
religion  having,  delivered  a-  rule  upon  .this  sub-
ject which  seems  to  enjoin  universal  secrecy:—
"  When  thou  doest  alms,  let  not  thy  left  hand
know  what  thy  right  hand  doeth;  that  thy  alms
may  be  in  secret,  and  thy  Father,  which  seeth  in
secret,  himself  shall  reward  thee  ppenly."  (Mat
vi.  3,  4.)  "Prom  the  preamble  to  this  prohibition
I  think  it,  however,  plain,  that  our  Saviour's  sole


w


MORAL  AND  POLITICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


which  are  needftd  to  the  bofyt  what  doth  it
profit?"  (James  u.  15, 16.)

4.  "That  giving  to  the  poor  is  not  ntentiqued
in  St. '  Paul's  description  pf  charity,  in  the  thir-
teenth chapter  of  his  First  Epistle  to  the  Corin-
thians." '  This  is  not  a  description  .of  charity,  hot
of  good-nature ;  and 'it  is  necessary  that  every
duty  he  mentioned  in  every  place..  v <

£  "  That  they  pay  the  poor-rates.?  They
might  as  well  allege  that  they  pay  their  debts:
for  the  poor  have  the  same  right  to  that  portion
of  a  man's  property  which  the  laws  assign  to*
them,  that  the  man  oimself  has  to  the  remainder.

6.  '"That  they  employ  many  poor  persons;"—*
"for  their  own  sfke,  not  the  poor's— otherwise  it
is  a  good  plea.

7.  "That  the  poor  do  not  suffer  so  much  as
we  imagine ;  that,  education  and  habit  have  're-
conciled them  to  the  evils  of  their  condition,  and
make  them  easy  under  it"  Habit  can  never
reconcile  human  nature~to  the  extremities  of  cold,
hunger,  and  thirst,  any  more,  than  it  can  reconcile
the  land  to  the  touch  of  a  red-hot  iron :  besides,
the  question  is  not,  how  unhappy1  any  one  is,  but
how  much  more  happy  we  can  make  him.

8.  "That  these  people,  give  them  what  you
will,  will  never  thank  you,  or  think  of  you  for  it."
In  the  first  place,  this  is  not  true:  in  the  second
place,  it  was  not  for  the*  sake  of  their  thanks  that
you  relieved  theim. ♦

9.  *'  That  we  are  liable  to  be  imposed  upon*"
If  a  due  inquiry  be  made,  our  merit,  is  the  same :  -
beside  that  the  distress  is  generally  "real,  although
the  cause,  be  untruly  stated. '

"10.  "  That  they  should  apply  to  their  parishes."
This  is  not  always  practicable:  to  which  we  may-
add,  that  there  are  many  requisites  to  a  comfort-
able subsistence,  which  parish  relief  dees  hot  sup-
ply ;  and  that  there  are  .some1,  who  would  sutler
almost  as  much  from  receiving  parish  relief  as  by
the  want  of  it;  and,  lastly,  that  there  are  many
modes  of  charity  to  which  this  answer  does  not
relate  at  all.

11.  "  That  giving  money,  encourages  idleness)
and  vagrancy.'"  This  is  true  only  of  injudicious
and  ^discriminate  generosity.

12.  "  That  we  have  too  many  objects  of  charity
at  home,  to  bestow  any  thing  upon  strangers;  or,
that  there  are  other  charities.  wnichAre  more  use-
ful, or  stand  in  greater  need.'1  The  value  of  this*
excuse  depends  entirely  upon  the  fact,  whether
we  actually  relieve'  those  neighbouring  objects*,
and  contribute  to  those  other  charities.

Beside  all  these  excuses,  pride,  or  prudery,  or
delicacy,  or  4ove  of  ease,  keep  one  naif  of  the
world  out  of  the.  way  of  observing  what  the  other
half  suffer.


design  was  to  forbid  ostentation,  and  all  publish-
ing of  good  works  which  proceeds  from  that  mo-
tive. "  Take  heed  that  ye  do  not  your  aims  be-
fore men,  to  be  seen  of  them;  otherwise  ye  have
.  no  reward  cf  your  Father  which  is  in  heaven^
therefore,  when  thou  doest  thine  alms,  do  not
sound  a  trumpet  before  thee,  as  the  hypocrites  do,
in  the  synagogues  and  in  the  streets,  that  they  may
hape  glory  qf  men.  Verily  I  say  unto  yeu,  they
have  their  reward.  V  ver.  1,  %  .There  are  motives
for  the  doing  our  alms  in  public,  beside  those  of
ostentation,  with  which  therefore  our  Saviour's
rule  has  no  concern :  such  as  to  testify  our  ap-
probation of  some  particular  species  of  charity,
and  to  recommend  it  to  others:  to  take  off  the
prejudice  which  the  want,  or,  which  is  the  same
thing,  the  suppression,  of  our  name  in  the  Est  of
contributors  might  excite  against  the  charity,  or
against  ourselves.  'And,  so  long  as  these  motives
are  free  Jfrom  any  mixture  of  vanity,  they  are  in
no  danger  of  invading  our  Saviours  prohibition;
they  rather  seem  to  comply  with  another  direction
which  he  has  left  us:,  "Let  your  light  so  shine
before  men,  that  they  may  see  your  good  works,
and  glorify  your  Father  which  is  in  heaven.'"  If
ft  be-  necessary  to  propose  a  precise  distinction
upon  the  subject,  I  can  think  of  none  better  than
t|ie  following :  When  our  boun*y  is  beyond  our
fortune  and  station,  that  is,' when  it  is  more  than
could  be -expected  from  us,  our  charity  should  be
private,  if -privacy  be  practicable,  when  it  is  not
more  than  might  be  expected,  it.may  be  public :
for  we  cannot  hope  to  influence  others'  to  toe  imi-
tation of  extraordinary  generosity,  and  therefore
want,  in  the  former  case,  the  only  justifiable  rea-
son for  making  it  public.  -  .
t  leaving  thus  described  several  different  exer-
tions of  charity,  it  may  not  be  improper  to  take
notice  of  a  species  of  liberality,  which  ,is  not
charity,  in  any  sense  of _ the  word:  1  mean  the
giving  of  entertainments  or  liouor,  for  the  sake
of  popularity;  or  the  rewarding,  treating,  and
maintaining,  the  companions  of  our  diversions,
as  hunters,  shooters,  ushers,  and  the  like.  I  do
not  say  that  this  is  criminal ;  I  only  say  that  it  is
not  charity;  and  .that  we  are  not  to  suppose,  be-
cause we*  give,  and  give  to  the  voor,  that  it  will
stand  in  the  place,'  or  supersede  the  obligation,  of
more  meritonoua.  and  disinterested,  bounty.

III.  The  pretences  by  which  men  excuse  them-
selves from  'giving  to  the  poor.  **

1.  "  That  they  have  nothing  to  spare,9  i.  e.
nothing  for  which  they  have  not  provided  some
other  use ;  nothing  which  their  plan  or  expense,
together  with  the  savings  they  nave  'resolved  to
lay  by,  will  not  exhaust:  never  reflecting  whether
it  be  in  their  power,  or.  that  it  is  their  duty^  to
retrench  their  expenses,,  and  contract  their  plan.
"  that  they  may  have  to  give  to  them  that  need:''
oar,  rather,  tha^  tins  ought  to  have,  been  part  of
their  plan  originally .•

2.  "  That  tney  have  families  of  their  own,  and
that  charity  begins  at  home."  The  'extent  of  this
plea  will  be  considered,  when  we  come%to  explain
the  duty  of  parents.  %-  1

3.  "That  charity  does  not  consist  in  giving
money,  but' in  benevolence,  philanthropy,  love  to
all  mankind,  goodness'  of  heart,". dec.  Hear  St.

James:  "If  a  brother  or -sister  be  naked,  and _, 0_, ^ _r

destitute  of  daily  food,  and  one  of  you  say  unto '  person  who  has  injured,  or  offended  us,  fartt&Ar
them,  depart  in  peace ;  be  ye  warmed  and  filled;  than  the  just  ends  of  punishment  or  reparation
notwithstanding  ye  give  then  not  those  things  rogtiire'.


(  t

CHAPTER  VI. '

Resentment/

Resentment  may  be  distinguished  into  anger
arid  revenge. .

s  By.  anger, J.  mean  the  pain  we  suffer  upon  the
receipt  ef  an  injury  or  affronVwith  the  usual  ef-
fects of  that  pain  upon  ourselves.  > .

By  revenge,  vthe  inflicting  of  pain  upon,  tiie  -


&EVENSR


71


A&gtt  pnamts  to  revenge;  but  it  is  possible
to  suspend  the  effect^  when  we  cannot  altogether
duell  the  principle*..  We  are  bound  also  to  en-
deavour to  qualify  and  comet  die  principle,  itself.
So  that  our  duty  requires  tpro  different  affplica-
tioosof  the  ftund ;  ana,  for  that  reason,  angex  and
ay  be  considered  separately.


CHAPTER  VlL

dn#er.

*  Bfcye  angry,  and  sin  not ;"  therefore  all  anger
is  not  sinful;  1  suppose,  because  some  degree  oQt, .
and  tfpon  some  occasions,  is  inevitable.

It  becomes  sinful,  or  contradicts,  however,  the
rafe  of  Scripture,  'when  it  is  conceived  upon
slight  and  inadrquate  provocations,  and,  when  it
continues  long.

L  When  itris  conceived  upon  slight  provoca-
tions: for  "charity  sufTereth  long,  fe  not  easily
provoked. —"  Let  every  man  he  alow  to  anger.
Peace,  Ippfrsnflpriqg,  gentleness,  meekness,  are
enumerated  among  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit,  Gal
▼.  22k  and  compose  the  true  Christian  temper,  as
to  this  artscfe  of  duty.

¥.  When  it  continues  lomjr  for,  "let  not  the
gQB£D  down  upon  your  wrath."

These  precepts,  and  all  reasoning  indeed  on
die  subject,  suppose  the  passion  of  anger  to  be
within  our  power ;  and  thu  power'  consists  nut  so
much  in  any  faculty  we  possess'  of  appeasing  our
wrath  at  toe  tine,  £for  we  are  passive  under  ihe-
smsjt  which  an  injury  or  affront  occasions,  and
all  we  can  then  do,  is  to  prevent  its  breaking  out
into  action,)  ae  in  sa,meUifying  our  minds  by
habits  of  just  reflection,  as  to  be  leas  irritated  by
winwsssnnit  of  injury,  and  to  be  sooner  pacified.

Reflections  proper  for  this  purpose,  and  which
May;  be  called  the  sedatives  of  anger,  are  the  fot-
lowing :  the  poss&iBry  of  mistakmg  the.  motives
fzom  winch  the  conduct  that  offends  Ms  proceeded:
how  often  our  oflenojto  have,  been  the  effect  of
inadvertency,  when  they  were  construed  into  in-
bVationscfmance;  the  inducement  which  prompt-
ed our  adversary  to  act  as  he  did,  and  howpower-
fuBy  the  same  inducement  has,  at  one  tune  or
other,  operated  upon  ourselves:  that  he  is  suf-
fering perhaps  under  a  Contrition,  ^hicE'  he  is
ashamed  or  wa^ts  opportunity  to  confess,;  and
how  ungenerous  it  is  to  triumph  by  coldness  or
insult  over  a  spirit  already  humbled  in  secret;
that  the  returns  of  kindness  are  sweet,  and  that
there  is  neither  honour,  .nor  virtue,  nor  use",  in  re-
\  them: — for,  some  persons -think;  them-
bound  to  cherish  and  keep  ajive  their  in-
ion,  when  they  And  it  dying  away  of  itself.
re  may  remember^  that  others  nave  their  pas-
y  their  prejudices,  their  favourite  aims,  their
,  that  cautions,  their  interests,  their  sudden
.  In,  their  varieties'  of  apprehension,  as  weH
as  we:  we  may  recollect  what  hath  sometimes.
1  in  oaur.minds,  when  we  have  gotten  on  the
j  side  of  a  quarrel,  and  imagine  the  same  to
he  passing  in  our  adversary's  mind  now;  when
b  .sensible  of  our  misbehaviour,  what
i  we  perceived  in  it,  and  expected  others
to  peroerve:  how  we  were  affected  by  the  kind-
ness, and  felt  the  superiority,  of  a  generous  re*
eeption  and  ready  forgiveness^  how  persecution
~"' "lour spirits  with  our  enmity, and  seemed


to  justify  the.  conduct  in  ouTseWas  which  we  be-
fore blamed.  Add  to  this,  the  indecency  of  ex-
travagant, anger ;  how  ft  renders  us,  whilst  it  lasts,
the  scorn  and  spoil  of  all  about  ns,  of  which  it
leaves  us,  when  it  .ceases,  sensible  and  ashamed ;
the  inconveniences  and  irretrievable  misconduct
into  which  our  irascibility  has  sometimes  betrayed
us ;  the  friendships  it  has  losfcus;  the  distresses  and
embarrassments  In  which  we  have  been  involved
by  it;  and  the  sore  repentance  which,  on  one- ac-
count or  other,  it  always  cost  us.

But  the  reflection  calculated' above  all  others
to  allay  the  haughtiness  of  temper  which  is  ever
finding  out  provocations,  and,  which  renders  anger
so  impetuous,  is  that  which  the  Gospel  proposes;-  •
namely,  that  we  ourselves  are,  or  shortly  shall  be,
suppliants  for  mercy  and  panjon^t  the  judgment-
seat  of  God>  Imagine  our  secret  sins  disclosed  and
brought  to  light;  imagine  us  thus  humbled  and
exposed;  trembling  under  the  hand  of  God;  cast-
ing ourselves  on  his  compassion ;  crying  out  for .
mercy;  imagine  such  a  creature  to  talk  of  satis-
faction and  revenge;  refusing  to  be  entreated,
disdaining  to  forgive;-  extreme  to  mark  and  to
resent  what  is  done  amiss; — imagine^  I  say,  this,
and  you  can  hardly  frame  to  yourself,  an  instance
of  more  impious  and  unnatural  arrogance.

The  point  is.  to  habituate  ourselves  to  these
reflections,  till  Jaey  rise  up  of  their  own  accord
whenrthey  are  wanted,  that  is,  instantly  upon  the
receipt  of  an  injury  or  affront,  and  with  such  force
and  colouring,  as  ooth  to  mitigate  the  paroxysms
of  our  anger  at  the  time,  and  at  length  to  produce
an  attention  in  the  temper  and  disposition  itself!


OHAPTftt'  VJfL
^Revenge.

All  pain  occasioned  to  another  in  consequence
ef  an  offence  or  injury  received  from  him,  fiirther
than  what  is  calculated^  procure  .reparation,  or
promote  the  just  ends  of  punishment,  is  so- much
revenge.

There  can  be  no  difficulty  in  knowing  when
we  occasion  pain  to  another.;  nor  much  in  dis-
tinffuishing  whether  we  ,do  so,  with  a  view  only
to  the  ends  of  punishment,  or  from  revenge ;  for,
in  the.  one  case  we  proceed  .with  reluctance,  in
-the  other  with  pleasure.

It  is  highly ' probable t  from  the  light  of  nature,
that  a  passion,  which  seeks  its  gratification  im-
mediately and  expressly  in  giving  pain,  is  dis-
agreeable to  the  benevolent  will  and  counsels  of
the  Creator.  Other,  passions  and  pleasures  may,
and  often  do,  produce  pain  to  some  one :  but  then
pain  is  not,  as  it  is  here,  the  object  of  the  passion,
and  the  direct  cause  of  t^e  pleasure.  Tnis  pro-
bability is  converted  into  certainty,  if  we  give
credit  to  the  authority  which  dictated  the  several
passages  of  the  Christian  Scriptures  that  condemn
revenge,  or,  what  is  the  same  $ing,  which  enjoin


e  will  set  down  the  principal  of  these  pas-
„  j;  and  endeavour  to  collect  from  them,  what
conduct  upon  the  whole  is  allowed,  towards  an
enemy,  and  What-ia  forbidden. '
, "  If  _ye  forgive  men  their  trespasses,  your  hea-

Ivenly  Father  will  also  forgive  you ;  but  if  ye  forgive
not  men  their  trespasses,  neither  will  jour  Father
forgive  your  trespasses."—"  And  his  lord  was


■73


MGHAL  and  political  philosophy.


wroth,  and  delivered  him  to  the  tormentors,  till
he  should  pay  all  that  was  doe  unto  bin*:  so  like-
wise shall  my  heavenly  Father  do  also  onto  you,
if  ye  from  your  hearts  forgive  not  every  one  his
brother  their  trespasses,"—"  Put  on  bowels  of
mercy,  kindness,  humbleness,  of  mind,  meekness,
long-suffering;  forbearing  one  another,  forgiving
one  another,  if  any  man  have  'a  quarrel  against
any,  even  as  Christ  forgave  you,  so  also  do  ye." —
"Be  patient  towards  all  men;  see  that  none
render  evil  for  evil  to  any  man." — "  Avemss  not
^ourselves,  but  rattier  give  place  unto  wrath :  for
it  is  written,  Vengeance"  is-  mine ;  I  will  repay,
saith  the  Lord.  Therefore,  if  thine  enemy  hunger,
feed  him;  if-  he  thirst,  give  htm  drink:  for,  in
so  doing,  thou  shalt  heap  coals  of  fire  on  his  head.
Be  not  overcome  of  eviL  but-  overcome  evil  with
good.'*

,  I  think  it  evident,  from  some  of  these  passages
taken  separately,  and  still  more  so  from  all  of
them  together,  that  revenge,  as  described  in  the
beginning  of  this  chapter,  is  forbidden  in  every
-  degree,  untfer  all  forms,  and  upon  every  occasion.
We  are  likewise  forbidden  to  Defuse  to  an  .enemy
even  the  most  imperfect  right :  "  if  he  hunger,
feed  him;  if  he  thirst,  give  him  drink  ft  which
are  examples  of  imperfect  rights.  If  one  who  has
offended  us,  solicit  from  us  a  vote  to  which  bis

n'tfcanons  entitle  him,  we  may  not  refuse  it
motives  of  resentment,  or  the  remembrance
of  what  we  have  suffered  at  his  hands.  His  right,
and  our  obligation  which  follows  the  right,  are
not  altered  by  his  enmity  to- us,  or  by  ours  to  nim.
'  On  the  other  hand,  I  do  not  conceive  that  these-
prohibitions  were  intended  to  interfere  with  the
punishment  or  prosecution  of  public  offenders.
In  the  eighteenth  chapter  of  St  Matthew,  our  Sa-
viour teus  his  disciples,  "  If  thy  brother  who  has
trespassed  against  thee  neglect  to  hear  the  church,
let  him  be  unto  thee  as  an  heathen  man,  and  a
publican."  Immediately  after  this,  when  St.  Pe-
ter asked  hjm,  "How  oft  ahajl  my  brother  sin
against  mel  and  I  forgive  himl  till  seven  times  r"
Christ  replied,  "  I  say  not  Unto  thee  until  .seven
times,  but  until  seventy  times  seven ;"  that  is,  as
often  as  he  repeats  the  offence.  From  these  two
adjoining  passages  compared  together,  we  are  au-
thorised to  conclude  that  the  forgiveness  of  an
enemy  is  not  inconsistent  with  the  proceedings
against  him  as  a  public  offender ;  and  that  the  dis-
cipline established  in  religious  or  civil  societies,  for
the  restraint  or  punishment  of  criminals,  ought  to
be  upholden.

If  the  magistrate  be  not  tied  down  with  these
prohibitions  from  the  execution  of  his  office,  nei-
ther is  the  prosecutor;  for  the  office  of  the  prose-
cutor is  as  necessary  as  that  of  the  magistrate.

Nor,  by  parity  of  reasonV  are  private  persons'
withholden  from  the  correction  of  vice,  when  it  is
in  their  power  to  exercise  it ;  provided  they  be  as-
sured that  it  is  the  guilt  which  provokes  them,  and
not  the  injury;  and  that  their  motives  ire  pure
from  all  mixture- and  every,  particle  of  that  spirit
which'delights  and,  triumphs  in  the  humiliation  of
an  adversary.


♦Matt.  vi.  14,  15:  kriii.  34,  35.  Col.  iil.  18,  13.
lTbes.v.  14,15. Bom.xiM9,30,3L

t  Bee  slso  Exodus,  xziii.  4.  '"  If  thou  meet  thine  ene-
my*! ox,  orbi«&M,  going  astray,  tboo,shalt  surely  bring
it  back  to  aim  again ;  if  thou  see  the  aw  of  bira  that


8,  lying  under  his  burden,  and  wou)dst  for-
bear to  help  him,  thou  shalt  surely' help  with  hiin.'*


Thus  it  is  no  breach  of  Christian  charity,  to
withdraw  our  company  or  civility  when  the  same
tends  to  discountenance  any  vjevras  practice.
"This  is  one  branch  of  that  extrajudicial  disriptine.
which  supplies  the  defects  and  the  remissness  of
law ;  ana  is  expressly  authorised  by  St.  .Paul  (1
Cor.  v.  11.)  M  But  now  I  have  written  unto  you
not  to  keep -company,  if  any  man  that  is  called  a
brother  be  a  fornicator,  or  covetous,,  or  an  idolater,
or  a  railer,  or  a  drunkard,  or  an  extortioner;  with
such  an  one,  no  not  to  eajt."  The  use  of  this  as-
sociation against  vice  continues  to  be  experienced
in  one  remarkable  instance,  am)  might  he  extend-
ed with  good  effect  to  others.-  The  conftderacy
amongst  women  of  character,  Uf  exclude  from  their
society  kept-rnistresses  and'  prostitutes,  contri-
butes more  perhaps  to  discourage  that  condition
of  life,  and  prevents  greater  numbers  from  enter-
ing into  it,  than  air  the.consideiations  of  prudence
and  religion  put  together.

We  are  likewise  allowed  to  practise  so  much
caution  as  not  to  put  ourselves  in  the  way  of  inju-
ry, or  invite  the  repetition  of  it.  If  a  servant  or
tradesman  has  cheated  us,  we  are  not  bound  to
trust  him  again ;  for.  this  is  to  encourage  him  in
his  dishonest  practices,  'which  is  doing  mm  much
harm.

Where  a  benefit  can  be  conferred  only  upon
one  or  few,  and  the-  choice  of  the  person  upon
whonVH  is  conferred  is  a  proper  object  of  favour,
we  are  at  liberty  to  prefer  those  who  have  not  of-
fended us  to  those  who  have;  the  contrary  being
no  where  required.

Christ,  who,  as  hath  beeta  well  demonstrated,*
estimated  virtues  by  .their  solid  utility,  and  not  by
their  fashion  or  popularity,  prefers  ibis  of  the  for-
giveness- of  injuries  to  every  other.  _  He  enjoins
it  oftener ;  with  more  earnestness;  under  a  great-
er variety  of  forme;  and  with  this  weighty  and  ■pe-
culiar circumstance,  that  the  forgiveness  of  others
is  the  condition"upon  which  alone  we  are*  to  ex-
pecj,  or  even  ask,  from  God,  forgiveness  for  our-
selves. And  this  preference  is  justified  by  the
superior  importance  of  the  virtue  itself The
feuds  and  animosities  in  famines,  and' between
neighbours,  .which  disturb  the  intercourse  of  hu-
man life,  and  collectively  compose  half  the  misery
of  it,  have  their  foundation  in  the  want  of  a  for-
giving temper;  and 'can  never  eease,  but  by  the
exercise  ofthis'virtue,  on  one  side,  or  on  both.


CHAPTER  IXa.  .

Dialling.

J Duelling  as  a  punishment  is  absurd ;  because
it  is  an  equal  chance,  whether  the  punishment  foil
upon  the  offender,  orlhe  person  offended. Nor
is- it  much  better  as  a  reparation:  it  being  difficult
to  explain  in  what  the  satisfaction  consists,  ox
how  it  tends  to  undo  the 'injury,  or  to  afford  a
compensation  for  the  damage  already  sustained.
• The  truth  is.  it  is  not  considered  as  either. A
lav/  of  honour  having  annexed  the  imputation  of
cowardice  to  patience  under  an  affront,  challenges
are  given  and  accepted  with  no  ether  "design  thai*
to'  prevent  or  wipe  off  this  suspicion ; -without
malice  against  the  adversary,  generally  -without  a


*  See  a  View  of  Uw  Internal  Evidence  of  Uk  Chris-
tian Religion*


LITIGATION.


indite  deAA>y  bin.  or  aqy  other  concern,  than  to
preserve  the  dneffistrs  own  reputation  and  recep-
tion in  the  workL  '

'  The  uiireasonablenese  of  this  ruje  of  manners
»  one  consideration ; '  the  duty  and  conduct  of  in-
dividual*,  while  such  a  tufe  exists,  is  another.

As  to  which,  the  proper  and  single  question  is
this,  whether  a  regard  for  our  own  reputation  is,
or  is  not,  sufficient  to  justify  the.  taking  away  the
fife  of  another?

Murder  is  forbidden;  and  wherever  human  life
■debberately  tauten  away,  otherwise  than  by  oub-
bc  authority,  there  is  murder.  The  Value  and  se-
curity of  human  life  make  this  rule  necessary ;  for
I  do  not'see  what  other  idea  or  definition  of  mur-
der can  be  admitted,  which  will  not  let  in  so  much
private  violence,  as  to  render  society  a  scene  of  .
peril  and  bloodshed

If  unauthorised  laws  of  honour  be  allowed  to
create  exceptions  to  divine  prohibitions,  there  is
an  end  of  ail  morality,  as  founded  m  the,  will  of
the  Deity ;  and  the  obligation  of  cvegry,  duty-  may,
at  one  time  or  other,  be  discharged  by  the  caprice
and  fluctuations  cf  fashion.

"  But  a  sense  of  shame  is  so  much  torture  ;"and#
no  relief  presents  Itself  otherwise  than  by  an  at-
tain)* upon  the  life  of  our  adversary."  What  then]
The  distress  which  men -suffer  by  the  wahtMjf
money  is  oftentimes  extreme,  and  no  resource  can
be  discovered  but  that  of  removing  a  life  which*
stands  between  the  unstressed  person  and  his'  in-'
beritanoe.  The  motive  in  this  case  Is  as  urgent,
and  lb*  meari*  mwh  tfie  same,  as  in  the  former:
yet  this  case  finds-  no  advocate.

Take  away  the  <£raimstance  of  the  duellist's
exposing  bis  own  .life,  and  it  becomes  assassina-
tion ;  add  this  circumstanue;  aiid  what  difference
does  jt  mate  1  None  but  this,  that  the  fewer  per-
haps will  imitate  .the  example,  and  human  life
will  be  somewhat  mare  sale,  when  it  cannot*  be
attacked  without  equal,  danger  to  the  aggressor's
own.  Experience,  however,  proves  that  there  is
fortitude,  enough  in  most  men'tQ^ndertake  this
hazard^  and  were  it  otherwise,  the  defence,  at
best,  would  be  only  that  which  a  highwayman  or
housebreaker  might  plead,'  whose  attempt  had
been  so  daring  and  desperate,  that  few  were  likely
to  repeat  the  same.  •

In  expostulating  with  the  duellist,  I  all  along
suppose  iris  adversary  to  fell.  Which  supposition'
I  ant  at  liberty  Jo  make,  because,  if  her  have  no
right  to  kill  bis  adversary,  he  has  none  to  attempt  it.
In  return,  I  forbear  from  applying  to  the  case
of  daeOuig  the  Christian  principle  of  the  forgive-
ness of  injuries;  because  it  is  possible  to  suppose
the  injury  to  be  forgiven,  and  the  duellist  to  act
entirely  nom  a  concern  for  his  own  reputation :
where  this  is  not  the*  case,  the  guilt  of  duelling
is  manifest,  and  is  greater.

In  this  view  it  seems  unnecessary  to  distinguish
IrtiWLieii  him  who  gives,,  and  him  who  accepts,  a
cbauertge:  for,  on  the  one  hand,  they  incur  an
equal  hazard  of  destroying  life ;  and  on  the  other, '
both,  act  upon  the  same  peiviiasionvthat  what  they
do  b  necessary,  iff  order  Jo  recover  or  pieserve  the
good  opinion  of  the  world.  .

Pnblte  opinion,  is  not  easily  controlled  by  ctvil
hwsjruiione:  for  which  reason  I  question  whether
tan  regulations  can  be  contrived,  of  sufficient
feece  to  suppiess  or  change'  the  rule  of  honour,
«nkfc  srtjgmstiars  all  scruples  about  duelling  with
•Be  fe^psttschof  oowsjchce..


The  insufficiency  of  the  redress  which  the  law
of  the  land  afford^  Tor'those  injuries  which  chiefly
affect  a  marl  in  his  sensibility  and  reputation,
tempts  many  to  redress  themselves.  -Prosecutions
for  such*  offences,  by  the  trifling  damages  that  are
recovered,  serve  only_to  make  the  sufferer  more
ridiculous. — This  ought  to  be  remedied

For  the  army,  where  the  point  of  honour  is
cultivated  with  exquisite  attention  and  refinement,
I  would  establish  a  Qmrt  9/  tfonour,  with  a  power
j>{  awarding  those  submissions  and  acknowledge
menta,  which  it  is  generally  the  purpose. of  a
challenge  to  obtain  ;•  and  it  might  grow  into  a
fashion,  with  persons  of  rank  of  all  professions,  to
refer  their  quarrels  to  this  tribunal

Duelling,  as  the  law  now  stands' can  seldom  be
overtaken  by  legal  punishment  The  challenge,
appointment,  and  ether  previous  ciicumstances,
which  indicate  the  intention  with  which  the  com-
batants met,  being  suppressed,  nothing  appears
to, a  court  of  justice,  but  (he  actual  rencounter;
and  if  a  person  he  stain  when  actually  fighting
with  his  adversary,  the  law  deems  his  death  no-
thing  mote  than  manslaughter* .


. , . \ CHAPTER  X.

Litigation.  Z

a  If  it  be  possibly,  live  peaceably  with  all  .men  f
which  precept  contains  in  Indirect  confession  that
this  is  not  always  possible.

The  instances  *  in  the  fifth  chapter  of  Saint
Matthew  are  rather  to  be  understood  as  proverbial
methods  of  describing  the  general  duties  of  for-
giveness and  behevoience,  and  the  temper  "which
we  ought  to  aim  at  acquiring,  than  as  directions
to  be  specifically  observed ;  or  of  themselves  of  any
great  importance  to  be  observed.  The  first  of  these
is/"  If  thine  enemy, smite  thee  on  thy  right  cheek;
turn  to  Him  the  other  also;"*yet,  when  one  of  the
officers  struck  Jesus  with-  the  palm  of  his  hand,
we^find  Jesus  rebuking  him  for  the  outrage  with
becoming  indignation ;  ')'  If  I  have  spoken  evil,
bear  witness  ofthe  evil;  but  if  well,  why  smitest
thou  roe  1"  (John  xviii.  43.)  It  may  be  observed,
likewise,  kthat  the  several  examples  are  drawn
from  instances  of  small  and  tolerable  injuries.  -  A
rule  which  forbade  all  opposition  to  injury,  or  de-
fence.against  it  could  nave  no  other  effect,  than
to  put  the  goaf  in  subjection  tojthe  bad,  and  de-
liver one  half  of  mankind  to  the  depredations  of
the  other  half;  which  must  be  the  case,  so  long  as
some  considered  themselves  as  hound  by  such  a
rule,  whilst  others  despised  it.  Saint  Paul,  though
no  one  inculcated  forgiveness  and  forbearance  with
a  deeper  sense  ofthe  value  and  obligation  of  these
virtues,  did^not  interpret  either  of  them  to  require
an  unresisting  submission  to  every  contumely,  or
a  neglect  of  the  means  of  safety  and  self-defence.
He  took  refuge  fn  the  laws  of  his  country,  and  in
the  privileges  of  a  Roman  citizen^  from  the  con-
spiracy ofthe  Jews  X  Acts  xxv.UO  and  from
the  clandestine  violence  ofthe  chief  captain  (Acts
xxii.  25.) AndVyet  this  is  the  same  apostle  who

'  *  "  Whosoever  shall  smite  the?  on  Ay  risht  cheek,
tarn  to  him  the  other  also :  and  if  any  man  will  me  thee
at  the  law/and  take  awfry  thy  coat,  let  aim  have  thy
cloak  also ;  and  whosoever  snail  compel  toss  to  go  a
mile,  go  wjUrfakn  twain."


74


MORAL  AND  POLITICAL,  PHILOSOPHY.


reproved  the  BtigiouenesB  of  his  Corinthian,  con-
vert! with'  *  much  severity.  M  Now,  therefore,
there  is  utterly  a  fault  amongyou.  because  ye  go
to  law  one  with  another.  Why  do  ye  not  rather
take  wrong  ^  why  do  ye  not  rather  suffer  your-
selves to  be  defrauded?
"  On  the  one  handr  therefore,  Christianity  ex-
•cmdes  all  vindictive  motives,  and*  all  frivolous
causes,  of  prosecution ;  so  that  where  the  injury
is  small,  where  ho  gqod  Durpose  of  public  example
is- answered,  where  forbearance  is  not  likely  to
'  invite  a  repetition  of  fhelnjury,  or  where  the  ex-
.  pense  of  an  action  becomes  apunishment  too  Be-'
.veee  for  the  offence j  therettie  Christian  is  with-
hokjen  by  the  authority  of  his  religion  from  going
to  law*  .

On  the  other  hand,  a  law-suit  is  inconsistent
.with  no  rule  of  the  Gospel,  when  it  is  instituted,
- 1.  Fot  the  eatablwhing  of  some  im^Qitant  right

9.  For  the  procuring  a  compensation  for  some
considerable  damage.  -

'  3.  For  the  preventing  of  future.injury*  /
'  But  sines  it  irf  supposed  to  be  undertaken  sim-
ply with  a  view  to  the  ends  of  justice  and  safety,
the  prosecutor  of  the  action,  is  bound  to  confine
himself  to  the  cheapest,  process  which  will  ac-
complish these  ends,  as  well  as  to  consent  to  any
peaceable  expedient  for.  the  same  purpose ;  as  to  a
reference,  in  which  the  arbitrators  can  do,  what
tap  kwcannot,  divide  the  damage,  when  the  fault
Is  mutual ;  or  to  a  compounding  of  the  dispute,
by  accepting  a  compensation  in  the  gross,  without
entering  into  articles  and  items,  which  it  is -often
t  very  difficult  to  adjust  separately.

As  lib  the  rest,  the  duty  of  the  contending  par-
ties may  be  expressed  in  the  following  directions :

Not  by  appeals  to  prolong  a  suit  against  your
own  conviction;  •

Not  to  undertake  or  defend  a  suit  against  a
poor  adversary,  or-render  it  more  dilatory  or  ex-
pensive than  necessary,  with  the  hope  of  intimir
oajing  or  wearing  him  out  by  the  expense.

Not  to  influence  evidence  by  authority  or  ex-
pectation;

Nor  to  stifle  any  in  your'  possession,  although
.it  make  against  you.

.  Hitherto  we  hare  treated  of  civil  actions.  In
criminal  prosecutions,  the  private  injur/  should  be
forgotten,  and  the  prosecutor  proceed  with  the
same  temper,  and  upon'the  same  motives,  as  the
magistrate;  the  one  being  a  necessary  minister  of
Justice  as  well  as  the  other,  and  both  bound  to  di-
rect their  conduct  by  a  dispassionate  care  of  the
public  welfare.  *  .  •

In  whatever  degree  the  punishment  of  an  of"
fender  is  conducive,  or  his  escape  dangerous,  to
the  interest  of  the  community,  in  the.same  degree
is  the  party  against  whom  the  crime  was  com-
mitted bound  to  prosecute ;  because  such  prosecu-
tions must  in  th^if  nature  originate  from  the  suf-
ferer. -  *-

Therefore  great  public  crimes,  as  -jobberies,
forgeries,  and  the-  like,  ought  not  to  be  spared,
from  an  apprehension  of  trouble  or  expense  in
carrying  on  the*  prosecution,  from  false  sname,  or
misplaced  compassion.

There  are  many  offences,  such  as  nuisances,
neglect  of  public  roads,  forestalling,  engrossing,
smuggling,  sabbath-breaking,  pro&neness,  drunk-
enness, prostitution,  the  keeping  of  lewd  dr  dis-
orderly houses,  the  writing,  publishing/  or  expos-
ing to  sale,  lascivious  txwkftor  pictures,  with


others;  the  prosecution^  which:  being  of  equtl
concern  to  the  whole  neighbourhood,  cannot  )»
chajgea  as  a^pecutiar  obligation  upon  any- '

Nevertheless,  there  is  great  merit  in  the  person
.who  undertakes  such  prosecutions  open  proper
motives ;.  whiclT  amounts  to  the- same  thiiuj. •

The  character  of  an  informer  is  in  this  country
undeservedly  odious.  But  where  any  public  ad-
vantage islDcely  to  he  attained  by  information,  or
other  activity  in  promoting  the  execution  of  the
Igws,  a  good  man  will  despise  a  prejudice  founded
in  no  just  reason,  -or  will  acquit  himself  of  the
imputation  of  interested  designs  by  giving,  away
his  share  of  the  penalty.

On  the  other  hand,  prosecutions  for  thetssjee
of  the  reward,  or  for  the  gratification  of  private
enmity,  where  the  offence  produces  no  public
mischief/  or  where  it  arises  from  ignorance  or  in-
advertency, are  reprobated  under  the  general.de-
sfeription  of  applying  a  rule  of  lavrto  a  purpose
for  -which  it  woo  not  intended.  Under  which
description  may  be  ranked  an  officious  revival  of
the  laws  against.  Popish  priests,  and  dissenting
teachers.  '


.  CHAPTER  XL
Gratitude.

ExiMPi.E8.Df  ingratitudeUibeck  and  <
voluntary  beneficence:  and  m  this,  the  wwishifr
of  ingratitude  consists;  Nor^  the  mischief  small*,
for  after  all  js  done  that  can  be  done,  forwards  pro-
viding for  the  public  happiness,  by  proscribing
rules,  of  justice,  and  enforcing  the  observation  of
them-  by  penalties  or  eompulsfon,  much  must  be
left  to  those  offices"of  kindness,  which  men  remain
at  liberty  to  exert  or  withhold.  Now  not  only  the
choice  of  the  objects,  but  the  quantity  and  even
the  existence  of  this  eoit  of  kindness  in  the  world,
depends,  inja  great  measure,  Upon  the  retain
which  it  receives:  and  this  is  a  consideration  of
general  importance.

A  second  reason  forcultivating  a  grateful  tem-
per in  ourselves,,  fe  the -following: Tbe  same
principle,  which  Jb  touched  with  the  Itindneas  of
a  human  benefactor,  is  capable  of  being  affected
by  the  divine  goodness,  and  of  beconring^undet
the  inifaence  of  that  affection^  a  source  of  the
purest  and  most  exalted  virtue. The  love  of  God
is,  the  sub^mest  gratitude. It  is  a  mistake,  there-
fore,- to  imagine,  that  this  virtue  is  ornrtted  in
n>e  Christian  Scriptures;  for  every  precept  which
commands  us  4I  to  love  Gotf,  because  he  first  loved
us,"  presupposes  the  principle  of  gratitude,  «~^
directs  it  tojts  proper  object.

It  fa  'impossible  to  particularise  the  several  ex-
pressions or  gratitude,  inasmuch  as  they  vary  with
the  character  and  situation  of  the  benefactor,  and
with  the  opportunities  of  Nthe  person,  obliged-,
which  variety  admits  of  no  bounds-.

It  may  be  observed,  however,  that  gratitude  can
never  oblige  a  man  to  do  what  is  wrong,  and
wharby  consequence  he  is  previously  obliged  not  <
to  dp.  It  h  no  ingratitude*  to  refuse  to  "do,  what
we  'cannot  reconcile  (o  any  apprehensions  of  our
duty ;  but  it  is  ingratitude  and  hypocrisy  together
to  pretend  this  reason,  when  it  is  not  the  read  one:

i  the  frequency  Of  such  pretences  hss  brought
this  apology  for  non-comDliance  -with,  the  ^nHof  a
benefactor  into  uniwiritrw  disgrace. *•*


PUBLIC  USE  OF  MARRIAGE  INSTITUTIONS.


75


tioh  of  both  these  qualities,  as  well  as  -of  moral

probity,  to  take  advantage  of  that  ascendency

-  which  the  conferring  of  benefits  justly  creates,,  to

draw  or  drive  those  whom  we  have  obliged  into


CHAPTER  XU.

- Slander. •

:  Srairare  is  acting,  both  in  philosophical  strict-
Hess,  and  as  .to  all  moral  purposes :» for  if  (he  mfe-
ewef  and  motive  of  our  conduct  be  the  same,  the
mean*  which  we  use  make  no  different©.

And-thts  is  in  effect  what  our  Saviour  declares,
Matt.  xiiv37:— ""By  thy  words  thou  shalt  be
justified,  end  by  thy  words  thou  ahalt  be  condemn-
ed:" by  thy  words,  as  welL  that  is,;  as  by  tfey
acopne;  the  one  shall  be  taken,  into  the  .account
ssi  weU  a*  the  other,  for  they  both'  possess  thesame
pteyeity  of  voluntarily  producing  good  or  evil.

Slander  may  be  distinguished '  into  two'  kinds :
naBeious  alander,  and  inconsiderate  slander.

dfalicioua  alander  is  the  relating  of  either  truth
or  falsehood,  for  the  purpose  of  creating  misery.

f  acknpwiedge  that  the  truth  or  feJeebood  of
what  is  related;  varies  the  oWreeof  guilt  consider-
ably; and  that  slander,  in  the  ordinary  acceptar
tiott  of  the  term,  efeprifies  the  ckculatioaof  mis-
tbjg*oim/mIiehoQd:jKAJktrih  may  be  made  instru-
mental  to  the  success  of  malicious  designs  as  well
M-fchKOood;  and  if  the  end  be  bid,  the  means
cannot  be  innocent

I  think  the  idea  of  alander  ought  to  be  confined
to  the  production  ofprafitotous  miachieC  When
we  new*  am  end  or  interest  of  our  own  to  serve,
if  we  attempt  to  compass  it  by  falsehood,  it  is
jrmmd;  if  by  a  publication  of  the  truth,  it  is  net
without  some  additional  circumstance  of  breach
of  nresxese,  betraying  bf  confidence,  or.  the  like,  to


punish  such  servant  JGftr  a  thouffhtlessne
neglect  nearly  as  prejudicial  as  deliberate  disobe-
dience. 1  accuse  you  not,  he  may  amy,  of  any
express  intention  to  hurt  me;  but  had  not  the
fear  of  nrV  displeasure,  the  care  of  my  interest,
antl  indeed  all  the"  qualities  which  constitute  the
.merit  of  a  good  servant,  teen  wanting  in  you*
they  would  not  only  have  excluded  every  direct
purpose  of  giving  >me  uneasiness,  but  have  been
so  far  present  to  your  thoughts',  as  to  have  checked
that  unguarded  licentiousness  by  which  I  have-
suffered  so  much,  and  inspired  you  in  its  place
with'  an  habitual  solicitude  ajxmt  the  effects  and
tendency  of  wbat  you  diil  or  said.-*-This  very
much  resembles  .the  case  of  all  sins  of*  uraisaiders-
tion ;  and,  amongst  the&rempst  of  these,  that  of
inconsiderate  slander. .  •

Information  communicated  for  the  real  purpose
of  warning,  or  cautioning,  is.  not  alander.  .

Indiscriminate  praise  is  the  opposite  of  slander,
but  it  is  the  opposite  extreme ;  and,  however  it
may  affect  to  be  thought  to  be  excess  of  eandour,
is  commonly  the  effusion  of  a  frivolous  under-
standing, or  proceeds  from  a  settled  contempt  of
all  moral  distinctions.  •*


i  tfee  pain  is  intended  for  the  person
Id  whom  we  are  speaking:  at  other  times,  an  en-,
inky  is  to  be  gratified  by  the  prejudice  or  disoroet
of  a  third  person.  To  infuse  suspicions,  to  kindle
er  nail  in  i  ii  i  disputes,  to  avert  the  favour  and  es-
teem of  benefactors  from  their  dependents,  to  ren-
der some  one  whom  we  dislike  contemptible  or
^HsTiihnsT  in  the  public  opinion,  are  all  offices  of
atander ;  of  which  the  guilt  must  be  measured  by
the  rifi  rfry  and  extent  of  the  misery  produced. .
The  digues  under  which  slander  is  conveyed,
r  in  a  whisper,  with  injunctions  of  secrecy
'  \  affected  refactahce,  are
i  of  the  offence,  as  they
tand  design,
slander  is  a  different  offence,  al-
i  mischief  actually  follow,,  and  a>
^  .  the  mischief  .might  have  been  foreseen.
TaWnot  being  conscious  of  thaT design  which  we
.  to  the  slanderer;  makes

.  here  consists  in  the  wantof  that  re-
i  of  our  conduct,  which  a
I  for  numan  happiness,  and  concern
'  ewr  doty  would  not  have  failed  to  have  pro-'
aedmus.  And  it  is  no  answer  to  this  criminar
ueai  as  amy,  that  we  entertained  no  eril  design*  A


by  way  of  caution,  or  with  aflecta
an  at  many  aggravations  of  the
ssawjatoDBOvedenlieTationanddei


servant  maybe  a  tery  bad  servant,  and  yet  seldom
or  never  design  to  act  in.  opposition  to  his  mas-
ter's interest  or  will :  and  his'  master  may  justly

'aVaiA


BOOK  III.


PART  m.

OF  RELATIVE  PITIES  WHICH  lEBULT  FEOM
THE  OONBTITUTIDN  OP  THE  QEXEal

The  constitution  of  the  sexes  b  the  foundation,
of  marriage.

Collateral  to  the  subject  ojf  marriage,  are  for-
nication, seduction,  adultery,  incest,  polygamy,
divorce. -  %

•  Consequential  to  marriage,  is  the  relation  and
rednmcal  duty  of  parent  and  child.

We  will  treat  ot  these  subjects  in  the  following
order :  -first,  of  the  public  use  of  marriage  institu-
tions ;  secondly,  of  the  subjects  collateral  to  mar-
riage, in  the  order  in.  which,  we  have  here  pro-
posed them;  thirdly,  of  marriage  itself;  and,
lastly,  of  the  relation  and  ledptocal  .duties  of  pe-
rente  and  children*


*  CHAPTER  L  ' .  ,
Of  the  Buhlic  Use  qf  Marriage  Institution*.

The  public  use  of  marriage  institutions  con-
sists in  their  promoting  the  following  beneficial
effects.

1>  Tbe  private  comfort  of  individuals-,  especially
of  the  female  sex.  Jt  may  be  true,  that  all  are  not
interested  in  this  reason;  nevertheless,  it  is  a  rea-
son to  all  for  abstaining  from  any  conduct  which
tends  in  its  general  consequence  to  obstruct  mar-
riage :  for  whatever  promotes  the  happiness  of  the
maTority,  is  binding  upon  the  whole.

&  ^production  of  the  greatest  number  ef


76


MORAL  AND  POLITICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


healthy  children,  their  better  education,  end  the
making  of  due  proviskm^orthejr  settlement  in4ifa

3.  The  peace  of  human  society,  in-cutting  off  a
principal  source  of  contention,  by  assigning  one
or  more  women  to  one  manf  and  protecting  his
exclusive  right  by  sanctions  of  morality  and  law.

4.'  The.  better  government  of  society,  by  dis-
tributing the  "community  into  separate  families-,
and  appointing  over  each  the  authority  of  a  mas-
ter .of  a  family,  which  has  more  .actual  influence
than  all  civil  authority  pot  together.

6.  The.  same  end,  m  the  additional  security
Which  the  etateTreceives  for  the  good  behaviour  of
its  citizens,  from-  the*  solicitude  they  .feel  for  Che
welfare  of  their  children,  and  from  their  bejng
confined  to  permanent  habitations.  .  ^ '

.  6.  The  encouitfjgement  of  industry.

Some  ancient  nations  appear  to  have  been  more
sensible  of  the  importance  of  marriage  institutions
than  we  are.  The  Spartans  obliged  their  citizens
fo  marry  by  penalties,  and  the  Romans  encouraged
theirs  by  the-  jus  triufn  liberorum.  A  man  who
had  no  child,  was  entitled  By  the  Roman  law  only
to  one  half  of  any  legacy  that  should  be  left  him,
that  is,  at  the  moat,  could  only  receive  one  half  of
the  testator's  fortune.


CHAPTER  n.
Fornication. .

Tbb  first  and  great  mischief,  and  by  conse-
quence the  guik,  of  promiscuous  concubinage,
consists  in  its  tendency,  to  .diminish  marriages,
and  thereby  to  defeat  the  several  beneficial  pur-
poses enumerated  in  the'  preceding  chapter.

Promiscuous  concubinage  discourages  marriage,
by  abating  the  chief  temptation  to  jt.  The  male
part  of  the  species  will  not  undertake  the  en-
cumbrance, expense,  and  restraint  of  married  life,
if  they  can  gratify  their  passions  "at  a- cheaper
price ;  and  they  will  undertake  any  thing,  rather
than  not  gratify  them.

t  The  reader  will  learn  to  comprehend  the  mag-
nitude of  this  mischief,  by  attending  to  the  im-
portance and  variety  of  the  uses  to  which  mar-
riage is  subservient;  and  by.  recollecting  withal,
that  the  malignity  and  moaal  Quality  of  each  crime
is  not  to  he  estimated  by  the  particular  effect  of
doe  offence,  or  of  one  person's  offending,  but  by
-  the  general  tendency  and  consequence  of  crimes
of  the  same  nature.  The  libertine  may  net  be
conscious  that  these  irregularities  hinder  his  own
marriage,  from  which  he  is  deterred,  he  may  al-
legej  by  different  considerations ;  much  less  does
he  perceive  how  At*  indulgences  can  hinder  other'
men  from  marrying;  but-what  will  he  say  would
be  the  consequence,  if  the  same  licentiousness
were  universal  1  or  what  ahould  hinder  its  be-
coming universal,  if  it  be  innocent  or  allowable  m
him? .

9.  Fornication  supposes  prostitution;  and  pros-
titution brings  and  leaves  the  victims  of  it  to  al-
most certain  misery.  It  is  no  small  quantity  bf
misery  in  the  aggregate,  which,  between  want,
disease,  and  insult,  is  suffered  by  those  outcasts
ef  human  society,, who  infest  populous  cities;  the
whole  of  which,  is'a  general  consequence  of  for-
nication, and  to-the  increase  and  continuance  of
which,  every  act  and  instance  of  fornication  cori-


.  3.  Formcation*prpb^iceahab&tf
lewdness,  which  introduces  the  more  aggravated
crimes  of  seduction,- aduhejry,  violation,  &c.  Like-
wise, however  it  be  accounted  for,  the  criminal
commerce jbf  the  sexes  corrupts  and  depraves  the
mind  and  moral  character  more  than  any  single
species  of  vice  whatsoever.  Thai  ready  percep-
tion of  guilt,  that  prompt  and  decisive  resolution
against  it,  which  constitutes  a  virtuous  character,
is-  seldom  found  in-  person*  addicted  to  these  in- „
diligences.  .They  prej5are«an  easy  admission  for
every  sin  that  .seeks  it ;  are,  in  low  life,  usually  tie
first  stage  in  men's,  progress  to  the  most  desperate
villanies ;  and*,  in  high  fife,  to  that  lamented  disso-
luteness of  principle,  which  manifests  itself  in  a
profligacy  oi  public  conduct,  and  a  contempt  of  the
obligations  of  religion  and  of  moral  probity.  Add
to  this,  that  habits  of  ubertinism  incapacitate  and
indispose  the.  mind  for  all  intellectual,  moral,  and '
religious  -pleasures ;  which  is  a  great  Joss  to  any
man's  happiness.

4.  Fornication  perpetuates  a  disease,  which
may  be  accounted  one  of  the  sorest  m*ip«K»>  of
human  nature;  and  the  effects  oi  which  are  said
to  visit  the  constitution  of  even  distant  genera*
tions.  >  .

.  The  passion  being  natural,  proves  that  it  was
intended  to  be  gratified :  but  under  what  reetric-.
tions,  or  whether  without  any,  must  be  collected
from  different  considerations.  *

The  Christian  Scriptures  condemn  fornication
absolutely  and  peremptorily.  "  Oul  of  the.  heart,"
says  out  Saviour,  "  proceed  evil  'thoughts,  mur-
ders, adulteries,  fomicatwn^  thefts,  raise  "witness,
blasphemies ;  these  are  the  things  which  defile  a
man."* These  are  Christ's  own  words :  and  one
word  from  him  upon  the  subject,  is  final. It-may
be  observed  with  what  society  fornication  is  clans
ed;  with  murders,  thefttf,  false  witness,  blasphe-
mies. I  do  not' mean  that  these  crimen  are  all
equal,  because  they  are  all  mentioned  together;
but  it  proves  that  they  are  all  Crimea* 'The  apos-
.tles  ate  more  full  upon  this  topic.  ,-One  well-known'
passage  in  tjie  EptBtte  to  the  Hebrews,  may  stand
in  the  place  of  ail  others ;  because,  admitting  the
authority  by  which  the  apostles  of  Christ  spake
and  wrote,  it  is  decisive :  "  Marriage  and  the  bed
un'defiled  is  honourable  amongst  ail  men:  but
whoremongers  'and  adulterers  God  will  judge;11
which  was  a  great  deal  to  say,  at  a  time  when  it
was  not  agreed,  even  amongst  phflos»phen~them-
seivea,  that  fornication  was  a  crime.

The*Scriptures  give  no  sanction  to  those  aus-
terities, which  have  been  since  imposed  upon  the
world  under  the  name  of  Christ's  religion ;  ma  the
celibacy  of  the  clergy,  the  praise  of  perpetual  vir-
ginity, the  prohibiiio  concubituB  cum  gravida
nxore ;  but  with  a  just  knowledge  of,  ana  regard
to,  the  condition  end  interest  of  the  human  spe-
cies, have  provided,  in  the*  marriage  of  one  man
with  one  wornan,  an  adequate  gratification  for  the
propensities  of  their  nature,  and  have  restricted
them  to  that  gratification.

The  avowed  toleration,  and  irr  some  countries
the  licensing,  taxing;  and  regulating  of  public
brothels,  has  appeared  to  the  people  an  authorising-
of  fornication;  and  has  contributed,  -with  other


*  Of  this  passion  it  has  been  truly  staid,  that  "  irregu-
larity baa  no  limits ;  that  one  excess  draws  on  another ;
that  the  most  easy,  therefore,  as  we  11  as  the  most  excel-
lent way  6f  being  virtuous,  is  to  be  *o  entirely.  ••  Osrden.
Berm.  xvi.  -  • ** ^


SEDUCTION.


tamm,so  for  to  vitiate  the*  public  opinion,  tfafet
thereiBno  practice  of  which  the  immorality  is  so
fittle  thought  of  or  acknowledged,  although  there
areJewln  which  it  can  nwre  plainly  be  made  oat
The  legislators  who  have  patronwed  receptacles
ef  proeMnrton.  ought  to  have  foreseen  tbia>  effect,
at  well  as'conssjIeTedVthat  whatever  facilitates  for-
ineation,  dmrimshf*  marriages.  And{  as  to  the
usual  apology  for  this  relaxed  discipline,  the
danger  or  greater  enormities,  if  access  to  prosti-
totes  we$e  too  strictly  watched  arid  prohibited,  it
wfl!  be  time  enough  to  look  to  that,  when  the  laws
and  the  inegtenfor  have  done  their  Utmost.  The
greatest  vigilance  of  both  wiH  do  no  more,  than
oppose  some  bounds  and  some  difficulties  to  Uiasr
mtercourse.  And,  alter  all,  these  pretended  fears
are  without  foundation  in  experience.  The  men
are  in  all  respects  the  most  virtuous,  in  countries
where  the  women  are  moat  chaste.

There  je  a;  species  of  cohabitation,  distinguish*
able,  no  doubt,  from  vagrant  concubinage,  and
wmeh,  by  reason  of  its-resemblance  to  marriage.'
may  be  tooufcht  topaitkapafe'  of  the  sanctity  ana


flhat  estate;  I  mean  the  case  of  kept
aaasfresset,  under  the  mvoumbtetiicumstance  of
mutual  fflefty.  This  case  I  have  heard  defended
by  some  such  apok^  as  the  following:  .
\  "That  the mangge-rite. being diferent  in  dif-
ferent countries,  and  m  the-same  country  amongst
dilfcwiiit  eeets,  and  with  some  scarce  any  thing;'
and,  moreover,  not  being  prescribed  or -even  men-
tioned m  Scripture,  can  be  accounted  pr  prdy  as
of  a  form  and  ceremony  of  human  invention:
that,  consequently,  if  a  man*  fend  woman  betroth
and  confine  themselves  to  each  other,  their  inter-
course most  beihe  same,  as  to  all  moral  purposes,
as  if  (hey  were  legally  married;  for  the  addition  or
emission  of  that  wmeh  b  a  mere  fornVand  cere-
mony, can  make  no  difference  in  the  sight  of  God,
or  hi  the  actual  nature  of  right  and  wrong."

To  aB  wmeh  it  miy  be  replied,  •

L  If  the  situation  of  the  parties  be  the  same
thing  as  marriage,  why  do  they  not  iparry  %

%  If  me  man  choose  to  Tiavett  in  hia  power  to
daaanss  the  woman  at  Ins  pleasure, -or  to  retain
her  in  a  state  of  humiliation  ancf  dependence  in-
csewssteat  with  the  rights  which  marriage  Would
confer  upon^fterY  it.  is  not  the  same  thing.

It  is  not  at  any  rate  t£e  same  thing  to  the


nil,  aa  to  the  n^arriage-rite^being  a  mere
and  that  also,  variable,  the  same  may  be
aaht  of  signing  and  eeakng  of  jwnoTs,  wills,  deeds
af  fMij  afalti,  and  the  hie,  which  yet  make  a
meat  difference  in  the  rights- and  obligations  of.
me  auotifls)  conoarned^in  them.  *

And  with  respect  to  the  rite  not  being,  appoint-
ed in  Scripture  ;--the  Scriptures  forbid  fornfea-
~ "'  "' ' ' lwitnoutm


t  marriage,  leaving
it  to>  the  law  of-  each  country  to  pronounoe  what"
m,  or  what  niakas.  a  marriage;  in  like  manner
* r  felted  theits,  that  is,  the  taking,  away  of.
r"a  prowerty,  leavimi.it  to  the  municipal
-fix  what  makes  the  thing  property,  or
i  it  in;  which  also,  as  well  as  marriage,  de-

1  arbitrary  and  mutable  forms.

Vde  the  injunctions  of  Scripture,  the!
L  of  the  question  seems  tobe  this":  It
_  ,  because  it  is  pernicious,  that  men  and

vuaneai  aaaould  cohabit,  without  undertaking  car-
■nut  iiiqfuiabie  obugations,  and  mutually  con-
■"* *-*-*!  chil rights;  $  therefore,  the  law


has  annexed  these  right*  an/4  oWgaflfons  to  cer-
tain forma,  so  that  they  cannot  be  secured  or  un-
dertaken- by  any  other  means,  which  is  the  case
here  (for,  whatever  the  parties  may  promise  to
^each  other,  nothing  but  tip  marriage-ceremony
can  make  their  promise  irrevocable,)  it  becomes  in
the  jnme  degree  immoral,  that  men  and  women
should  cohabit  without  the  interposition  of  these,
forms.  .;-•  *. '  .-


If  fornication  be  criminal,  all  those  incentives
which  lead  to*  it.  are  accessaries 'to  the  crime  y  aa
lascivious  conversation,  whether  expressed  in  ob»
scener  or  disguised  under  modest  phrases;  also
wanton eongs,  pictures,  books;  the  writing,- pub-
lishing, and  circulating,  of  which,  whether  out  of
frolic,  or  for  some  pitiful  proijt,  is  productive  of  so
extensive  a  mischief  from,  so  mean  a.  temptation, '
that  few  crimes,  within  the  reach  of  private  wick-
edness, have  more  to  answer  for,  or  less  to  plead
in  their  excuse.  -m

Indecent  conversation,  and  by  parity  of  reason
all  the  rest,  areJforbidden  by  Saint  Paul,  Eph.  iv.
29.  "  Let  no  corrupt  communication  proceed  out
ef  your  mouth "  and,  again,  Col.-  iii.  "8.  "-Put  off
finm  communication  ou^  of  your  mouth. "

..The  invitation,  or  voluntary  admission,  of  im-
pure thoughts,  or  the  suffering  them  to"fcef  pos-
session of  the  imaginatien^fidls  within  the  same
description,  and  is  condemned  by  Christ,  Matt.  v.
28.  ""Whosoever  looketh  on  a  woman  to  lust  after
her,  hath  committed  adultery  with  her  already  in
hiirhearL"  Christ,  by  thus  enjoining  a  regulation
of  the  thoughts,  strikes  at  the  rootrofthe'  evil.


' CHAPTER  HL
.  :  "* '  Seduction.

The  seducer  practises  the  same  stratagems  to
draw  a  woman's  person,  into  his  power,  that  a
avpndler  does  to  get  possession  of  your  goods,  ox
money;  yet  the  laic  of  honour,  which  abhors  de-
ceit, applauds  the  address  of  a  successful  intrigue ;
so  much  is  this  capricious  rule  guided  by  names,
and  with  such  facility  does  it  accommodate  itself
to  the  pleasures  and  conyeniency  of  higher  life !

Seductionls  seldom  accomplished  without  fraud ;
and  the  fraud  is  by  so  much  more  criminal  than
other  frauds,  aa  the  injury  effected  by  it  is  greater,
continues  longer,  and  less  admits  reparation.

This  injury  is  threefold:  to  the  .woman,  to  her
fiunUy,  and  to  the  public.  '  .

I.  The  injury  to  the  womsri  is  made  up  of  the
nam  she  suffers  from  shame,  or  the  Ion  she  sustains
m  her  reputation  and  prospects  of  marriage,  and
of  the  depravation  of  her  moral  principle.

1.  Thisjrtin  must  be  extreme -if  we  may  judge
of  it  from  those  barbarous*  endeavours  to  conceal
their  disgrace,  to  which  women,  under  such  cir-
cumstances, sometimes  have  recourse ;  comparing
also  this  barbarity  with  their  passionate  fondness
for  their  onspring  in  other  cases.  Nothing  but  an
agony  of  mind  the  most  insupportable  can  induce
a  woman  to  forget  her  nature,  and  the  pity  which
even  a  stranger  would-show  to  a  helpless  and  im-
ploring infant.  It  is  true,  Chat  all  are  not  urged
to  this  extremity  •  but  if  any  are,  it  affords  an  me-
dication of  how  much  all  suffer  from  the  same
cause. What  shall  we  say  to  the  authors  of  such

7*  *


78


MORAL  AND  POLITICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


8.  TheibMWhkhawoman«Qrtak«brtheroifi
of  her  reputation,  almost  exceeds  computation.
Every  person's  happiness  depends  in  part  Upon
the  respect  and  reception  'which  they  meet  with
in  the 'world;  and  it  is  no  inconsiderable  mortifi-
cation, even  to  the- firmest  tempers,  tote  rejected
from  the  society  of-  their  equals,  or  received  there
with  neglect  and  disdain.  But  this  is  not  all,  nor
the  worst  By  srrule  of  life,  which  it  is  not  easy
Co  blame,  and  which  it  is  impossible  to  alter,  a
woman  loses,  with  her  chastity  the  chance  of  mar-
rying at  all,  or  in  any  manner  equal  to  the  hepes
she  had  been  accustomed  to  entertain.  Now  mar-
riage, whatever  ifbe  to  a  manjs  that  from  which
every  woman  expects  her  chief  happiness..  And
this  is  still  more  true  in. low  life,  of  which  con-
dition the  Women  are  who  are  most  exposed  to
solicitations  of  this  sort  Add  to  this,  that  where
a  woman's  maintenance  depends  upon  her  cha-
racter (as  it  does,  in  a  great  measure,  with  those
who  are  to  support  themselves  by  service,)  little
sometimes  is  left  to  the  forsaken  sufferer,  but  to
starve  for  want  of  employment,,  or  to  have  re-
course to  prostitution  for  food  and  raiment-

'3.  As  a  woman  collects-  her  virtue  into  this
point,  the  loss  of  her 'chastity  is  generally  the
deatruetiori  of  hit  moral  principle  ;  and  this  con-'
sequence  is  .to  be  apprehended,  whether  (he  cri-
minal intercourse  be  dlscoverebVor  not. '

II.  Themju^tothefitinilynmvbeiindeTstood,
by  the  application  of  that  infallible- rule,  '".of  do-
ing to  others,  what  we  would  (hat  others  should
do  unto  us.'*— Let  a  father  or  a  brother  say,  for
what  consideration  they  would  suffer  tins  injury
to  a  daughter,  or .  a  sister ;  and  whether  any,  or
even  a  total,  loss  of  fortune,  could  create  eoual
affliction  and  distress.  And  when  they  .reflect
upon  this,  let  them  distinguish,  if  they  can,  be*
tween  a  robbery,  committed .  upon  thepr  property
by  fraud  or  forgery,  and  the  ruin  of  th$tr  happiness
by  the  treachery  or  a  seducer.

III.  The  public  at  large  lose  t,he  benefit  of  the
Woman's  service  in  h*r  proper  place  and  destina-

,  tfan,  as  a  wife  and  parent  This,  to  the  whole
community,  may  he  little :  but  ft  is  often  more
than  all  the,  good  which  the  seducer  does  to  the.
community  pan  recompense.  Moreover,  prostitu-
tion iOupplied  bj  seduction ;  and  in  proportion
to  the  danger  there  *>  of  the  woman's  betaking
herself,  after  her  first  sacrifice,  to  a  life  of  public
fewdnessrthe  seducer  is  answerable  for  the  mul-
tiplied evils  to  which  his  crime  gives  birth.

Upon  the  whole,  if  we  pursue  the  effects  of  se-
duction through  the  complicated  misef^  which  it
occasions,  and  if  it  be  right  to  estimate  crimes'  by
the  mischief  they  knowingly  produce,  it  will  ap-
pear something  more  than  mere  invective  to  as-
sert, that  not  one  half  of  the  crimes,  $r  which
men- sutler  death  by  the  laws  of  England,  are  so
flagitious  as  this.* .  • " .

CHAPTER  IV.  • ,'•

Adultery.

A  .new  sufferer  'is.  introduced,— the  injured"
husband,  who  receives  a  wound  in  hisvsensiwlity

•  Yet  the  law  hat  provided  no  punishment  for  this
offence  beyond  a  pecuniary  satisfaction  to  the  injured
family ;  and  this  can  only  be  come  at  by  one  of  the
quaintest  fteUoas  i*  the  world :  by  the  father's  bringioff
bis  action  against  the  sedtioer,  for  the  lose  of  bis
daughter's  service,  daring  bar  pregnancy  aad  nurturing.


.  the  most  painful  and  ineuxabsi
that  human  nature  knows. In  all  other  respects,
adultery  on.  the  part  of -the  than  who  solicits  the
chastity  of  a  married  woman,  incljldee  the  crime
of  seduction*  and  is  attended  with  the  same  mis-
chief. "  "'/'.••,
The  infidelity- of  the  woman  is  aggravated  by
cruelty  to  her  children,  who  are  generally  in-
volved in  their  parents^  shame,  and  always  mads
unhappy  by  their  quarreL -
.  IfitbesWtnatthesecenseonencss
able  not  so  much  upon  the  crime,  as  the  discovery, '
we  answer,  first  that  the  crime  coujd  not  he  dis-
covered unless  it  were  committed,  and1  that  the
commission  b  never  secure  from  dueovery ;  and
secondly,  that  if  we  excuse*  adulterous  connexions,
-whenever  they  can  hope  to  escape  detection,
which  is  the  conclusion  to  which  this  argument
conducts  us,  we  leave  the  husband  no  other  se-
curity for  his  wife's  chastity,  than  in  her  want  of
opportunity  or 4emptatior4;  which  would  probably
either  deter  men  from  mvrrying,  or  render  Mar-
riage a  state  of  such  jealousy  and  alarm  to  the
husband,  as  must  end  in  the  slavery  aikl 'confine-
ment of  the  wife.  ' ' f\
'  The  Vow,  by  which  married  persons  mntnatta
engage  their  fidelity,  "  is  witnessed  before.God/  •
anu  accompanied  wxh  circumstances  oTsnieinhity
and  religion,  wbich~apnroach  to  the  nature  of  ajt
oath. The  married  oflenoVr  therefore  incurs  a
crime  little  .short  of  perjury,  and  the  seduction  of
a  ■oarried  woman  is  htQe  less  than  subornation
of  perjury; and  this  guilt  is  independent  of  the


All  behaviour  whicl)  is  designed*  or  which
knowingly  tends,  to  captivate  the  anWtaonof  a
married  woman)  is  a  barbarous  intausion  upon
the  peace  and  virtue  of  a  nuuiry,  though  it  mil
abort  of  adultery. '  - •

The  usual  and  only  apology  for  adultery  it,  the
prior  transgression  or  the  other  party. There  are
degrees,  no  doubt,  in  tins,  as  in  other  crimes :
and  so  far  as  the  bad  effects  of  adultery  are  anti-
cipated by  the  conduct  of  the  husband  or  wife
who  offends  first  the  guiltof  the  second  odendst
Wlea*.  But  this  falls  very'  far  short  of  a  justifica-
tion;  unless  it  could  be  shown  that  the  obligation
of  the  rnarriage-vow  depends  upon-  the  conoitka\
ef  reciprocal  nuefity ;  for  which  conatroctidti  there
appears  no  foundation,  either  in  expediency,  or  in
the  termtwof  the  promise,  or  in  the  design  of  the

>-ine»


legisJature  wjnch prescribed  the  nasnrmge-n
Moreover,  the  rule  contended  for  bV  {hia  ptea,  1
a  manifest  tendency  to  multiply  the  offence,  trat
none  to  reclaim  the  offender.  ~  r  * ; •

The  way  of  considering  the  ofietsos)  of  one
fnrty  as  a  'provocation  to  the  other,  and  the  other
as  only  retaliating  (be  injury  by  repeating  the  -
crime,  is  a  childish  trifling  with-  woriSa.'

"Thou  *halt  not  commit  adultery^'  was  nn
interdict  delivered  by  Gfod  himself ' By  tk*e  Jew-
ish.tew,  adultery  was  capital  to  both  parties  in
the  crime:  "Even  he  that'  committeth  adultery
with -his.  neighbour's  wife,  the  adulterer  and  adul-
teress shall  sorely  be  put  to  death/'; — Levit.  zx.  10.
Which  passages  prove,  that' the  Divhie Legis-
lator placed  a  great  difference  between  adultery
and  fornication. "And  with' this  agree  the  Chris-
tian Scriptures:  for,  in  almost  all  the  catalogues
they  have  left  us  of  crimes  and  crimmala, ti»y
enumerate  "fornication,  adultery,  whoremonger*,
adultererar  (Matthew  xv.  1%  i  Cor.  vi.  9.  Crei


' INCEST.


show  thatihey  did  not  consider  them  arfta  same :
bat  that-  die  crime  'of  adultery  wasrin  their  ap-
prehension, distinct  from,  and  accumulated  upon
font  fff  fcrnVyifrm *•*

The  history  of  the  women  taken-  in  adultery,
recorded  in  the  eighth  chapter-of  St  Jtfhn's  Gos-„
pel  ha*  been  thought-fay  some  to  give  countenance
4o  that  came.  As  ChrisUoldtJte  woman,  "Neither.
do  1  condemn,  thee,",  we  most  believe,  it  is  uaitf,
that  he  deemed'  her  conduct  either  not  criminal*'
or  not  a  crime,  however;  of  the  heinous  nature
which  we  represent  it  to  be. A,  more  attentive

mw»w*in»*irm*  nftlte  «m  yril\i  I  thinly  wmwivw  im

that  from  it  nothing  can  be  concluded  as  to  Christ's
opinion  concerning  adultery  r  either  one  way  or
the  other.  The.  transaction  is.thus  related:  "Early
in  theunorning  Jesusjcame  again  into  the  temple,
and  all  the  people'  cfme  unto  him:  add  he  sat
down  and  taught  them.  And  the  Scribes  and
Pharisees)  brought-  unto  him  a  woman  taken  tn
adnhjery:  when  they  had  set  her  in  the  midst,'
they  sty  unto  him,  Master^  this  woman  was  taken
madunes^ui  the  very  act:  now  Moses  in 'the  law
cnminanded  that  such  should  be  stoned ;  but  what
sayest  thoul  Thjs  they  said  tempting  himv  that
tbejTbaghi  have  to  accuse  him.  But  Jesus  stoops
ed  down,  and  with  his  finger  wrote  on  the  ground,
as  tfcongh  he  heard  them  not.  .*  So  when  they
crmtinqpd  nsiring  him,  he  lift  up  himsefc.  and  said
onto  teams.  He  Jhat.  m  without  sin  amongst  you,1
let  him  first  cast. a  stone  at  her;  and  again  he
stooped  down  and  wrote- on  the  ground :  and  they
whi&heanj  it,  being  convicted  oy  their  own  con-
scwmee,  went  out.  one  by  one,  beginning  ait  thft
eUest  even  onto  the  last ;  and  Jeans  was  left  alone,
and  the  woman  standing  in  the  midst.  When
Jeans  laid  nil  qp  himself;  and  saw  hone  but  the
woauan,'iie  said  unto  her.  Woman,  where  are
those  thine  accusers  ?  hath  no  man  condemned
thee?  She  said  unto  horn,  No  man,  Lord.  Ano/
ha  said  unto  I$er,  Neither  do  I  condemn  thee;  go,


•TTbi  theysaid4emptmg  him,  that  they  might
have  to  accuse  him;"  to  draw  him.  thatis,  into  in
eiawisf  of  judicial  authority,  that  they  might  have
to  accuse  him  before  the Reman  governor,  of  usurp-
ing or  lUteriifcwMhW  with  the  civil  government.
TOs  was  their  dtttra;  and  ChriatS  behaviour
the  whole  affair  proceeded  firom  a
i  of  this  design,  and  a  determination  4o
I  nV  He  gives  them  at  flnf.a  cold  and  sullen
well  suited  u)  the  insidious  intention
with"  which  they  came:  "fie  stooped  down,  and
wins,  his  finger  wrote  on  the*  ground,  as  though
he  hssod  them  not"  "When  they  continued  ask-
""  * H  when  they  teased  him  to  speak,  he-dis-

em  with*  rebuke,  which  the  impertinent

» of  their  errand,  as*  welt  as  the  -sacred  cha-.
nacaar  of  nmny  of  them,  deserved:  '{He  that  is  with-
es* aha  (thatis,  this,  aw)  among  you,  let  hhn  first
cast  a\atecfe  other."  Uijs had  its  effect;  Stung
with  the  reproof,  and  disappointed  of  their  aim.
ffhey  stole  atwmy-one  by  dnev  and 'left ^Jesufr  and
'"  an-  alone. And  -then  follows  the  con-

_,  which  is  the  part  of  the' narrative  most
I  to  oor  present  subject "Jesus  said  unto
her.  Woman,,  when  are'  those  thine  accusers?
InaWMinamcoDn^mned'thee^  She  said,  Np  man.
And.  Jesus'  said  unto  her,  ^either  do  X
i ;  go,  and  sin  no  more."  How,  When
,  the  woman,  "Hath  no  man  con-


o^w«<d  thee  r  he  certainly  spoke,  and  was  un-
derstood by  'the  woman  to  speak,  of  a  legal  and
judicial  condemnation.;'  otherwise,  her  answer,
"No  man,  Lord,"  was  not  true.  In -every  other
sense  of  condemnation,  as  blame,  censure,  reproof,

Srivate  judgment,  and  the  like,  many  had  cOn-
emned  her;  all  those  indeed  who  had  brought
her  to  Jesus.  If  then  a  judicial  sentence  was  what"
Christ  meant  by  condemning  in  the  .question,  the
common  use  of  language  rajmree  us'  to  suppose
that  he  meant  the  same  in  his  reply,  ^Neither  do
I  condemn  t^ee,"  i.e.  I' pretend  tor  no  judicial
character  or  authority  over  thee)  it  is  no  office  or
business  of  mine  to  pronounce  or  execute»the  sen-
tence of  tfie  law.  ''  -  -  %
When  Christ  adds,  "Go,  and  sin  no  more,4'  he
in  effect  tells  her,  that  she  had  sinned  already :
but  as  to  the  degree  or  quality  of  the  sin,  xx
Christ's  opinion  concerning  it,  nothing  v  declared,
or  can  be  inferred;  either  way.  *  -
;  Adultery-,  which  was  punished'  with  death  dnr-
ingtHe  Usurpation,  is  now  regarded  by;  the  law
ofEngland  onto  as  a  civil  injury  ;<  for  which,  the
imperfect  satisfaction  that  money  can  afford^  may
he  recovered  by  the  husband.


.'CfiAPTERT. v .

. '  /*»•<. * ' • ' '

»•■»''"  '  i  ■ *.

Itr  order  to  ^preserve  chastity  in  families, -and
between  persons  of  different  sexes,,  brought  up
and  living  together  in  a -state  of  unreserved  hfc-
timacjr,  it  is  necessary;  by  every*  method  <possibIe,
to  inculcate  an  abhorrence  6t  incestuous  conjunc-
tions ;  which  abhorrence  can  only  be  upholden  by
the  •absolute  reprobation  of  all  commerce  of  the
sexes  between  near' .relations.  Upon  this  prin-
ciple, the  marriage  as  v^ell  as  other  cohabitations
oi  brothers  and  sisters,  ef  lineal  kindred,  and  of
all  who  usually  live  in  the  same  family,  maybe
said  to  be  forhejden  by  the-  law  of"  nature. /

Restrictions  Which  extend  to  remoter  degrees
of  kindred  than  what  this  reason  makes  it  neces-
sary to  prohibit  from  mtermarriage,  are.  bounded
in  the  authority  of  the  positive  law  which  ordains
them,  and  can  only  be  justified  by  their  tendency
to  diffuse  wealth,  to  connect  families*  or  to  pro-
mote some  poUticaVsdvahtagB.

.The  Leyitical  law,  which  is  received  in  this
country,  arid  from  which  tie  rule  of  the  Roman
law'diifers-very  little,,  prohibits*  marriage  between
relations',  -within  r/irc^  degrees  of  kindred ;.  com-
puting the  generations,  not  from,  but  through  the
common.  .ancestor,  and  accounting  -affinity  the
sfuness^nsatiguinity.  '  The  issue;  however,  of
such  marriagesjare  not  bastardised,  unless0  the'
parents  be  divorced  during  their  life-time. . -  .

The  Egyptians'are  said  to  have  allowed  of  the
marriage  of  brothers  and  sisters.  Amongst  die
Athenians,  a' very  singular-regulation  prevailed;
brothers  and  sisters  ofthe  half  blood,  if  related  by
the  father's  side,  might  marry ;  if  by^tSe  mothers
side,  they  "were  prohibited  from  marrying. .  >The
.same  custom  also  probably  obtained  in  Chaldea/so
early  as  the  age  in  which  Abraham  left  it ;  for  he
and  Sarah  his  wife  stood"  m  Ibis'  relation  to  each


•  The  Boman  la*  continued  the  prohibition  to  the
descendant*  of  brothers  and  .sisters-  without  limits.  In
the  Levities]  and  English  law,  there  is  nothing  to  bin-
der a  man  from  marrying  bis/rsat-niece.


MORAL  AND  .POLITICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


80


other:  "And  yet,  indeed,  sue  is  my  sitter;  she  is
the  daughter  of  my  father,  bat  not  of  my  mother  j
and  she  became  mytrife.''  Gen.  xz.  12.


\ CHAPTER  VI.

.  . Polygamy.

'  The  equality*  in  the  number  of  males  and  fe-
males torn  into  the  world,  intimates  the  intention
ofOod,  that  one  woman  should  be  assigned  to  one
man: -for  if  to  one  man  be  allowed  an  exclusive
right  to  free  or  more  women)  four  or  more  men
'must  be  deprived  of  the  exclusive  possession  of
any :.  which  could  never  be  the  order  intended.

It  seems  also  a  significant  indication  of  the  di-
vine veiU,  that  tie  at  first  created  only  one^womah
to  one  man:  Had  God  intended  polygamy  for  the
species,  it  is  probable  he  would  nave  begun,  with
it;  especially  as,*by  giving  to  Adam  more  wives
than  one,  tfce  multiplication  of  the  human  race
would  have  proceeded  with  a  quicker  progress.

Polygamy  not  only  violates  the  constitution  of
nature,  and  the  apparent  design  of  the  Deity,  but
produces  to  the  parties  themselves,  and  to  the  pub-
lic, the  following  bad  effects ;  contests  and  jealou-
sies amongst  the  wives  of  the  vine  husband  -t  dis-
tracted affections,  or  the  loss  of -all  affection,  in  the
husband  himself:  a  voluptuousness  in  the  rich,
which  dissolves  the  vigour  of  their  intellectual  as
well  as  active  faculties,  producing  that  indolence,
and  imbecility  both  of  mmd  and  body,  which  have
•long  characterised  the  nations' of  me  East;  the
abasement  of  one*  half  of  the  human  species,  who,
-  in  countries.  wl>ere  polygamy  obtains,  an*  degraded
into  mere  instruments  of  physical  pleasure  to  the
other  half;  neglect  ypf  children.;  And  the'  mani-
fold, and  sometimes  unnatuml  mischiefs,  which
arise  from  a  scarcity  of  women!  To  *  compensate  -
for- these  evils,  polygamy  does  pot  offer  a  single
advantage.  In^the  article  of  population,  which  it
has  been  thought  to  promote,  the  community  gain
'  nothing  :t  for  the  question  is  nbt,  whether  one
man  will  have  more  children  by  five  or-more  wives
than  by  one ;  but  whether  these  five  wives  would
not  bear  the  same" or  a  greater  number  of  ehildren
.to  £ve  separate  husbands.  And  as  to  the  care  of
the  children,  when  produced,  and  the  sending  of
<t^em  into  the  worta  in  situations  in  which  they
•  may  be  likely  to  form-  and  bring  up  families  of

*  This  equality  is*  not  exact,  ybe-  number  of  male
infants  exceeds  that  of  females  in  the  "proportion  of
nineteen  to  eighteen. xor  thereabouts :  which  excess  pro-
vides for  the  greater  consumption  of  males  by  war,  aea-
-  faring,  and  other  dangerous- or  unhesltbfDccupations.

t  Nothing,  I  mean,  compared  with  a  state  in  which
marriage  is  nearly  universal.  Where  marriages  are  leas
sejiera[,  and  many  women  unfruitful  from  the  want  of
husbands,  polygamy  might  at  first -add  a  little  to  popuJa-
.tion,  and  but  a  little ;  for,  as  a  variety  of  wives  would
oa  sought  chiefly  from  temptations  of  voluptuousness,  it
would  rather  iacrease  the  demand  for  female  beauty,"
than  for  the  es*  at  large.  And  this  UttU  Would  soon  be
made  less  *y  many  deductions.  For*  first,  as  no/fe  *but
the- opulent  can  maintain  a  plurality  of  wives,  where
polygamy  obtains,  the*  rich  indulge  in  it  while  the' rest
take  up with.a  vague  andjtarren  incOntinency.  And,
secondly,  women  would  grow  less  jealous  of  .their  vir-
tue, "When-  they  had. nothing  for, which  to* reserve  it,  but
a  chamber  in  the  karanC\  when  their  chastity  was  no
.  longer  to*  he  regarded  with  the  eights  and  happiness  of
a  wife,  as  enjoyed  under  the"  marriage.of  one  woman  to
one  man.  These  considerations  may.  be  added  to  what
is  mentioned  in  tnetext,  concerning  the  easy  and  early
settlement  ofchildrsnia  the  world.  .


their  own,  upon-which  the^  increase  and
ek>n  of  the.  human 'species  ,in  a  great
depend ;  this  is  less  provided- for,  and  less  -practi-
cable, where  twenty  or  thirty  children'  are  to  «pe
supported  by  the  attention  and-  fortunes  of  one
father,  than  if  they  were -divided  into  Ave  or  sue
families,  to'  each  of  which  were  assigned  the  indus-
try and  irmeritahce  of  two  parent*, ..  . - .

Whether  simultaneous  polygamy  was  permit-
led  by  the  law  of  'Moses,,  seems  doubtful:*
but  whether  permittejj.  of  not,  it  was  certainhr
-prsjctised  by  the  Jewish jpatriarchfc,  both  before
that  law,  and  under  it  .  The  permission,  if  there
were  any,  might  be  like  that  of  divorce,  *i  for  the
hardness  of  their  heart,"  in  condescension  to  their
restqblished  indulgences,  rather  than  from  -the
general  rectitude  or  propriety  of  the  tlpng  itself,.
The  state  of  manners  in  Ju<Jtea  had  probably
undergone  a  reformation  inline  respect  before  the
time  of  Christ  j  for  in  the  ffew  Testament  wre
meet  with  no  trace  or  mention'  of  any  such  prac-
tice being  tolerated.

For  which  reason,auid  because  U  was  tikejvise  -
forbidden  amongst  the  Greeks  and*  ttomansj  we
cannot  expect  to  find  any- express  law -upon  the
subject  in  the  christian  code/  The  words  of
Christ  t  (Matt  xix.  9.)  may-be  construed,  by  an
easy  implication,  to  pro&Eit  polygamy :  for,  if
whoever  putteth  jtway  his  wife,  and  vuxrrieth
another,  committeth  ^adultery1,"  "he  wh6  mairieth.
another /ictt/iou*  putting  away  the  first,  is  no  learn
guilty  of  adultery:  Because  the  adultery  does  not
consist  in  the  -repudiation  of  the  first  wife  .(for,
however  unjust 'or.  cruel  that  may.be,  it  is  not
adultery,)  but  in  entering  intoe  seoonj-nuuiiace
during  the  legal  existence-  artd  obhgaiion  of  tRe  -
first  The  several  passages  in  St  Paul's  writings,
which'  apeak  of  inamage,  always :  suppose-  it  to
signify  the  onjon  of  one  man  with  one  woman.
Upon  this  supposition  he  argues.  Ronton.  ^,  3,
3.  "  Know  ye  not,  brethren,  (for  I  speak  to  them
that  know  the  law,)  how-  that  the  Jaw  hath
dominion  over  a  man,  as  long  as.  he  liveth  1 "Fes?
the  woman'  which  halh  anJrasband,  is  bound  bjr
the  law  toiler  husband  so  long  as  he  liveth :  bmt  if
the  husband  be  dead,  she  is  loosed  .from  the  Jew
of  her  husband :  so  then,  if  while  Her  husband
liveth.  she  be  married  to  another  man,  sue  shall  he
called  -an  adulteress."  When  the  .same  apostle
permits  marriage,  to*-  his  Corinthian '  converts,
(which,"'  for  the  present  distress,"  he  judges  to  be
inconvenient,)  he  restrains  the  permission  to  the
marxiage^of  one  husband  with  one  wife :— '  It-  m
.good  for  "a  man  not  to  touch  a  woman ;  neverthe-
less, <to  avoid  fornication,  let  every  man  have' his
own  wife,  and. let  every  woman, have  her  owxi
husband."  "  *.

•  The  manners  of  different  countries  have  varied
in  nothing  more  than,  in  their  domestic  constita-
tjons.  Leas  polished  and  more  luinuriious  ™ri""rT
have  either  not  perceived  the  ipd  effects  of  Poly-
gamy, or,  if  they  did *  perceive  them,  they  who  in.
such  countries  possessed  the  power  of  reforming
the  Utws  have  been  unwilling  to- resign  their  own
gratifications.  Polygamy  is  retained  at  this  day
among  the  Turks,  and  throughout  every  part  of
Asia  in  which  Christianity  is  not  pofessed.  -In
Christian  -countries,  it  w-  universally  prohibited*


•SeeBeot.  xvii.  17;  xxi.  15.

f  I  say  unto  you.  Whosoever  shall  pat  sway  -his  wife/
except  it  be  for  fornication,  and  Shall  marry'  r— ■-
committath  adultery.  ,


DIVORCE.


81


In  8wedeti,k  is  punished  with  death.  In  Eng-
*  land,  besides  the  nullity  of  the  second  marriage,
H  tabjecU  the  offender  to  transportation,  or  im-
prisonment and  branding)  for  the  first  offence,
and.  to  capital  punishment  for  the  second.  And
whatever  may  be  said  in  behalf  of  polygamy  when
it  is  authorised  br  the  law  of  the  land,  the  mar-
riage of  a  second  wife  during  the  life-time  of  the
first,  in  countries  where  such  a  second  marriage
n  wild,  most  be  ranked  with  the  most  dangerous
and  cruel  of  those  frauds,  by  which  a  woman  is
cheated  oat  of  her  fortune,  her  person,  and  her
happiness.  The  ancient  Medea  compelled  their
absent,  in  one  canton,  to  take  seven  wives;  in
another,  each  woman  to  receive  five  husbands :
according  as  war  had  made,  in  one  quarter  of  their
country,  an  exUraordinary  havoc  among  the  men,
or  the  women  had  been  carried  away  by  an  enemy
from  another.  This  regulation,  so  far  as  it  was
adapted  to  the  proportion  which  subsisted  between
the  number  c*  males  and  females,  was  founded  in
the  reason  upon  which  the  most  approved  nations
of  Europe  proceed  at  present.

Csasax  found  amongst  the  inhabitants  of  this
Island  a  species  of  gorygamy,  if  it  may  be  so  called,
which  was  perfectly  singular.  Uxorei,  says  he,
habemi  den*  dwodtnkpte  inter  ee  commune*  ;  ct
maximejvatrtn  cum  fratribuB,  parenieeque  cum
Hberieg  eed  si  qui  tint  ex  hie  noli,  eorum  haben-
tmrMkeriy  quoprimumvrrgoqiusquedeductaest.


CHAPTER  VII.

Qf  Divorce.

Br  dssoree,  I  mean  a  dissolution  of  the  mar-
riagecoptmct,  by  the  act,  and  at  the  will,  of  the


Tins  power  wasallowed  to  the  husband,  among
the  Jews,  the  Greeks,  and  latter  Romans ;  and
is  at  una  day  exercised  by  the  Turks  and  Fer-

The  congnrity  of  such  a  right  with  the  law  of
natare.  m  the  question  before  us.

Ana,  in  the  first  ptace2  it  is  inanifestly  incon-
sistent with  the  duty  which  the  parents  owe  to
their  children;  which  duty  can  never  be  so  well
reJnUed  as  by  their  cohabitation  and  united  care.
It  is  also  incompatible  with  the  right  which  the
mother  possesses,  as  well  as  the  father,  to  the
gratfeude  of  her  children,  and  the  comfort  of  their
suciety  ;  of  both  which  she  is  almost  necessarily
deprived,  by  her  dismission  from  her  husbands


>  this  objection  does  not  interfere,  I  know
of  no  principle  of  the  law  of  nature  applicable  to
the  question,  beside  that  of  general  expediency.

For,  if  we.  say  that  arbitrary  divorces  are  ex-
cluded by  the  terms  of  the  marriage-contract,  it
may  be  answered,  that  the  contract  might  be  so
famed  as  to  admit  of  this  condition.

If  we  argue,  with  some  moralists,  that  the
obugntfan  of  a  contraci  naturally  continues,  so
long  as  the  purpose,  which  the  contracting  parties
had  in  view,  requires  its  continuance ;  it  will  be
jKssm^ii  to  show  what  panose  of  the  contract  (the
care  of  children  excepted,)  should  confine  a  man
to  a  woman,  from  whom  he  seeks  to  be  loose.

If  we  contend,  with  others,  that  a  contract  can-
not, by  the  law  of  nature,  be  dissolved;  unless  the
*  in  the  station  which  etch
L


possessed  before  the  contract  was  entered  into;
we  shall  be  called  upon  to  prove  this  to  be  an
universal  or  indispensable  property  of  contracts.

.1  confess  myself  unable  to  assign  any  circum-
stance in  the  marriage-contract,  which  essentially
distinguishes  it  from  other  contracts,  or  which
proves  that  it  contains,  what  many  have  ascribed
to  it,  a  natural  incapacity  of  being  dissolved  by
the  consent  of  the  parties,  at  the  option  of  one  of
them,  or  either  of  them.  But  if  we  trace  the
effects  of  such  a  rule  upon  the  general  happiness
of  married  life,  we  shall  perceive  reasons  of  expe-
diency, that  abundantly  justify  the  policy  of  those
laws  which  refuse  to  the  husband  the  power  of
divorce,  or  restrain  it  to  a  few  extreme  and  spe-
cific provocations :  and  our  principles  teach  us  to
pronounce  that  to  be  contrary  to  the  law  of  na-
ture, which  can  be  proved  to  be  detrimental  to  the
common  happiness  of  the  human  species.

A  lawgiver,  whose  counsels  are  directed  by
views  of  general  utility,  and  obstructed  by  no  local
impediment,  would  make  the  marriage  contract
indissoluble  during  the  joint  lives  of  the  parties;
for  the  sake  of  the  following  advantages : —

I.  Because  this  tends  to  preserve  peace  and
concord  between  married  persons,  by  perpetuating
their  common  interest,  and  by  inducing  a  neces-
sity of  mutual  compliance.

There  is  great  weight  and  substance  in  both
these  considerations.  An  earlier  termination  of
the  union  would  produce  a  separate  interest.  The
wife  would  naturally  look  forward  to  the  dissolu-
tion of  the  partnership,  and  endeavour  to  draw
to  herself  a  fund  against  the  time  when  she
was  no  longer  to  have  access  to  the  same  re-
sources. This  would  beget  peculation  on  one  side,
and  mistrust  on  the  other ;  -evils  which  at  present
very  little  disturb  the  confidence  of  a  married  life.
The  second  effect  of  making  the  union  determin-
able only  by  death,  is  not  less  beneficial.  It  ne-
cessarily happens  that  adverse  tempers,  habits,
and  tastes,  oftentimes  meet  in  marriage.  In  which
case,  each  party  must  take  pains  to  give  up  what
offends,  ana  practise  what  may  gratify  the  other.
A  man  and  woman  in  love  with  each  other,  do
this  insensibly ;  but  love  is  neither  general  nor
durable ;  and  where  that  is  wanting,  no  lessons  of
duty,  no  delicacy  of  sentiment,  will  go  half  so  far
with  the  generality  of  mankind  and  womankind
as  this  one  intelligible  reflection,  that  they  must
each  make  the  best  of  their  bargain:  and  that,
seeing  they  must  either  both  be  miserable,  or  both
share  the  same  happiness,  neither  can  find  their
own  comfort  but  in  promoting  the  pleasure  of  the
other.  These  compliances,  though  at  first  ex-
torted by  necessity,  become  in  time  easy  and  mu-
tual ;  and,  though  less  endearing  than  assiduities
winch  take  their  rise  from  affection,  generally  pro-
cure to  the  married  pair  a  repose  and  satisfaction
sufficient  for  their  happiness.
'  II.  Because  new  objects  of  desire  would  be  con-
tinually sought  after,  if  men  could,  at  will,  be  re-
leased from  their  subsisting  engagements.  Sup-
pose the  husband  to  have  once  preferred  his  wife
to  all  other  women,  the  duration  of  this  preference
cannot  be  trusted  to.  Possession  makes  a  great
difference :  and  there  is  no  other  security  against
the  invitations  of  novelty,  than  the  known  impos-
sibility of  obtaining  the  object.  Did  the  cause
which  brings  the  sexes  together,  hold  them'
together  by  the  same  force  with  which  it  first
attracted  t£em  to  each  other  j  or  could  the?


MORAL  AND  POLITICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


be  restored  to  her  personal  integrity,  and  to  all  the
advantages  of  her  virgin  estate;  the  power  of
divorce  might  be  deposited  in  the  hands  of  the
husband,  with  less  danger  of  abuse  or  inconve-
niency.  But  constituted  as  mankind  are,  and
injured  as  the  repudiated  wife  generally  must  be,
it  is  necessary  to  add  a  stability  to  the  condition
of  married  women,  more  secure  than  the  con-
tinuance of  their  husband*'  affection;  and  to
supply  to  both  sides,  by  a  sense  of.  duty  and  of
obligation,  what  satiety  has  impaired  of  passion
and  of  personal  attachment.  Upon  the  whole,  the
power  of  divorce  is  evidently  and  greatly  to  the
disadvantage  of  the  woman :  and  the  only  question
appears  to  be  whether  the  real  and  permanent
happiness  of  one  half  of  the  species  should  be  sur-
rendered to  the  caprice  and  voluptuousness  of  the
other  1

We  have  considered  divorces  as  depending
upon  the  will  of  the  husband,  because  that  is  the
way  in  which  they  have  actually  obtained  in
many  parts  of  the  world :  but  the  same  objections
apply,  in  a  groat  degree,  to  divorces  by  mutual
consent;  especially  when  we  consider  the  indeli-
cate situation  ana  small  prospect  of  happiness,
which  remains  to  the  party  who  opposed  his  or
her  dissent  to  the  liberty  and  desire  of  the  other.
The  law  of.  nature  admits  of  an  exception  in
favour  of  the  injured  party,  in  cases  of  adultery, ,
of  obstinate  desertion,  of  attempts  upon  life,  of
outrageous  cruelty,  of  incurable  madness,  and
perhaps  of  personal  imbecility;  but  by  no  means
indulges  the  same  privilege  to  mere  dislike,  to  op-
position of  humours  and  inclination,  to  contrariety
of  taste  and  temper,  to  complaints  of  coldness,
neglect,  severity,  peevishness,  jealousy :  not  that
these  reasons  are  trivial,  but  because  such  objec-
tions may  always  be  alleged,  and  are  impossible
by  testimony  to  be  ascertained ;  so  that  to  allow
implicit  credit  to  them,  and  to  dissolve  marriages
whenever  either  party  thought  fit  to  pretend
them,  would  lead  in  its  effect  to  all  the  licentious-
ness of  arbitrary  divorces.

Milton's  story  is  well  known.  Upon  a  quar-
rel with  his  wife,  he  paid  bis  addresses  to  another
woman,  and  set  forth  a  public  vindication  of  his
conduct,  by  attempting  to  prove,  that  confirmed
dislike  was  as  just  a  foundation  for  dissolving  the
rnarriage^xMtract,  as  adultery :  to  which  position,
and  to  all  the  arguments  by  which  it  can  be  sup-
ported, the  above  consideration  affords  a  sufficient
answer.  And  if  a  married  pair,  in  actual  and  ir-
leconcileable  discord,  complain  that  their  happi-
ness would  be  better  consulted,  by  permitting
them  to  determine  a  connexion  which  is  become
odious  to  both,  it  may  be  told  them,  that  the  same
permission,  as  a  general  rule,  would  produce  liber-
tinism, dissension,  and  misery,  amongst  thousands,
who  are  now  virtuous,  and  quiet,  and  happy  in
their  condition :  and  it  ought  to  satisfy  them  to
reflect,  that  when  their  happiness  is  sacrificed  to
the  operation  of  an  unrelenting  rule,  it  is  sacri-
ficed to  the  happiness  of  the  community.

The  Scriptures  seem  to  have  drawn  the  obliga-
tion tighter  than  the  law  of  nature  left  it.  "  Who-
soever/' smith  Christ,  "  shall  put  away  his  wife,  ex-
cept it  be  for  fornication,  and  shall  marry  another,
-  committeth  adultery;  and  whoso  marrieth  her
which  is  put  away,  doth  commit  adultery." —
Matt  xix.  9.  The  law  of  Moses,  for  reasons  of
local  expediency,  permitted  the. Jewish  husband
to  put  away  bis  wife;  but  whether  lor  every


cause,  or  for  what,  causes,  appears  to  have  been
controverted  amongst  the  interpreters  of  those
times.  Christ,  the  precepts  of  whose  rehgioa
were  calculated  for  more  general  use  and  observa-
tion, revokes  this  permission  (as  given  to  the
Jews,  n  for  the  hardness  of  their  hearts,")  and
promulges  a  law  which  was  thencefonsard  to
confine  divorces  to  the  single  case  of  adultery  in
the  wife.  And  I  see  no  sufficient  reason  to  de-
part from  the  plain  and  strict  meaning  of  Christ 'a
words.  The  rule  was  new.  It  both  surprised  and
offended  his  disciples;  yet  Christ  added  nothing
to  relax  or  explain  it.

Inferior  causes  may  justify  the  separation  of
husband  and  wife,  altnough  they  will  not  au-
thorise such  a  dissolution  of  the  marriage  con*
tract  as  would  leave  either  party  at  liberty  to
marry  again :  for  ii  is  that  liberty,  in  which  the
danger  and  mischief  of  divorces  principally  con-
sist. If  the  care  of  children  does  not  require  that
they  should  live  together,  and  it  is  become,  in  the
serious  judgment  of  both,  necessary  for  their  mu-
tual happiness  that  they  should  separate,  let  them
separate  by  consent.  Nevertheless,  this  necessity
can  hardly  exist,  without  guilt  and  misconduct  oft
one  side  or  both.  Moreover,  cruelty,  ill-usage,  ex-
treme violence,  or  moroseness  of  temper,  or  other
great  and  continued  provocations,  make  iMawful
for  the  party  aggrieved  to  withdraw  from  the  so-
ciety of  the  offender  without  his.  or  her  ooturnt.
The  law  which  imposes  the  marriage-vow,  where-
by the  parties  promise  to  "  keep  to  each  other,"  or
in  other  words,  to  live  together,  must  be  under-
stood to  impose  it  with  a  silent  reservation  of  these
"cases ;  because  the  same  law  has  constituted  a  ju-
dicial relief  from  the  tyranny  of  the  husband,  by
the  divorce  a  rMnsa  et  torot  and  by  the  provision
which  it  makes  for  the  separate  maintenance  of
the  injured  wife.  St.  Paul  likewise  distinffuiahee
between  a  wife's  merely  separating  herself  from
the  family  of  her  husband,  and  her  marrying
again: — "Let  not  the  wife  depart  from  her  hus-
band :  but  and  if  she  do  depart,  let  her  remain
unmarried."

The  law  of  this  country,  in  conformity  to  our
Saviour's  injunction,  confines  the  dissolution  of
the  marriage-contract  to  the  single  case  of  adul-
tery in  the  wife ;  and  a  divorce,  even  in  that  case,
can  only  be  brought  about  by  the  operation  of  an
act  of  jparliament,  founded  upon  a  previous  sen-
tence in  the  ecclesiastical  court,  and  a  verdict
against  the  adulterer  at  common  law :  which  pro-
ceedings taken  together,  compose  as  complete  en
investigation  of  the  complaint  as  a  cause  can  re-
ceive. It  has  lately  been  proposed  to  the  legisla-
ture to  annex  a  clause  to  these  acts,  restraining
the  offending  party  from  marrying  with  the  com-
panion of  her  crime,  who,  by  the  course  of  pro-
ceeding, is  always  known  and  convicted :  for  there
is  reason  to  fear,  that  adulterous  connexions  are
often  formed  with  the  prospect  of  bringing  them
to  this  conclusion ;  at  least,  when  the  seducer  has
once  captivated  the  affection  of  a  married  woman,
he  may  avail  himself  of  this  tempting  argutoent.
to  subdue  her  scruples,  and  complete  nis  victory  5
and  the  legislature,  as  the  business  is  managed  ait
present,  assists  by  its  interposition  the  criminal
design  of  the  offenders,  and  confers  a  privilege
where  it  ought  to  inflict  a  punishment.  The  pro-
posal deserved  an  experiment:  but  sonxthin^
more  penal  will,  I  apprehend,  be  found  necessary
I  to  check  the  progress  of  this  alaonag  depravity,.


MARRIAGE.


88


ra  law  night  not  be  famed  directing
the  Jbrtune  ef  the  adulteress  to  descend  as  in
ease  of  her  natural  deaths  reserving,  however,


i  proportion  of  the  produce  of  it,  by  way
of  annuity,  tor  her  subsistence  (such  annuity,  in
no  case,  to  exceed  a  fixed  sum,)  end  also  so  fer
suspending  the  estate  in  the  hands  of  the  heir  as
to  mesetwe  the  inheritance  to  any  children  she
rmght  bear  to  a  second  marriage,  in  case  there
was  none  to  anoceed  in  the  place  of  their  mother
by  the  first;  whether,  I  say.  such  a  law  would  not
render  female  virtue  in  higher  life  leas  vincible,  as
well  as  the  seducers  of  that  virtue  less  urgent  in
their  suit,  we  recommend  to  the  deliberation  of
those  who  are  wilting  to  attempt  the  reformation
ef  this  nnpoitant,  but  most  incorrigible,  class  of
the  community.  A  passion  for  splendor,  for  ex-
pensive amnwjments  and  distinction,  is  commonly
mind,  in  that  description  of  women  who  would
become  the  objects  of  such  a  law.  not  leas  inordi-
nate than  their  other  appetites.  A  severity  of  the
kind  we  propose,  applies  immediately  to  that  pas-
sion. And  there  is  no  room  for  any  complaint  of
ffijuettoe,  since  the  provisions  above  stated,  with
others  which  might  be  contrived,  confine  the
punishment,  so  far  as  it  is  possible,  to  the  person
of  the  offender;  sunning  the  estate  to  remain  to
the  hear,  or  within  the  femily,  of  the  ancestor
from  whom  it  came,  or  to  attend  the  appointments
of  his  wilL .'

itences  of  the  eorlpsiaatiml  •  courts,  which
e  the  parties  a  vinculo  matrimonii  by  rea-
'ty  within
r  want  of
parents  and  guardians,
9  of  the  merriage»contract,  but
that  there  never  was  any
ihnent  subsisting  at  the  time,
1  the  celebration  of  the  marriage-rite  a
i  nrnttitr.  And  the  rite  itself  contains  an  ex-
. .  Jon  of  these  impwliincnts.  The  man  and  wo-
man to  be  married  are  charged,  "if  they  know  any
anpednnent  why  they  may  not  be  lawfully  joined
together,  to  confess  it;"  and  assured  "  that  so
inanyaa  are  coupled  together,  otherwise  than  God's
went  doth  allow,  am  not  joined  together  by  God,
neither  is  their  matrimony  lawful',"  aD  which  is
jwhsrlrd  by  nay  of  solemn  notice  to  the  parties,
that  the  vow  they  are  about  to  make  will  bind
their  consciences  and  authorise  their  cohabitation,
only  upon  the  supposition  that  no  legal  impedi-


son  of  "»|»iimiiy,  frigidity,  consanguinity  ^
the  prohibited  degrees,  prior  marriage,  or  w
the  requisite  consent  of  parents  and  guai


CHAPTER  Vm.

Marriage.

Wtcthk&  it  hath  grown  out  of  some  tradition
of  the  Divine  appointment  of  marriage  in  the
penman  of  our  first  parents,  or  merely  from  a  de-
sign to  impress  the  obligation  of  the  marriage-con-
tact with  a  solemnity  suited  to  its  importance,
the  marriage-rite,  in  almost  all  countries  of  the
world,  hasbeen  made  a  religious  ceremony ;+  al-


*  It  was  not,  however,  in  Christian  countries  re.
faiia*  that  marriages  should  he  celebrated  in  churches,
trit  the  thirteenth  century  of  the  Christian  sua.  Mar
nates  ia  JBmrland  daring  toe  Usufpatfon,  were  so-
tawaaasd  before  Jmttiees  oTthe  peace :  but  for  what  pur-
esse  this  aovefty  was  iatrodaesd*  except  fodegrade  the


though  marriage,  in  He  own  nature,'  and  abstract-
ed firom  the  rules  and  declarations  which  the  Jew-
ish and,  Christian  Scriptures  deliver  concerning
it,  be  properly  a  civil  contract,  and  nothing  more*

With  respect  to  one  main  article  in  matrunonial
alliances,  a  total  alteration  has  taken  place  in  the
fashion  of  the  worlfl ;  the  wife  now  brings  money
to  her  husband,  whereas  anciently  the  husband
paid  money  to  the  family  of  the  wife;  as  was  the
case  among  the  Jewish  patriarchs,  the  Greek*,
and  the  old  inhabitants  or  Germany*  This  al-
teration has  proved  of  no  small  advantage  to  the
female  sex :  for  their  importance  in  point  of  for-
tune procures  to  them,  in  modern  times,  that  as-  '
akUrity  and  respect,  which  are  always  wanted  to
compensate  for  the  inferiority  of  their  strength;
but  winch  their  personal  attractions  would  not
always  secure.

Our  business  is  with  marriage,  as  it  is  esta-
blished in  this  country.  And  in  treating  thereof
it  will  be  necessary  to  state  the  terms  of  the  mar-
riage vow,  in  order  to  discover: —

1.  What  duties  this  vow  creates.

2.  What  a  situation  of  mind  at  the  time  win-
consistent  with  it.

3.  By  what  subsequent  behaviour  it  is  violated.
The  husband  promises  on  his  part,  "to  love,

comfort,  honour,  and  keep,  his  wife :"  the  wife  on
hers,  "  to  obey,  serve,  love,  honour,  and  keep,  her
husband;'1  in  every  variety  of  health,  fortune,  and
condition:  and  both  stipulate  "to  forsake  all
others,  and  to  keep  only  unto  one  another,  so  long
as  they  both  shall  live."  This  promise  is  called
the  marriage  vow;  is  witnessed  Defore  God  and
the  congregation ;  accompanied  with  prayers  to
Almighty  God  for  his  blessing  upon  it;  and  at-
tended with  such  circumstances  of  devotion  and
solemnity  as  place  the  obligation  of  it,  and  the
guilt  of  violating  it,  nearly  upon  the  same  foun-
dation with  that  of  oaths.

The  parties  by  this  vow  engage  their  personal
fidelity  expressly  and  specifically;  they  engage
likewise  to  consult  and  promote  each  other's  hap-
piness ;  the  wife,  moreover,  promisee  obedience  xq
her  husband.  Nature  may  have  made  and  left  the
sexes  of  the  human  species  nearly  equal  in  their
faculties,  and  perfectly  so  in  their  rights ;  but  to
guard  against  those  competitionswhich  equality,  or
a  contested  superiority,  is  almost  sure  to  produce,
the  Christian  Scriptures  enjoin  upon  the  wife
that  obedience  whnh  she  here  promise^  and  in
terms  so  peremptory  and  absolute,  that  it  seems
to  extend  to  every  thing  not  criminal,  or  not  en-
tirely inconsistent  with  the  woman's  fapptness.
"  Let  the  wife,"  says  St.  Paul/ "  be  subject  to  her
husband  in  every  thing." — "  The  ornament  of  a
meek  and  quiet .  spirit,"  says  the  same  apostle,
speaking  of  the  duty  of  wives,  "is,  in  the  sight
of  God,  of  gftat  price."  No  words  ever  expressed
the  true  merit  of  the  female  character  so  well  as
these.

The  condition  of  human  life  will  not  permit  us
to  say,  that  no  one  can  conscientiously  marry,
who  does  not  prefer  the  person  at  the  altar  to  all
other  men  or  women  in  the  world :  but  we  can
have  no  difficulty  m  pronouncing  (whether  we
respect  the  end  of  the  institution,  or  the  plain


*  The  ancient  Assyrians  sold  their  tomtits  by  an  an-
nual auction.  The  prices  were  applied  by  way  of  por-
tions to  the  more  homely.  By  this  contrivance,  all  of
both  sorts  were  disposed  of  in  marriage.


84


MORAL  AND  POLITICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


terms  in  which  the  contract  is  conceived,)  that
whoever  is  conscious,  at  the  time  of  his  marriage,
of  such  a  dislike  to  the  woman  he  is  about  to  mar-
ry, or  of  such  a  subsisting  attachment  to  some
other  Woman,  that  he  cannot  reasonably,  nor  does
in  fact,  .expect  ever  to  entertain  an  affection  for
his  future  wife,  is  guilty,  when  he  pronounces  the
marriage  vow,  of  a  direct  and  deliberate  prevarica-
tion; and -that,  too,  aggravated  by  the  presence  of
those  ideas  of  religion,  and  of  the  Supreme  Being,
which  the  place,  the  ritual,  and  the  solemnity  of  the
occasion,  cannot  fail  of  bringing  to  his  thoughts.
The  same  likewise  of  the  woman.  This  charge
must  be  imputed  to  all  who,  from  mercenary  mo-
tives, marry  the  objects  of  their  aversion  and  dis-
gust; and  likewise  to  those  who  desert,  from  any
motive  whatever,  the  object  of  their  affection,  and,
without  being  able  to  subdue  that  affection,  marry
another.

The  crime  of  falsehood  is  also  incurred  by  the
man  who  intends,  at  the  time  of  his  marriage,  to
commence,  renew,  or  continue  a  personal  com-
merce with  any  otner  woman.  And  the  parity  of
reason,  if  a  wife  be  capable  of  so  much  guilt,  ex-
tends to  her.

The  marriage-vow  is  violated,

I.  By  adultery.

I|.  By  any  behaviour  which,  knowingly,  ren-
ders the  life  of  the  other  miserable;  as  desertion,
neglect,  prodigality,  drunkenness,  peevishness,
penuriousness,  jealousy,  or  any  levity  of  conduct
which  administers  occasion  of  jealousy.

A  late  regulation  in  the  law  of  marriages,  in
this  country,  has  made  the  consent  of  the  lather,
if  he  be  living,  of  the  mother,  if  she  survive  the
father,  and  remain  unmarried,  or  of  guardians,  if
both  parents  be  dead,  necessary  to  the  marriage  of
a  person  under  twenty-one  years  of  age.  By  the
Roman  law,  the  consent  et  avi  et  patris  was  re-
quired so  long  as  they  lived.  In  France,  the  con-
sent of  parents  is  necessary  to  the  marriage  of
sons,  until  they  attain  to  thirty  years  of  age;  of
daughters,  until  twenty-five.  In  Holland,  for  sons
till  twenty-five;  for  daughters  till  twenty.  And
this  distinction  between  the  sexes  appears  to  be
well  founded ;  for  a  woman  is  usually  as  properly
qualified  for  the  domestic  and  interior  duties  of  a
wife  or  mother  at  eighteen,  as  a  man  is  for  the
business  of  the  world,  and  the  more  arduous  care
of  providing  for  a  family,  at  twenty-one.

The  constitution  also  of  the  human  species  in-
dicates the  same  distinction.*


CHAPTER  IX.

Of  the  Duty  of  Parents.

^  That  virtue,  which  confines  its  beneficence
within  the  walls  of  a  man's  own  house,  we.  have
been  aosMstomed  to  consider  as  little  better  than
a  more  refined  selfishness ;,  and  yet  it  will  be  con-
fessed, that  the  subject  and  matter  of  this  class
of  duties  are  inferior  to  none  in  utility  and  im-
portance :  and  where,  it  may  be  asked,  is  virtue,
the  most  valuable,  but  where  it  does  the  most
good  1  What  duty  is  the  most  obligatory,  but  that
on  which  the  most  depends  1  Andwhere  have  we


•  Cum  via  prolem  procresndi  dititiua  herent  in  mare
foam  ra  Ksmina  populi  numeral  nequaquam  minuetur,
a*  serius  venerem  oolere  loceperint  viri.


happiness  and  misery  so  much  in  our  power,  or
liable  to  be  so  affected  by  our  conduct,  as  in  our
own  families'?  It  will  also  be  acknowledged  that
the  good  order  and  happiness  of  the  worldare  bet-
ter uphoklen  whilst  each  man  applies  himself  to
his  own  concerns  and  the  care  of  his  own.
family,  to  which  he  is  present,  than  if  every  man.
from  an  excess  of  mistaken  generosity,  should
leave  his  own  business,  to  undertake  hn  neigh-
bour's, which  he  must  always  manage  with  less
knowledge,  cnnveniency,  ana  success.  If  there-
fere,  the  low  estimation  of  these  virtues  be  well
founded,  it  must  be  owing,  not  to  their  inferior
importance,  but  to  some  defect  or  impurity  in  the
motive.  And  indeed  it  cannot  be  denied,  that  it
is  in  the  power  of  <u9ociation  so  to  unite  our
children's  interest  with  our  own,  as  that  we  shall
often  pursue  both  from  the  same  motive,  place
both  in  the  same  object;  and  with  as  little  sense
of  duty  in  one  pursuit  as  in  the  other.  Where
this  is  the  case,  the  judgment  above  stated  is  not
far  from  the  truth.  And  so  often  as  we  find  a  so-
licitous care  of  a  man's  own  family,  in  a  total  ab-
sence or  extreme  penury  of  every  other  virtue,  or
interfering  with  other  duties,  or  dimcting  its
operation  solely  to  the  temporal  happiness  of  the
children,  placing  that  happiness  m  amusement
and  indulgence  whilst  they  are  young,  or  in  ad-
vancement of  fortune  when  they  grow  up,  there
is  reason  to  believe  that  this  is  the  case.  In  tine
way,  the  common  opinion  concerning  these  duties
may  be  accounted  for  and  defended.  If  we  look  to
the  subject  of  them,  we  perceive  them  to  be  in-
dispensable. If  we  regard  the  motive,  we  imd
them  often  not  very  meritorious:  Wherefore,  al-
though a  man  seldom  rises  high  in  our  esteem  who
has  nothing  to  recommend  him  beside  the  care  of
his  own  family,  yet  we  always  condemn  the  net-
gleet  of  this  duty  with  the  utmost  severity;  both
by  reason  of  the  manifest  and  immediate  mischief*
which  we  see  arising  from  this  neglect,  and  bo-
cause  it  argues  a  want  not  only  of  parental  af-
fection, but  of  those  moral  principles  which  ought
to  come  in  aid  of  that  affection  where  it  is  want-
ing. And  if,  on  the  other  hand,  our  praise  and
esteem  of  these  duties  be  not  proportioned  to  the
good  they  produce',  or  to  the  indignation  with
which  we  resent  the  absence  of  them,  it  is  for
this  reason,  that  virtue  is  the  most  valuable,  not
where  it  produces  the  most  good,  but  where  it  is
the  most  wanted:  which  is  not  the  case  here;  be-
cause its  place  is  often  supplied  by  instincts;  or  in-
voluntary associations.  Nevertheless,  the  offices
of  a  parent  may  be  discharged  from  a  conscious-
ness of  their  obligation,  as  well  as  other  duties  ;
and  a  sense  of  t|iis  obligation  is  sometimes  neces-
sary to  assist  the  stimulus  of  parental  affection  -
especially  in  stations  of  life  in  which  the  wants  or
a  family  cannot  be  supplied  without  the  continual
hart}  labour  of  the  father,  and  without  his  rev
fraining  from  many  indulgences  and  recreations
which  unmarried  men  of  like  condition  are  able  to
purchase.  Where  the  parental  affection  is  suf-
ficiently strong,  or  has  fewer  difficulties  to  sur-
mount, a  principle  of  duty  may  still  be  wanted  to
direct  and  regulate  its  exertions:  for  otherwise  it
is  apt  to,  spend  and  waste  itself  in  a  womanislx
fondness  for  the  person  of  the  child;  an  impro-
vident attention  to  his  present  ease  and  gratincs*-
tion ;  a  pernicious  facility  and  compliance  with
his  humours ;  an  excessive  and  superfluous  care
to  provide  the  externals  of  liappinees,  with  little


DOTY  OP  PARENTS.


a


WBD't^Bnl&oii  to  the  internal  sources  of  virtue
sim!  satisfaction.  Universally,  wherever  a  parent's
eonduct  ■  prompted  or  directed  by  a  mum  of  duty,
there  is  so  much  virtue.

Having  premised  thus  much  concerning  the
place  winch  parental  duties  hold  in  the  scale  of
Human  virtues,  we  proceed.to  state  and  explain
the  duties  themselves.

When  moralists  tell  us,  that  parents  are  bound
to  to  <#  they  can  lor  their  cbiUren,  they  tell  us
more  than  is  true;  for, at  that  rate,  every  expense
which  night  have  been  spared,  and  every  profit

' d  which  might  have  been  made,  would  be


The  duty  of  parents  has  its  limits,  like  ether
denes ;  and  admits,  if  not  of  perfect  precision,  at
feast  of  rales  definite  enough  for  application.

These  rules  may  be  explained  under  the  several
hesdsofWt*tfeiuwice,  education,  and  a  reasonable
fnvirionjbr  the  child's  happiness  in  respect  qf
wttoard  cundU&cnt.

The  wants  of  children  make  it  necessary  that
some  person  maintain  them:  and,  as  no  one  has
a  light  to  burthen  others  by  his  act,  it  follows,
that  the  parents  are  bound  to  undertake  this
charge  themselves.  Beside  this  plain  inference,
the  ejection  of  .parents  to  their  children,  if  it  be
instinctive,  and  the  provision  which  nature  has
prepared  in  the  person  of  the  mother  for  the  sus-
tentafion  of  the  infant,  concerning  the  existence
and  deoignrf  which  there  can  be  no  doubt,  are

Hence  we  learn  the  guilt  of  those  who  run
away  from  their  families,  or  (what  is  much  the
same,)  in  consequence  of  idleness  or  drunkenness,
throw  them  upon  a  parish ;  or  who  leave  them
ik'slimiH  at  their  death,  when,  by  diligence  and
rragafity,  they  might  have  laid  up  a  provision  for
then*  support:  also  of  those  who  refuse  or  neglect
the  care  of  their  bastard  offspring,  abandoning
them  to  a  condition  in  which  they  must  either
perish  or  become  bmthensome  to  others;  for  the
duty  of  maintenance,  like  the  reason  upon  which
it  is  founded,  extends  to  bastards,  as  well  as  to

SSEBUnssO  ^wimthbh-

T*he  Christian  Scriptures,  although  they-con-
cem  themselves  little  with  maxims  of  prudence
and  much  less  authorize  worldly-
\  or  avarice,  have  yet  declared  in  ex-
their  judgment  of  the  obligation  of  this
1  If  any  provide  not  for  his  own,  especially
for  these  of  his  own  household,  he  hath  denied  the
smith,  mtki  is  worse  than  an  infidel,"  (1  Tim.  v.  8. ;)
he  hath  disgraced  the  Christian  profession,  and
*-"— i  abort  m  a  duty  which  even  infickls  acknow-


■*j


Education.
Education,  in  the  most  extensive  sense  of  the
word,  may  comprehend  every  preparation  that  is
"  i  in  onr  youth  for  the  sequel  of  our  livesj  and

" nee  I  use  it. Some  such  preparation  is

/  for  children  of  all  conditions,  because
without  "it  they  must  be  miserable,  and  probably
will  be  vicious,  when  they  grow  up,  either  from
X  of  the  means  of  subsistence,  or  from  want  of
d  inoffensive  occupation.  In  civilized
thing  is  effected  by  art  and  skill.


» a  person  who  is  provided  with  neither
(and  neither  can  be  acmmed  without  exercise  and

— ' **  n)  wfli  be  useless;  and  he  that  is  useless,

"  r  be  at  the  seme  time  mischievous  to


the  community.  So  that  to  send  an  i
child  into  the  world,  is  injurious  to  the  rest  of
mankind;  it  is  little  better  than  to  turn  out  a
mad  dog  or  a  wild  beast  into  the  streets.

In  the  inferior  classes  of  the  community,  this
principle  condemns  the  neglect  of  parents,  who
do  not  inure  their  children  betimes  to  labour  and
restraint,  by  providing  them  with  apprenticeships,
services,  or  other  regular  employment,  but  who
suffer  them  to  waste  their  youth  in  idleness  and
vagrancy,  or  to  betake  themselves  to  some  lazy,
trifling,  and  precarious  calling:  for,  the  conse-
quence of  having  thus  tasted  the  sweets  of  na-
tural liberty,  at  an  age  when  their  passion  and
relish  for  it  are  at  the  highest,  is,  that  they  become
incapable,  for  the  remainder  of  their  lives,  of  con-
tinued industry,  or  of  persevering  attention  to  any
thing ;  spend  their  tune  in  a  miserable  strnjnne
between  the  importunity  of  want,  and  the  Trev
someness  of  regular  application;  and  are  pre-
pared to  embrace  every  expedient,  which-piesents
a  hope  of  supplying  their  necessities  without  con-
fining them  to  the  plough,  -dp  loom,  the  shop,  or
the  counting-house.

In  the  middle  orders  of  society,  those  parents
are  most  reprehensible,  who  neither  qualify  their
children  for  a  profession,  nor  enable  them  to  five
without  one ;+  and  those  in  the  highest,  who,  from
indolence,  indulgence,  or  avarice,  omit  to  procure
their  children  those  liberal  attainments  which  are
necessary  to  make  them  useful  in  the  stations  to
which  they  are  destined*.  A  man  of  fortune,  who
permits  his  son  to  consume  the  season  of  educa-
tion in  hunting,  shooting,  or  in  frequenting  horse-
races, assemblies,  or  other  unedifying,  if  not  vi-
cious, diversions,  defrauoV  the  community  of  a
benefactor,  and  Bequeaths  them  a  nuisance.

Some,  though  not  the  same,  preparation  for  the
sequel  of  their  lives,  is  necessary  for  youth  of  every
description;  and  therefore  for  bastards,  as  well  as
for  children  of  better  expectations.  Consequently,
they  who  leave  tha  education  of  their  bastards  to
chance,  contenting  themselves  with  making  pro-
vision for  their  subsistence,  desert  half  their  duty.

III.  A  reasonable  provision  for  the  happiness
of  a  child,  in  respect  of  outward  condition,  re-
quires three  things:  a  situation  suited  to  his  ha-
bits and  reasonable  expectations;  a  competent
provision  for  the  exigencies  of  that  situation ;  and
a  probable  security  for  his  virtue.

The  first  two  articles  will  vary  with  the  con-
dition of  the  parent  A  situation  somewhat  ap-
proaching in  rank  and  condition  to  the  parent's
own ;  or,  where  that  is  not  practicable,  similar  to
what  other  parents  of  like  condition  provide  for
their  children ;  bounds  the  reasonable,  as  well  as
(generally  speaking)  the  actual,  expectations  of
the  child,  and  therefore  contains  the  extent  of  the
parent's  obligation.

Hence,  a  peasant  satisfies  his  duty,  who  sends
out  his  children,  properly  instructed  for  their  oc-
cupation, to  husbandry  or  to  any  branch  of  manu-
facture. Clergymen,  lawyers,  physicians;  officers
in  the  army  or  navy,  gentlemen  possessing  mo-
derate fortunes  of  inheritance,  or  exercising  trade'
in  a  large  or  liberal  way,  are  required  by  the  same
rule  to  provide  their  sons  with  learned  professions,

*  Amongst  the  Athenians,  if  toe  parent  did  not  pat
his  ebiid  into  a  way  t>f  getting  a  livelihood,  the  child
was  not  bound  to  make  provision  for  the  parent  when
old  and  necewitotw.  ft


MORAL  AND  POLITICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


i  fat  the  army  or  navy,  places  in  public
offices,  or  reputable  branches  of  merchandise.
Providing  a  child  with  a  situation,  includes  a
competent  supply  for  the  expenses  of  that  aitua-
tarn,  until  the  profits  of  it  enables  the  child  to  sup-
port himself  Noblemen  and  gentlemen  of  high
lank  and  fortune  may  be  bound  to  transmit  an
inheritance  to  the  representatives  of  their  family,
sufficient  for  their  support  without  the  aid  of  a
trade  or  profession,  to  which  there  is  little  hope
that  a  youth,  who  has  been  nattered  with  other
expectations,  will  apply  himself  with  diligence  or
success.  In  these  parts  of  the  world,  public  opinion
has  assorted  the  members  of  the  community  into
sour  or  five  general  classes,  each  class  comprising
a  great  variety  of  employments  and  professions,
'the  choice  of  which  must  be  committed  to  the
private  discretion  of  the  parent*  All  that  can  be
expected  from  parents  as  a  duty,  and  therefore
the  only  rule  which  a  moralist  can  deliver  upon
the  subject,  is,  that  they  endeavour  to  preserve
their  children  in  the  class  in  which  they  are  bom,
that  is  to  say,  in  which  others  of  similar  expects?
ttons  are  accustomed  to  be  placed;  and  that  they
be  careful  to  confine  their  hopes  and  habits  of  in-
dulgence to  objects  which  will  continue  to  be  at-


It  is  an  ill-judged  thrift,  in  some  rich  parents,
to  bring,  up  their  sons  to  mean  employments,  for
-the  sake  of  savjng  the  charge  of  a  more  expensive
education:  for  these  sons,  when  they  become  mas-
ters of  their  liberty  and  fortune,  will  hardly  con-
tinue in  occupations  by  which  they  think  them-
selves degraded,  and  are  seldom  qualified  for  any
thing  better.

(  An  attention,  in  the  fist  place,  to  the  exigen-
cies of  the  children's  respective  conditions  in  the
world;  and  a  regard,  in  the  second  place,  to  their
reasonable  expectations,  always  postponing  the
expectations  to  the  exigencies  when  both  cannot
be  satisfied,  ought  to  guide  parents  in  the  disposal
ef  their  fortunes  after  their  death.  And  these
exigencies  and  expectations  must  be  measured  by


♦Tbe  health  and  virtue  of  a  child's  future  life  are
considerations  so  superior  to  all  others,  that  whatever
is  likely  to  have  the  smallest  Influence  upon  these,  de-
serves the  parent's  first  attention.  In  respect  of  health,
Sericulture,  and  all  active,  rural,  and  out-of-door  em-
oyments,  are  to  be  preferred  to  manufactures  and  se-
ctary occupations.  In  respect  of  virtue,  a  course  of
dealings  in  which  the  advantage  is  mutual,  in  which
the  profit  on  one  side  is  connected  with  the  benefit  of
the  other  (which  is  the  case  in  trade,  and  all  serviceable
act  or  labour ,)  is  more  favourable  to  the  moral  charac-
ter, than  callings  in  which  one  man's  gain  is  another
man's  loss;  in  which  what  you  acquire,  is  acquired
without  equivalent,  and  parted  with  in  distress ;  as  in
gaming,  and  whatever  partakes  of  gaming,  and  in  the
predatory  profits  of  war.  The  following  distinctions
also  deserve  notice :  A  business,  like  a  retail  trade,  in
which  the  profits  are  small  and  frequent,  and  accruing
from  the  employment,  furnishes  a  moderate  and  con-
stant engagement  of  the  mind,  and,  so  far,  suits  better
with  the  general  disposition  of  mankind,  than  profes-
sions which  are  supported  by  fixed  salaries,  as  stations
In  the  church,  army,  navy,  revenue,  public  offices,  fee.
or  wherein  the  profits  are  made  in  large  sums,  by  a  few
peat  concerns,  or  fortunate  adventures ;  as  in  many
branches  of  wholesale  and  foreign  merchandise,  in
which  the  occupation  is  neither  so  constant,  nor  the
activity  so  kept  alive  by  immediate  encouragement.
For  security,  manual  arts  exceed  merchandise,  and
such  as  supply  the  wants  of  mankind  are  better  than
those  which  minister  to  their  pleasure.  Situations
which  promise  an  early  settlement  in  marriage,  are  on
many  accounts  to  be  chosen  before  those  which  require
a  longer  waiting  for  a  larger  establishment.


the  standard  which  custom  has  estshushed:  for
there  is  a  certain  appearance,  attendsnee,  estab-
lishment, and  mode  of  living,  which  custom  he*
annexed  to  the  several  ranks  and  orders  of  civil
life  (and  which  compose  what  is  called  decency,)
together  with  a  certain  society,  and  prtWlsr
pleasures,  belonging  to  'each  cuss:  and  a  young
person  who  is  withheld  from  sharing  in  these  for
want  of  fortune,  can  scarcely  be  said  to  have  a
bur  chance  for  happiness:  the  indignity  and  moiw
tincation  of  such  a  seclusion  being  what  few
tempers  can  bear,  or  bear  with  contentment  And
as  to  the  second  consideration,  of  what  a  child  may
reasonably  expect  from  his  parent,  he  wjH  expect
what  he  sees  all  or  most  others  in  similar  circum-
stances receive;  and  we  can  hardly  call  expecta-
tions unreasonable,  which  It  is  impossible  to  sup-


By  virtue  of  this  rule,  a  parent  is  justified  in
making  a  difference  between  his  children  accord-
ing as  they  stand  in  greater  or  less  need  of  the
assistance  of  his  fortune,  in  consequence  of  the
difference  of  their  age  or  sex,  or  of  the  situations
in  which  they  are  placed,  or  .the  varioua  success)
which  they  have  met  with.

On  account  of  the  few  lucrative  employments
which  are  left  to  the  female  sex.  and  by  conse-
quence the  little  opportunity  they  nave  of  adding
to  their  income,  daughters  ought  to  be  the  par-
ticular objects  of  a  parent's  care  and  foresight ;
and  as  an  option  of  marriage,  from  which  tney
can  reasonably  expect  happiness,  is  not  presented
to  every  woman  who  deserves  it,  especially  in
times  in  which  a  licentious  celibacy  is  in  fashion
with  the  men,  a  father  should  endeavour  toenabie
his  daughters  to  lead  asingle  life  withindependenoe
and  decorum,  even  though  he  subtract  more  for
that  purpose  from  she  portions  of  his  sons  than  is
agreeable  to  modern  usage,  or  than  they  expect.

But  when  the  exigencies  of  their  several  sttusv
tions  are  provided  for,  and  not  before,  a  parent
ought  to  admit  the  second  consideration,  the  satis-
faction of  bis  children's  expectations;  and  upon
that  principle  to  prefer  the  eldest  son  to  the  rest,
and  sons  to  daughters :  which  constitutes  the  right,
and  the  whole  right,  of  primogeniture,  aa  weft  as
the  only  reason*  for  the  preference  of  one  sex  to
the  other.  The  preference,  indeed,  of  the  first-
born, has  one  public  good  effect,  that  if  the  estate)
were  divided  equally  amongst  the  sons,  it  would
probably  make  them  all  idle;  whereas,  by  the
present  rule  of  descent,  it  makes  only  one  so;
which  is  the  less  evil  of  the  two.  And  it  must
further  be  observed  on  the  part  of  the  sons,  that
if  the  rest  of- the  community  make  it  a  rule  to  pre-
fer sons  to  daughters,  an  individual  of.  that  com-
munity ought  to  guide  himself  by  the  same  rule,
upon  principles  of  mere  equality.  For,  as  the  son
suffers  by  the  rule,  in  the  fortune  he  may  expect
in  marriage,  it  is  but  reasonable  that  he  shodld
receive  the  advantage  of  it  in  his  own  uiheritanoe.
Indeed,  whatever  the  rule  be,  as  to  the  preference
of  one  sex  to  the  ether,  marriage  restores  the
equality.  And  as  money  is  generally  more  con-
vertible to  profit,  and  more  likely  to  promote  in-
dustry, in  the  hands  of  men  than  of  women,  the
custom  of  this  country  may  properly  be  complied
with,  when  it  does  not  interfere  with  the  weignnuax
reason  explained  in  the  last  paragraph.

The  point  of  the  children's  actual  expectation**,
together  with  the  expediency  of  subjecting  the  il~
licit  commerce  of  the  sexes  to  every  c*


DUTY  OP  PARENTS.


leant  which  it  can  receive,  makes  the  difference
between  the  claim  of  legitimate  children  and
of  bastards.  Bat  neither  reason  will  in  any  case
justify' the  leaving  of  bastard*  to  the  world  with-
out provision,  education,  or  profession ;  or{  what
is  more  cruel,  without  the  means  of  continuing
in  the  situation  to  which  the  parent  has  intro-
duced them ;  which  last  is,  to  leave  them  to  in-
evitable misery.

After  the  first  requisite,  namely,  a  provision  for
the  ezigenciel  of  his  situation,  is  satisfied,  a  parent
nay  «Kmim«h  a  child's  portion,  in  order  to  punish
any  flagrant  crime,  or  to  punish  contumacy  and
want  o?  filial  duty  in  instances  not  otherwise
criminal :-  for  a  child  who  is  conscious  of  bad  be-
haviour, or  of  contempt  of  his  parent's  will  and
happiness,  cannot  reasonably  expect  the  same  in-
stances of  his  munificence.

A  child's  vices  may  be  of  that  sort,  and.  his
vicious  habits  so  incorrigible,  as  to  afford  much
the  same  reason  for  behaving  that  he  will  waste
sr  misemploy  the  fortune  put  into  his  power,  as  if
he  were  mad  or  idiotish,  in  which  case  a  parent
may  treat  him  as  a  madman  or  an  idiot;  that  is,
may  deem  it  soinoent  to  provide  for  bis  support,
by  an  annuity  equal  to  his  wants  and  innocent
enjoyments,  and  which  he  maybe  restrained  from
alienating.  This  seems  to  be  the  only  case  in
which  a  disinherison,  nearly  absolute,  is  jus-
tifiable.

Let  not  a  father  hope  to  excuse  an  inofficious
disposition  of  his  fortune,  by  alleging,  that "  every
nan  mar  do  what  he  will  with  his  own."  All  the
truth  which  this  expression  contains  is,  that  this
discretion  is  under  no  control  of  law;  and  that
his  will,  n#wever  capricious,  will  be  valid.  This
by  no  means  absolves  his  conscience  from  the  ob-
nnnons  of  a  parent,  or  imports  that  he  may  ne-
glect, without  injustice,  the  several  wants  and  ex-
pectations of  his  family,  in  order  to  gratify  a
whim  or  pique,  or  indulge  a  preference  founded
in  no  reasonable  distinction  of  merit  or  situation.
Although  in  his  intercourse  with  his  family,  and
in  the  lesser  endearments  of  domestic  life,  a  pa-
rent may  not  always  resist  his  partiality  to  a  fa-
vourite child  (which,  however,  should  be  both
avoided  and  concealed,  as  oftentimes  productive
of  lasting  jealousies  and  discontents;)  yet,  when
he  sits  down  to  make  his  will,  these  tendernesses
must  give  place  to  more  manly  deliberations.

A  lather  of  a  family  is  bound  to  adjust  his
economy  with  a  view  to  these  demands  upon  his
fortune;  and  until  a  sufficiency  for  these  ends  is
acquired,  or  in  due  time  probably  will  be  acquired
(for,  in  human  affaire,  probability  ought  to  con-
:  us,)  frugality  ana  exertions  of  industry  are
He  is  also  justified  in  the  declining  ex-
fiberaHty :  for,  to  take  from  those  who
want,  in  order  to  give  to  those  who  want,  adds
nothing  to  the  stock  of  public  happiness.  Thus
far,  therefore,  and  no  farther,  the  plea  of  "children,"
of  "  large  families,"  "  charity  begins  at  home,"  &c.
is  an  excuse  for  parsimony,  and  an  answer  to
those  whosoScit  our  bounty.  Beyond  this  point,
a*  the  use  of  riches  becomes  less,  the  desire  of
1+ying  up  should  abate  proportionably.  The
troth  is,  our  children  gain  not  so  much  as  we
imagine,  in  the  chance  of  this  world's  happiness,
or  even  of  its  external  prosperity,  by  setting  out
m  H  with  large  capitals.  Of  those  who  have  died
ads,  a  gnat  part  began  with  little.  And  in  re-
•waeWenjoyjosi^fhsyaiaiio^^


a  fortune  which  a  man  acquires  by  weB-appfied
industry,  or  by  a  series  of  success  in  his  business,
and  one  found  in  his  possession,  or  received  from
another.

A  principal  part  of  a  parent's  duty  is  still  be-
hind, viz :  the  using  of  proper  precautions  and
expedients,  in  order  to  form  and  preserve  his
children's  virtue.

To  us,  who  believe  that,  in  one  stage  or  other
of  our  existence,  virtue  will  conduct  to  happiness,
and  vice  terminate  in  misery ;  and  who  observe
withal,  that  men's  virtues  and  vices  are,  to  a  cer-
tain degree,  produced  or  affected  by  the  manage-
ment of  their  youth,  and  the  situations  in  which
they  are  placed;  to  all  who  attend  to  these  reasons,
the  obligation  to  consult  a  child's  virtue  will  ap-
pear to  differ  in  nothing  from  that  by  which  the
parent  is  bound  to  provide  for  his  maintenance  or
fortune.  The  child's  interest  is  concerned  in  the
one  means  of  happiness  as  well  as  in  the  other ;
and  both  means  are  equally,  and  almost  exclu-
sively, in  the  parent's  power.

For  this  purpose,  the  first  point  to  be  endeav-
oured after  is,  to  impress  upon  children  the  idea  of
acamntablenets,  that  is,  "to  accustom  them  to  look
forward  to  the  consequences  of  their  actions  in
another  world;  which  can  only  he  brought  about
by  the  parents  visibly  acting  with  a  view  to  these '
consequences  themselves.  Parents,  to  do  them
justice,  are  seldom  sparing  of  lessons  of  virtue  and
religion:  in  admonitions  which  cost  little,  and
which  profit  less ;  whilst  their  example  exhibits  a
continual  contradiction  of  what  they  teach.  A
father,  for  instance,  will,  with  much  solemnity
and  apparent  earnestness,  warn  his  son  against
idleness,  excess  in  drinking,  debauchery,  and  ex-
travagance, who  himself  loiters  about  all  day
without  employment;  comes  home  every  night
drunk ;  is  made  infamous  in  his  neighbourhood  by
some  profligate  connexion ;  and  wastes  the  for-
tune which  should  support,  or  remain  a  provision
for  his  family,  in  riot,  or  luxury,  or  ostentation.
Or  he  will  discourse  gravely  before  his  children
of  the  obligation  and  importance  of  revealed  re-
ligion; whilst  they  see  the  most  frivolous  and
oftentimes  feigned  excuses  detain  him  from  its
reasonable  and  solemn  ordinances.  Or  he  will
set  before  them,  perhaps,  the  supreme  and  tre-
mendous authority  of  Almighty  God ;  that  such
a  Being  ought  not  to  be  named,  or  even  thought
upon,  without  sentiments  of  profound  awe  and
veneration.  This  may  be  the  lecture  he  delivers
to  his  family  one  hour;  when  the  next,  if  an
occasion  arise  to  excite  his  anger,  his  mirth  or  hje
surprise,  they  will  hear  him  treat  the  name  of  the
Deity  with  the  most  irreverent  profanation,. and
sport  with  the  terms  and  denunciations  of  the
Christian  religion,  as  if  they  were  the  language  of
some  ridiculous  and  long  exploded  superstition.
Now,  even  a  child  is  not  to  be  imposed  upon  by
such  mockery.  He  sees  through  the  grimace  of
this  counterfeited  concern  ,for  virtue.  He  dis-
covers that  his  parent  is  acting  a  part ;  and  re-
ceives his  admonitions  as  he  would  hear  the  same
maxims  from  the  mouth  of  a  player.  And  when
once  this  opinion  has  taken  possession  of  the
child's  mind,  it  has  a  fetal  effect  upon  the  parent's
influence  in  all  subjects;  even  those,  in  which  he
himself  may  be  sincere  and  convinced.  Whereas
a  silent,  but  observable,  regards  the  duties  of  re-
ligion, in  the  parent's  own  behaviour,  will  take  a
sure  and  gradual  hold  of  the  child's  disposition,


88


MORAL  AND  POLITICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


much  beyond  formal  reproofs  and  chiding*,  which!
being  generally  prompted  by  aome  present  provo-
cation, discover  more  of  anger  than  of  principle,
and  are  always  received  with  a  temporary  alien-
ation and  disgust.

A  good  parent's  first  care  is,  to  be  virtuous
himself;  a  second,  to  make  his  virtues  as  easy  and
engaging  to  those  about  him  as  their  nature  will
admit.  Virtue  itself  offends,  when  coupled  with
forbidding  manners.  And  aome  virtues  may  be
urged  to  such  excess,  or  brought  forward  so  un-
seasonably, as  to  discourage  and  repel  those  who
observe  and  who  are  acted  upon  by  them,  instead
of  exciting  an  inclination  to  imitate  and  adopt
them.  Young  minds  are  particularly  liable  to
these  unfortunate  impressions.  For  instance,- if
a  Dither's  economy  degenerate  into  a  minute  and
teasing  parsimony,  it  is  odds  but  that  the  son,
who  has  suffered  under  it,  seta  out  a  sworn  enemy
to  all  rules  of  order  and  frugality.  If  a  fathers
piety  be  morose,  rigorous,  ana  tinged  with  melan-
choly, perpetually  breaking  in  upon  the  recreation
of  his  family,  and  surfeiting  them  with  the  lan-
guage of  rehgion  on  all  occasiona;  there  is  danger
teat  the  son  carry  from  home  with  him  a  settled
prejudice  against  seriousness  and  religion,  as  in-
consistent with  every  plan  of  a  pleasureable  life;
and  turn  out,  when  he  mixes  with  the  world,  a
character  of  levity  or  dissoluteness.

Something  likewise  may  be  done  towards  the
correcting  or  improving  of  those  early  inclinations
which  children  discover,  by  disposing  them  into
situations  the  least  dangerous  to  their  particular
Character*.  Thus,  I  would  make  choice  of  a
retired  life  for  young  persons  addicted  to  licen-
tious pleasures;  of  private  stations  for  the  proud
and  passionate ;  of  liberal  professions,  and  a  town
fife,  for  the  mercenary  and  sottish:  and  not,
according  to  the  general  practice  of  parents,  send
dissolute  youths  into  the  army :  penurious  tem-
pers to  trade ;  or  make  a  crafty  lad  an  attorney ;
or  natter  a  vain  and  haughty  temper  with  ele-
vated names,  or  situations,  or  callings,  to  which
tile  fashion  of  the  world  has  annexed  precedency
and  distinction,  but  in  which  his  disposition,  with-
out at  all  promoting  his  success,  will  serve  both  to
multiply  and  exasperate  his  disappointments.  In
the  same  way,  that  is,  with  a  view  to  the  particu-
lar frame  and  tendency  of  the  pupil's  character,  I
Would  make  choice  of  a  public  or  private  education.
The  reserved,  timid,  and  indolent,  will  have  their
acuities  called  forth,  and  their  nerves  invigorated,
by  a  public  education.  Youths  of  strong  spirits
and  passions  will  be  safer  in  a  private  education.
At  our  public  schools,  as  far  as  'I  have  observed,
more  literature  is  acquired,  and  more  vice ;  quick
parts  are  cultivated,  slow  ones  are  neglected.
Under  private  tuition,  a  moderate  proficiency  in
juvenile  learning  ia  seldom  exceeded,  but  with
more  certainty  attained.


CHAPTER  X.

The  Rights  o/  Parents.

The  rights  of  parents  result  from  their  duties.
If  h  be  the  duty  of  a  parent  to  educate  his  chil-
dren, to  form  them  for  a  life  of  usefulness  and  vir-
tue{  to  provide  for  them  situations  needful  for
their  subsistence,  and  suited  to  their  circumstances,
and  to  prepare  them  for  those  ^ftuations ;  he  has


a  right  to  such  authority,  and  in  support  «f  that
-authority  to  exercise  such  discipline  aa  may  be
necessary  for  these  purposes.  The  law  of  nature
acknowledges  no  other  foundation  of  a  parentis
right  over  his  children,  besides  his  duty  towards
them.  (I  speak  now  of  such  rights  as  may  be
enforced  by  coercion.)  This  relation  confers  no
property  in  their  persons,  or  natural  dominion
over  them,  as  is  commonly  supposed.

Since  it  is,  in  general,  necessary  to  determine
the  destination  of  children,  before  tfitey  are  capa-
ble of  judging  of  their  own  happiness^  parents
have  a  right  to  elect  professions  for  them.

As  the  mother  herself  owes  obedience  to  the
father,  her  authority  must  submit  to  his.  In  a
competition,  therefore,  of  commands,  the  father  ia
to  be  obeyed.  In  case  of  the  death  of  either,  the
authority,  as  well  as  duty,  of  both  parents,  de-
volves upon  the  survivor.

These  rights,  always  following  the  duty,  be-
long likewise  to  guardians ;  and  so  much  of  them
as  is  delegated  by  the  parents  to  guardians,  be-
longs to  tutors,  school-masters.  &c.

From  this  principle,  "  that  the  rights  of  parents
result  from  their  uuty,"  it  follows,  that  parents
have  no  natural  right  over  the  lives  of  their  chil-
dren, aa  was  absurdly  allowed  to  Roman  father*;
nor  any  to  exercise  unprofitable  severities ;  nor  to
command  the  cornmiasion  of  crimes:  for  these
rights  can  never  be  wanted  for  the  purpose  of  a
parent's  duty.

Nor,  for  the  same  reason,  have  parents  any
right  to  sell  their  children  into  slavery.  Upon
which,  by  the  way,  we  may  observe,  that  the
children  of  slaves,  are  not,  by  the  law  of  nature,
born  slaves :  for,  as  the  maaWa  right  is  derived
to  him  through  the  parent,  it  can  never  be  greater
than  the  parent's  own.

Hence  also  it  appears,  that  parents  not  only
pervert,  but  exceed  their  just  authority,  when
they  consult  their  own  ambition,  interest,  or  pre-
judice, at  the  manifest  expense  of  their  children's
happiness. Of  which  abuse  of  parental  power,
the  following  are  instances:  the  shutting  up  of
daughters  and  younger  sons  in  nunneries,  and
monasteries,  in  order  to  preserve  entire/  the  estate
and  dignity  of  the  family;  or  the  using  of  any  arts,
either  of  kindness  or  unkihdnesa,  to  induce  them
to  make  choice  of  this  way  of  fife  themselves:
or,  in  countries  where  the  clergy  are.  prohibited
from  marriage,  putting  sons  into  the  church  for
the  same  end,  who  are  never  likely  to  do  or
receive  any  good  in  it,  sufficient  to  compensate
for  this  sacrifice ;  the  urging  of  children  to  mar-
riages from  which  they  are  averse,  with  the  view
of  exalting  or  enriching  the  family,  ox  for  the  *»lr«y
of  connecting  estates,  parties,  or  interests :  or  the
opposing  of  a  marriage,  in  which  the  child  would
probably  find  his  happiness,  from  a  motive  of  pride
or  avarice,  of  family  hostility,. or  personal  pique.


CHAPTER  XL

The  Duty  qf  Children.

The  duty  of  children  may  be  considered,

I.  During  childhood.

IL  After  they  have  attained  to  manhood  but
continue  in  their  father's  faintly.  *

III.  After  they  have  attained  to  **\»nknm1  and
have  left  their  father's  nuni!*.  ««,««


DUTY  OP  CHILDREN.


89


I.  During  childhood.
Children  must  be  supposed  to  have  attained  to
some  degree  of  discretion  before  they  are  capable
of  any  duty.  There  is  an  interval  of  eight  or  nine
yean  between  the  dawning  and  the  maturity  of
reason,  in  which  it  is  necessary  to  subject  the  in-
clination of  children  to  many  restraints,  and  di-
rect their  application  to  many  employments',  of  the
tendency  ana  use  of  which  they  cannot  judge ;  for
which  cause,  the  submission  of  children  during
this  period  must  be  ready  and  implicit,  with  an
exception,  however,  of  any  manifest  crime  which
may  be  commanded  them.

A.  After  they  have  attained  to  manhood,  hut
continue  in  their  father' a  family.

If  children,  when  they  are  grown  up,  volun-
tarily continue  members  of  their  father  a  family,
they  are  bound,  beside  the  general  duty  of  •  grati-
tude to  their  parents,  to  observe  such. regulations
of  the  fiunily  as  the  father  shall  appoint ;  con-
tribute their  labour  to  its  support,  if  required ;  and
confine  themselves  to  such  expenses  as  he  shall
allow.  The  obligation  would  be  the  same,  if  they
were  admitted  into  any  other  family,  or  received
support  from  any  other  hand.

III.  After  they  havo  attained  to  manhood,  and
hare  left  their  father's  family.

in  this  state  of  the  relation,  the  duty  to  parents
is  simply  the  duty  of  gratitude;  not  different
la  kind,  from  that  which  we  owe  to  any  other
benefactor;  in  degree,  just  so  much  exceeding
other  obligations,  by  how  much  a  parent  has  been
a  greater  benefactor  than  any  other  friend.  The
services  and  attentions,  by  which  filial  gratitude
nay  be  testified,  can  be  comprised  within  no  enu-
meration. It  will  show  itself  in  compliances  with
the  will  of  the  parents,  however  contrary  to  the
child's  own  taste  or  judgment,  provided  it  he  nei-
ther criminal,  nor  totally  inconsistent  with  his
happiness;  in  a  constant  endeavour  to  promote
their  enjdymenU,  prevent  their  wishes,  and  soften
their  anxieties,  in  small  matters  as  well  as  in
great ;  in  assisting  them  in  their  business ;  in  con-
tributing to  their  support,  ease,  or  better  accom-
modation, when  their  circumstances  require  it;
in  afibrding  them  our  company,  in  preference  to
more  amusing  engagements;  in  waiting  upon
their  ajrfrness  or  decrepitude ;  in  bearing  with
the  infirmines  of  their  health  or  temper,  with  the
peeviihnear  and  complaints,  the  unfashionable,
negligent,  austere  manners,  and  offensive  habits,
which  often  attend  upon  ad  vanced  years :  for  where
most  old  age  find  indulgence,  if  it  do  not  meet
with  it  in  the  piety  and  partiality  of  children'?

The  most  serious  contentions  between  parents
and  their  children  are  those  commonly  which  re-
late to  marriage,  or  to  the  choice  of  a  profession.
A  parent  has,  in  no  case,  a  right  to  destroy  his
child's  happiness.  If  it  be  true,  therefore,  that
then  exist  such  personal  and  exclusive  attach-
ments between  individuals  of  different  sexes,  that
the  possession  of  a  particular  man  or  woman  in
sssiiisfljii  be  really  necessary  for  the  child's  hap-
piness; or,  if  it  be  true,  that  an  aversion  to  a  par-
ssession  may  be  involuntary  and  uncon-
■  ■■„..  ,  then  it  will  follow,  that  parents,  where1
mis  is  the  case,  ought  not  to  urge  their  authority,
oaf  that  the  child  w  not  bound  to  obey  it

The  point  is,  to  discover  how  far,  in  any  par-

jrsstsnee,  this  if  the  case. Whether  the

i  of  lovers  ever  continues  with  such  in-

lao  Jong,  that  the  •access  of  their  de- ,


aires  constitutes,  or  the  disappointment  affects
any  considerable  portion  of  -their  happiness,  com-
pared with  that  of  their  whole  life,  it  is  difficult  to
determine ;  but  there  can  be  no  difficulty  in  pro-
nouncing, that  not  one  half  of  those  attachments,
which  young  people  conceive  with  so  much  haste
and  passion,  are  of  this  sort.  I  believe  it  also  to
be  true,  that  there  are  few  aversions  to  a  profes-
sion, which  resolution,  perseverance,  activity  in
going  about  the  duty  of  it,  and,  above  all,  despair
of  changing,  will  not  subdue :  yet  there  arc  some
such.  Wherefore,  a  child  who  respects  his  pa-
rents' judgment,  and  is,  as  he  ought  to  be,  tender
of  then*  happiness,  owes,  at  least,  so  much  de-
ference to  their  will,  as  to  try  fairly  and  faithfully,
in  one  case,  whether  time  and  absence  will  not
cool  an  affection  which  they  disapprove;  and,  in
the  other,  whether  a  longer  continuance  in  the
profession  which  they  have  chosen  for  him  may
not  reconcile  him  to  it.  The  whole  depends  upon
the  experiment  being  made  on  the  child's  part
with  sincerity,  and  not  merely  with  a  design  of
compassing  his  purpose  at  last,  by  means  of  a
simulated  and  temporary  compliance.  It  is  the
nature  of  love  and  hatred,  and  of  all  violent  af-
fections, to  delude  the  mind  with  a  persuasion  t$at
we  shall  always  continue  to  feel  them  as  we  feel'
them  at  present;  we  cannot  conceive  that  they
will  either  change  or  cease.  Experience  of  similar
or  greater  changes  in  ourselves,  or  a  habit,  of
giving  credit  to  what  our  parents,  or  tutors,  or
books,  teach  us,  may  control  this  persuasion,
otherwise  it  renders  youth  very  untractable :  for
they  see  clearly  and  truly  that  it  is  impossible
they  should  be  happy  under  the  circumstances
proposed  to  them,  in  their  present  state  of  mind.
After  a  sincere  but  ineffectual  endeavour,  by  the
child,  to  accommodate  his  inclination  to  his  pa-
rent's pleasure,  he  ought  not  to  suffer  in  his  pa-
rent's affection,  or  in  his  fortunes.  The  parent,
when  he  has  reasonable  proof  of  this  should  ac-
quiesce ;  at  all  events,  the  child  is  then  at  liberty
to  provide  for  his  own  happiness.

Parents  have  no  right  to  urge  their  children
upon  marriages  to  wliich  they  are  averse:  nor
ought,  in  any  shdpe,  to  resent  the  cluldren's  dis-
obedience to  such  commands.  This  is  a  different
case  from  opposing  a  match  of  inclination,  Ircause
the  child's  misery  is  a  mucli  more  probable  con-
sequence ;  it  being  easier  to  live  without  a  person
that  we  love,  than  with  one  whom  we  hate.  Add
to  this,  that  compulsion  in  marriage  necessarily
leads  to  prevarication;  as  the  reluctant  party  pro-
mises an  affection,  which  neither  exists,  nor  is  ex-
pected to  take  place :  and  parental,  like  all  human
authority,  ceases  at  the  point  where  obedience  be-
comes criminal.

In  the  above-mentioned,  and  in  all  contests  be-
tween parents  and  children,  it  is  the  jwircnt's  duty*
to  represent  to  the  child  the  consequences  of  his
conduct ;  and  it  will  be  found  his  best  policy  to
represent  them  with  fidelity.  It  is  usual  for  pa-
rents to  exaggerate  these  descriptions  beyond  pro-
bability, andby  exaggeration  to  lose  allercdit  with
their  children ;  thus,  in  a  great  measure,  defeating
their  own  end.

Parents  are  forbidden  to  interfere,  where  a  trust
is  reposed  personally  in  the  son ;  and  where,  con-
sequently, the  son  was  expected,  and  by  virtue
of  that  expectation  is  obliged,  .to  pursue  his  own
judgment,  and  not  that  of  any  other:  as  is  the  '
case  with  judicial  magistrates  in  the  execution  of


MORAL  AND  POLITICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


their  office;  with  members  of  the  legislature  in
their  Totes;  with  electors  where  preference  is  to
be  given  to  certain  prescribed  qualifications  The
son  may  assist  his  own  judgment  by  the  advice  of
his  rather,  or  of  any  one  whom  he  choose*  to  con-
auk  :  but  his  own  judgment,  whether  it  proceed
linen  knowledge  or  authority,  ought  finally  to  de-
termine his  conduct.

The  duty  of  children  to.  their  parents  was
thought  worthy  to  be  made  the  subject  of  one  of
the  Ten  Comniandments ;  and,  as  such,  is  re-
cognised try  Christ,  together  with  the  rest  of  the
moral  precepts  of  the  Decalogue,  in  various  places

The  same  divine  Teacher's  sentiments  con-
cerning the  relief  of  indigent  parents,  appear
■nfficienUy  from  that  manly  and  deserved  indig-
nation with  which  he  reprehended  the  wretched
casuistry  of  the  Jewish  expositors,  who,  under  the
name  of  a  tradition,  had  contrived  a  method  of
evading  this  dutyyby  converting,  or  pretending  to
convert,  to  the  treasury  of  the  temple,  so' much  of
their  property  as  their  distressed  parent  might  be
entitled  by  their  law  to  demand.

Agreeably  to  this  law  of  Nature  and  Chris-
tiafnty,  children  are,  by  the  law  of  England,  bound
to  rapport,  as  well  their  immediate  parents,  as
their  grandfather  and  grandmother,  or  remoter
ancestors,  who  stand  in  need  of  support. •

.  Obedience  to  parents  is  enjoined  by  St.  Paul  to
the  fiphesians :  "  Children  obey  your  parents  in
the  Lord,  for  this  is  right;"  and  to  the  Colossians:
M  Children,  obey  your  .parents  in  all  things,  for
this  is  well-pleasing  unto  the  Lord."*

By  the  Jewish  law,  disobedience  to  parents
was  in  some  extreme  cases  capital :  Deut.  xxi  18.


BOOK  IV.


bums  to  ocHSBLvn

This  division  of  the  subject  is  retained  merely
for  the  sake  of  method,  by  which  the  writer  and
the  reader  are  equally  assisted.  To  the  subject
itself  it  import*  nothing;  for,  the  obligation  of  all
duties  being  fundamentally  the  same,  it  matters
little  under  what  class  or  title  any  of  them  are
considered.  In  strictness,  there  are  few  duties  or
crimes  which  terminate  in  a  man's  self;  and  so
for  as  others  are  ajfected  by  their  operation,  they
have  been  treated  of  in  some  article  of  the  pre-
ceding book.  We  have  reserved,  however,  to  this
head,  the  right*  of  self -defence ;  also  the  con-
sideration of  drunkenness  and  suicide,  as  offences
against  that  care  of  our  faculties,  and  preservation
of  our  persons,  which  we  account  duties,  and  call
duties  to  ourselves.

CHAPTER  L

The  Rights  of  Self-Defence.

It  has  been  asserted,  that  in  a  state  of  nature
We  might  lawfully  defend  the  most  insignificant


*  Upon  which  two  phrases,  "  this  is  risht,"  and,  ••  for
tUs  is  well-pteaain?  unto  the  Lord,*'  being  used  by  St.
Paul  in  u  sense  perfectly  parallel,  we  may  observe,  that
moral  rectitude,  and  conformity  to  the  Divine  will,  were
la  ins  apprehension  the  same.


right,  provided  it  were  a  perfect  deteTTninste  right,
by  any  extremities  which  the  obstinacy  of  the)
aggressor  rendered  necessary.  Of  this  I  doubt;
l)ecause  I  doubt  whether  the  general  rule  be  worth
sustaining  at  such  an  expense ;  and  because,  apart
from  the  general  consequence  of  yielding  to  the
attempt,  it  cannot  be  contended  to  be  for  the  aug-
mentation of  human  happinc*4.  that  one  man
should  lose  his  life,  or  a  limb,  rather  than  another
a  pennyworth  of  his  property.  Nevertheless,
perfect  rights  can  only  be  distinguished  by  their
value;  and  it  is  impossible  to  ascertain  the  value
at  which  the  liberty  of  using  extreme  violence  be-
gins. The  person  attached,  must  balance,  as  well
as  he  can,  between  the  general  consequence  of
yielding,  and  the  particular  effect  of  resistance.

However,  this  right,  if  it  exist  in  a  state  of  na-
ture, is  suspended  by  the  establishment  of  civil
society :  because  thereby  other  remedies  are  pro-
vided against  attacks  upon  our  property,  and  be-
cause it  is  necessary  to  the  peace  and  safety  of  the
community,  that  the  prevention,  punishment,
and  redress  of  injuries,  be  adjusted  by  public  laws.
Moreover,  as  the  individual  is  assisted  in  the  re-
covery of  his  right,  or  of  a  compensation  for  hie
right,  by  the  public  strength,  it  is  no  less  equitable
than  expedient,  that  he  should  submit  to  public
arbitration  the  kind,  as  well  as  the  measure  of
the  satisfaction  which  he  is  to  obtain.

There  is  one  case  in  which  all  extremities  are
justifiable ;  namely,  when  our  life  is  assaulted,  and
it  becomes  necessary  for  our  preservation  to  kill  the
assailant  This  is  evident  in  a  state  of  nature  ;
unless  it  can  be  shown,  that  we  are  bound  to  pre-
fer the  aggressor's  life  to  our  own,  that  is  to  say,
to  love  our  enemy  better  than  ourselves,  which
can  never  be  a  debt  of  justice,  nor  any  where  ap-
pears to  be  a  duty  of  charity.  Nor  is  the  casa
altered  by  our  living  in  civil  society ;  because,  by
the  supposition,  the  laws  of  society  cannot  inter-
pose to  protect  us,  nor,  by  the  nature  of  the  case,
compel  restitution.  This  liberty  is  restrained  to
cases  in  which  no  other  probable  means  of  pre-
serving our  life  remain,  as  flight,  calling  for  assist-
ance, disarming  the  adversary,  Ac.  The  rule
holds,  whether  the  danger  proceed  from  a  vohxo-
tary  attack,  as  by  an  enemy,  robber,  or  assassin ;
or  trom  an  involuntary  one,  as  by  a  madman,  or
person  sinking  in  the  water,  and  draggingus  after
him ;  or  where  two  persons  are  reduced  to  a  eftosv
tion  in  which  one  or  both  of  them  must  perish :  a*
in  a  shipwreck,  where  two  seize  upon  a  pbnk,
which  will  support  only  one :  although,  to  say  the
truth,  these  extreme  cases,  which  happen  seldom,
and  hardly,  when  they  do  happen,  admit  of  morel
agency,  are  scarcely  worth  mentioning,  much  lee*
discussing  at  length.

The  instance  which  approaches  the  nearest  to
the  preservation  of  life,  and  which  seems  to  justify
the  same  extremities,  is  the  defence  of  chastity.

In  all  other  cases,  it  appears  to  me  the  safest  to
consider  the  taking  away  of  life  as  authorised  by
the  law  of  the  land ;  ana  the  person  who  takes  it
away,  as  in  the  situation  of  a  minister  or  execu-
tioner of  the  law.

In  which  view,  homicide,  in  England,  is  justi-
fiable:

1.  To  prevent  £he  commission  of  a  crime,  which,
when  committed,  would  be  punishable  with  death*.
Thus,  it  is  lawful  to  shoot  a  highwayman,  or  orje*
attempting  to  break  into  a  house  by  night ;  but
not  so  if  the  attempt  be  made  in  the  day-time  j


DRUNKENNESS.


91


vthfch  particular  dfrrinction,  by  a  consent  of  le-
gislation that  is  remarkable,  obtained  also  in  the
Jewish  law,  as  well  as  in  the  laws  both  of  Greece
and  Rome.

2.  In  necessary  endeavours  to  cany  the  law
into  execution,  as  in  suppressing  riots,  apprehend-
ing malefactors,  preventing  escapes,  &c.

I  do  not  know  that  the  law  holds  forth  its  au-
thority to  any  cases  besides  those  which  fid!  within
one  or  other  of  the  aljpve  descriptions;  or,  that,
after  the  exception  of  immediate  danger  to  life  or
chastity,  the  destruction  of  a  human  being  can  be
innocent  without  an  authority.

The  rights  of  war  are  not  here  taken  into  the


CHAPTER  IL

Drunkenness.

Drunkenness  is  either  actual  or  habitual;
just  as  it  Is  one  thing  to  be  drunk,  and  another  to
be  a  drunkard.  What  we  shall  deliver  upon  the
subject  most  principally  be  understood  of  a  habit
of  intemperance ;  although  part  of  the  guilt  and
danger  described,  may  be  applicable  to  casual  ex-
cesses; and  all  of  it  in  a  certain  degree,  forasmuch
as  every  habit  is  only  a  repetition  of  single  in-


The  mischief  of  drunkenness,  from  which  we
are  to  compote  the  guilt  of  it,  consults  in  following
thebeddfects:

1.  It  betrays  most  constitutions  either  to  extra-
vagances of  anger,  or  sins  of  lewdness.
9.  It  disqualifies  men  for  the  duties  of  their
,  both  by  the  temporary  disorder  of  their
,  and  at  length  by  a  constant  incapacity


3.  It  is  attended  with  expenses,  which  can  often
be  iB  spared.

4.  It  is  sore  to  occasion  uneasiness  to  the  family
of  the  drunkard.

&.  It  shortens  fife.

To  these  consequences  of  drunkennesB  must
be  added  the  peculiar  danger  and  mischief  of  the
essoapfe. Qnmkermess  is  a  social  festive  vice;
apt,  beyond  any  vice  that  can  be  mentioned,
to  draw  in  otfeers  by  the  example. The  drinker
collects  his  circle;  the  circle  naturally  spreads ;  of
those  who  are  drawn  within  it,  many  become  the
cjonupteis  and  centres  of  sets  and  circles  of  their
own ;  every  one  countenancing,  and  perhaps  emu-
latrnr  the  rest,  till  a  whole  neighbourhood  be  in-
fected fiuiD  the  contagion  of  a  single  example.
This  account  is  confirmed  by  what  we  often  ob-
serve of  drunkenness,  that  it  is  a  local  vice ;  found
to  prevail  In  certain  countries,  in  certain  districts
ef  a  eooxttry,  at  in  particular  towns,  without  any
reason  to  be  given  fcr  the  fashion,  but  that  it  had
Item  introduced  by  some  popular  examples.  With
this  observation  upon  the  spreading  quality  of
drunkenness,  let  us  connect  a  remark  which  be-
lenay  to  the  several  evil  effects  above  recited.  The

s  of  a  vice,  nke  the  symptoms  of  a  dis-

D  ,  they  be  all  enumerated  inthe.de-
,  "seldom  all  meet  in  the  same  subject.
In  die  instance  under  consideration,  the  ape  and
are  of  one  drunkard  may  have  little  to
i  mhammations  of  lust  or  anger ;  the  for-
^a«  of  a  second  may  not  be  injured  by  the  ex-
" — B^athirdinsyhaveriominirytobedisquieted


by  his  irregularities :  and  a  fourth  may  possess
a .  constitution  fortified  against  the  poison  of
strong  liquors.  But  if,  as  we  always  ought  -to  do,
we  comprehend  within  the  consequences  of  our
conduct  the  mischief  and  tendency  of  the  exam-
ple, the  above  circumstances,  however  fortunate
lor  the  individual,  will  be  found  to  vary  the  mult
of  his  intemperance  less,  probably,  than  ha  sup-
poses. The  moralist  may  expostulate  with  him
thus :  Although  the  waste  of  time  and  of  money
be  of  small  importance  to  you,  it  may  be  of  the
utmost  to  some  one  or  other  whom  your  society
cornipts.  Repeated  or  long-continued  excesses,
which  hurt  not  your  health,  may  be  ratal  to  your
companion.  Although  you  have  neither  wire  or
child,  nor  parent,  to  lament  your  absence  from
home,  or  expect  your  return  to  it  with  terror :  other
families,  in  which  husbands  and  fathers  have  been
invited  to  share  in  your  ebriety,  or  encouraged  to
imitate  it,  may  justly  lay  their  misery  or  ruin  at
your  door.  This  will  hold  good  whether  the  per-
son seduced  be  seduced  immediately  by  you,  or
the  vice  be  propagated  from  you  to  nim  through
several  intermediate  examples.  All  these  consid-
erations it  is  necessary  to  assemble,  to  judge  truly
of  a  vice  which  usually  meets  with  muder  names
and  more  indulgence  than  it  deserves.

I  omit  those  outrages  upon  one  another,  and
upon  the  peace  and  safety  of  the  neighbourhood,
in  which  drunken  revels  often  end ;  and  also  those
deleterious  and  maniacal  effects  which  strong  li-
quors produce  upon  particular  constitutions:  be-
cause, in  general  propositions  concerning  drunk-
enness, no  consequences  should  be  included,  but
what  are  constant  enough' to  be  generally"  ex-
pected.

Drunkenness  is  repeatedly  forbidden  by  St
Paul :  "  Be  not  drunk  with  wine,  wherein  is  ex-
cess." "  Let  us  walk  honestly  as  in  the  day,  not
in  rioting  and  drunkenness."  "Be  not  deceived;
neither  fornicators,  nor  drunkards,  nor  revilers.
norextbrtkmers,  shall  inherit  the  kingdomof  Goo."
Ephes.  v.  18;  Romans  xiii.  13;  1  Cor.vi  9, 10.
The  same  apostle  likewise  condemns  drunkenness,
as  peculiarly  inconsistent  with  the  Christian  pro-
fession:--" They  that  be  drunken,  are  drunken
in  the  night:  but  let  us,  who  are  of  the  day,  be
sober."  1  Thess.  v.  7,  8.  We  are  not  concerned
with  the  argument:  the  words  amount  to  a  pro-
hibition of  drunkenness,  and  the  authority  is  con-
clusive.

It  is  a  question  of  some  importance,  how  for
drunkenness  is  an  excuse  for  the  crimes  which  the
drunken  person  commits.

In  the  solution  of  this  question,  we  will  first
suppose  the -drunken  person  to  be  altogether  de-
prived of  moral  agency,  that  is  to  say,  of  all  re-
flection and  foresight.  In  this  condition,  it  is  evi-
dent that  he  is  no  more  capable  of  guilt  than  a
madman ;  although,  like  him,  he  may  be  extreme-
ly mischievous.  The  only  guilt  with  which  he  is
chargeable,  was  incurred  at  the  time  when,  he  vo-
luntarily brought  himself  into  this'  situation.  And
as  every  man  is  responsible  for  the  consequences
which  he  foresaw,  or  might  have  foreseen,  and  for
no  other,  this  guilt  will  be  in  projxwrtion  to  the
probability  of  such  consequences  ensuing.  From
which  principle  results  the  following  rule,  viz.  that
the  guilt  of  any  action  in  a  drunken  man,  bean
the  same  proportion  to  the  guHt  of  the  like  action
in  a  sober  man,  that  the  probability  of  its  being
the  consequence  of  dronrennnss,  bean  to  absolute


98


MORAL  AND  POLITICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


certainty.  By  vtooe  of  thbrwe,  those  vices  which
are  the  known  effects  of  drunkenness,  either  in
general  or  upon  particular  constitutions,  are  in  all,  or
in  men  of  such  constitutions,  nearly  as  criminal
as  if  committed  with  all  their  faculties  and  senses
about  them.

If  the  privati6n  of  reason  be  only  partial,  the
guilt  will  be  of  a  mixed  nature.  For  so  much  of
his  self-government  as  the  drunkard  retains,  he  is
as  responsible  then  as  at  any  other  time.  He  is
entitled  to  no  abatement  beyond  the  strict  propor-
tion in  which  his  moral  faculties  are  impaired.
Now  I  call  the  guiH  of  the  crime,  if  a  sober  man
had  committed  it,  the  whole  guilt.  A  person  in
the  condition  we  describe,  incurs  part  of  this  at
the  instant  of  perpetration  ;  and  by  bringing  him-
self into  such  a  condition,  he  incurred  that  fraction
of  the  remaining  part,  which  the  danger  of  this
consequence  was  of  an  integral  certainty.  For
the  sake  of  illustration,  we  are  at  liberty  to  sup-
pose, that  a  man  loses  half  his  moral  faculties  by
drunkenness;  this  leaving  him  but  half  his  re-
sponsibility, he  incurs,  when  he  commits  the  action,
half  of  the  whole  guilt.  We  will  also  suppose
that  it  was  known  beforehand^  that  it  was  an  even
chance,  or  half  a  certainty,  that  this  crime  would
follow  nis  getting  drunk.  This  makes  him  charge-
able with  naif  of  the  remainder;  so  that  alto-
gether, he  is  responsible  in  three- fourths  of  the
guilt  which  a  sober  man  would  have  incurred  by
the  same  action.

I  do  not  mean  that  any  real  case  can  be  reduced
to  numbers,  or  the  calculation  be  ever  made  with
arithmetical  precision ;  but  these  are  the 'princi-
ples, and  this  the  rule  by  which  our  general  ad-
measurement of  the  guilt  of  such  offences  should
be  regulated.

The  appetite  for  intoxicating  liquors  appears  to
me  to  be  almost  always  acquired.  One  proof  of
which  is,  that  it  is  apt  to  return  only  at  particular
times  and  places:  as-after  dinner,  in  the  evening,
on  the  market-day,  at  the  market-town,  in  such  a
company,  at  such  a  tavern;  And  this  may  be  the
reason  that,  if  a  habit  of  drunkenness  be  ever  over-
come, it  is  upon  some  change  of  place,  situation,
company,  or  profession.  A  man  sunk  deep  in  a
habit  of  drunkenness  will,  upon  such  occasions
as  these,  when  he  finds  himself  loosened  from  the
associations  which  held  him  fast,  sometimes  make  a
plunge,  and  get  out.  In  a  matter  of  so  great  im-
portance, it  is  well  worth  while,  where  it  is  in  any
degree  practicable,  to  change  our  habitation  and
society,  for  the  sake  of  the  experiment
_  Habits  of  drunkenness  commonly  take  their  rise
either  from  a  fondness  for,  and  connexion  with,
some  comoany,  or  some  companion,  already  ad-
dicted, to  this  practice;  which  affords  an  almost
irresistible  invitation  to  take  a  share  in  the  indul-
gences which  those  about  us  are  enjoying  with  so
much  apparent  relish  and  delight ;  or  from  want
of  regular  employment,  which  is  sure  to  let  in
many  superfluous-cravings  and  customs,  and  often
this  among  the  rest ;  or,  lastly,  from  grief,  or  fa-
tigue, both  which  strongly  solicit  that  relief  which
inebriating  liquors  administer,  and  also  furnish  a
specious  excuse  for  complying  with  the  incli-
nation. But  the  habit,  when  once  set  in,  is  con-
tinued by  different  motives  from  those  to  which
it  owes  its  origin.  Persons  addicted  to  excessive
drinking,  sutler  in  the  intervals  of  sobriety,  and
near  the  return  of  their  accustomed  indulgence,  a
faintness  and  oppression  circa  praxordia,  which


it  exceeds  the  ordinary  patience  of  human  1
to  endure.  This  is  usually  relieved  for  a  short
time,  by  a  repetition  of  the  same  excess ;  and  to
this  relief,  as  to  the  removal  of  every  long  contin-
ued pain,  they  who  have  once  experienced  it,  are
urged  almost  beyond  the  power  of  resistance.
This  is  not  all :  as  the  liquor  loses  its  stimulus,
the  dose  must  be  increased,  to  reach  the  same
pitch  of  elevation  or  ease ;  which  increase  propor-
tionably  accelerates  the  progress  of  all  the  mala*
dies  that  drunkenness  brings  on.  Whoever  re-
flects upon  the  violence  of  the  craving  in  the
advanced  stages,  of  the  habit,  and  the  fatal  termi-
nation to  which  the  gratification  of  it  leads,  will,
the moment  he perceives  in  himself  the  first


symptoms  of  a


growing
us  resora


inclination  to


perance,  collect  his  resolution  to  this  point;  or
(what  perhaps,  he  will  find  his  best  security,)
arm  himself  with  some  peremptory  rule,  as  to  the
times  and  quantity  of  his  indulgences.  I  own
myself  a  friend  to  the  laying  down  of  rules  to
ourselves  of  this  sort,  and  rigidly  abiding  by  them.
They  may  be  exclaimed  against  as  stiff,  but  they
are  often  salutary.  Indefinite  resolutions  of  ab-
stemiousness are  apt  to  yield  to  extraordinary
occasions;  mndr  extraordinary  occaskHuTto  occur
perpetually.  Whereas,  the  stricter  the  rule  is,
the  more  tenacious  we  grow  of  it;  and  many  a
man  will  abstain  rather  than  break  his  rule,  who
would  not  easily  be  brought  to  exercise  the  same
mortification  from  higher  motives.  Not  to  men-
tion, that  when  our  rale  is  once  known,  we  an
provided  with  an  answer  to  every  importunity.

There  is  a  difference,  no  doubt,  between  con-
vivial intemperance,  and  that  solitary  sotrishne—
which  waits  neither  for  company  nor  invitation.
But  the  one,  I  am  afraid,  commonly  ends  in. the
other:  and  this  last,  in  the  basest  degradation
to  which  the  faculties  and  dignity  of  numan  na-
ture can  be  jeduced.


CHAPTER  III.

Suicide.

There  is  no  subject  in  morality  in  which  the
consideration  of  general  consequences  is  more
necessary  than  in  this  of  Suiqde.  Particular  and
extreme  cases  of  suicide  may  be  imagined,  and
may  arise,  of  which  it  would  be  difficult  to
assign  the  particular  mischief  or  from  that  con-
sideration alone  to  demonstrate  the  guilt:  and
these  cases  have  been  the  chief  occasion  of  con-
fusion and  doubtfulness  in  the  question :  albeit,
this  is  no  more  than  what  is  sometimes  true  of
the  most  acknowledged  vices.  I  could  nropoee
many  possible  cases  even  of  murder,  which,  if
they  were  detached  from  the-  general  rule,  and
governed  by  their  own  particular  consequences
alone,  it  would  be  no  easy  undertaking  to  prove
crimipal.

<^The  true  question  in  this  argument  is  no  other
[than  this:  May  every  man  who  chooses  to  de-
stroy his  life,  innocently  do  sol  Limit  and  dis-
tinguish the  subject  as  you  can,  it  will  come  at
{last  to  this  question.

^  For,  shall  we  say,  that  we  are  then  at  liberty
to  commit  suicide  when  we  find  our  continuance
in  life  become  useless  to  mankind?  Any  one  who
pleases,  may  make  himself  useless ;  and  .melaja-
choly  minds  are  prone  to  think  themselves


stncmE.


ftaa,  when  ihey  really  are  not  so.  Supposing  a
kw  were  promulgated,  aflowing  each  private  per-
son to  destroy  every  man  he  met,  whose  longer
continuance  in  the  world  he  judged  to  be  useless;
who  would  not  condemn  the  latitude  of  such  a
rule?  who  does  not  perceive  that  it  amounts  to  a
permission  to  commit  murder  at  pleasure?  A
smdlar  rule,  regulating  the  right  over  our  own
fives,  wouM  be  capable  of  the  same  extension.
Beside  which,  no  one  is  useless  for  the  purpose  of
this  plea,  but  he  who  has  lost  every  capacity  and
opportunity  of  being  useful,  together  with  the  pos-
sibility of  recovering  any  degree  of  either;  which
is  a  state  of  such  complete  destitution  and  despair,
as  cannot,  I  believe,  be  predicated  of  any  man
firing.

Or  rather,  shall  we  say  that  to  depart  volunta-
rily out  of  life,  is  lawful  for  those  alone  who  leave
none  to  lament  their  death  1  If  this  consideration
is  to  be  taken  into  the  account  at  all,  the  subject
of  debate  will  be,  not  whether  there  are*  any  to
sorrow  for  us,  but  whether  their  sorrow  for  our
death  will  exceed  that  which  we  should  suffer  by
continuing  to  live.  Now  this  is  a  comparison  of
things  so  lnddcmtinate  in  their  nature,  capable
of  so  different  a  judgment,  and  concerning  which
the  judgment  will  differ  so  much  according  to  the
•tale  orthe  spirits,  or  the  pressure  of  any  present
anxiety,  that  it  would  vary  little,  in  hypochon-
driacal constitutions,  from  an  unqualified  license
to  commit  suicide^  whenever  the  distresses  which
men  felt,  or 'fancied,  rose  high  enough  to  over-
come the  pain  and  dread  of  death.  Men  axe
never  tempted  to  destroy  themselves  but  when
under  the  oppression*  of  some  grievous  uneasi-
ness: the  restrictions  of  the  rule  therefore  ought
to  apply  to  these  cases.  But  what  effect  can  we
look  tor  from  a  rule  which  proposes  to  weigh  our
pain  against  that  of  another;  the  misery  that  is
Kit,  against  that  which  is  only  conceived ;  and  in
so  corrupt  a  balance  as  the  party's  own  distempered
imagination  1

In  like  manner,  whatever  other  rule  you  assign,
it  will  ultimately  bring  us  to  an  ^discriminate
toleration  of  suicide,  in  all  cases  in  which  there  is
7  r  of  its  being  committed.  It  remains,  there-
.  to  inquire  what  would  be  the  effect  of  such
nation:  evidently,  the  loss  of  many  lives  to
the  community,  of  which  some  might  be  useful  or
important;  the  affliction  of  many  families,  and
the  consternation  of  all:  for  mankind  must  live
in  continual  alarm  for  the  fete  of  their  friends  and
dearest  relations,  when  the  restraints  of  religion
and  morality  are  withdrawn ;  when  every  disgust
which  is  powerful  enough  to  tempt  men  to  suicide,
■hall  be  deemed  sufficient  to  justify  it;  and  when
the  follies  and  vices,  as  well  as  the  inevitable  ca-
lamities, of  human  life,  so  often  make  existence  a
burthen.

^  A  second  consideration,  and  perfectly  distinct
fan  the  former,  is  this :  by  continuing  in  the
world,  and  in  the  exercise  of  those  virtues  which'
lamam  within  our  power,  we  retain  the  oppor-
tunity of  meliorating  our  condition  in  a  future
state.  Thisargruinent,itwtrae,doesnotin8trict-
ness  pqpove  suicide  to  be  a  crime;  but  if  it  supply
a  Motive  to  dissuade  us  from  committing  it,  it
amounts  to  much  the  same  thing.  Now  there  is
a©  condition  in  human  life  which  is  not  capable
•'•nose  virtue,  active  or  passive.  Even  piety  and
fltion  under  the  sufferings  to  which  we  are
,  testify  a  trust  and  acquiescence  in  the  Di-


vine .counsels,  more  acceptable  perhaps,  than  the
most  prostrate  devotion;  afford  an  edifying  ex-
ample to  all  who  observe  them;  and  may  hope  for
a  recompense  among  the  most  arduous  of  human  .
virtues.  These  qualities  are  always' in  the  power
of  the  miserable;  indeed  of  none  hut  the  miserable.

The  two  considerations  above  stated,  belong
to  aU  cases  of  suicide  whatever.  Beside  which
general  reasons,  each  case  will  be  aggravated  by'
its  own  proper  and  particular  consequences;  by
the  duties  that  are' deserted ;  by  the  claims  that
are  defrauded ;  by  the  loss,  affliction,  or  disgrace,
which  our  death,  or  the  manner  of  it,  causes  our
family,  kindred,  or  friends;  by  the  occasion  we
give  to  many  to  suspect  the  sincerity  of  our  moral
and  religious  professions,  and,  together  with  ours,
those  of  all  others ;  by  the  reproach  we  draw  upon
our  order,  calling,  or  sect;  in  a  word,  by  a  great
variety  of  evil  consequences  attending  upon  pe-
culiar situations,  with  some  or  other  of  wnicn  every
actual  case  of  suicide  is  chargeable.

I  refrain  from  the  common  topics  of  "deserting
our  post,"  "throwing  up  our  trust"  "rushing
uncalled  into  the  presence  of  our  Maker  "  with
some  others  of  the  same  sort,  not  because  they  are
common,  (for  that  rather  affords  a  presumption
in  their  favour,)  but  because  I  do  not  perceive  in
them  much  argument  to  which  an  answer  may
not  easily  be  given.

Hitherto  we  have  pursued  upon  the  subject  the
light  of  nature  alone;  taking, however  into  the
account,  the  expectation  of  a  future  existence,
without  which  our  reasoning  upon  this,  as  indeed
all  reasoning  upon  moral  questions,  is  vain:  we
proceed  to  inquire,  whether  any  thing  is  to  be  met
with  in  Scripture,  which  may  add  to  the  proba-
bility of  the  conclusions  we  have  been  endeavour-
ing to  support.  And  here  I  acknowledge,  that
there  is  to  be  found  neither  any  express  determi-
nation of  the  question,  nor  sufficient  evidence  to
prove  that  the  case  of  suicide  was  in  the  contem-
plation of  the  law  which  prohibited  murder.  Any
inference,  therefore,  which  we  deduce  from  Scrip-
ture, can  be  sustained  only  by  construction  and
implication :  that  is*  to  say,  although  they  who
were  authorised  to  instruct  mankind,  have  not
decided  a  question  which  never,  so.  far  as  appears
to- us,  came  before  them ;  yet  I  mink,  they  nave
left  enough  to  constitute  a  presumption  how  they
would  have  decided  it,  had  it  been  proposed  or
thought  of.

What  occurs  to  this  purpose,  is  contained  in
the  following  observations :

1.  Human  life  is  spoken  of  as  a  term  assigned
or  prescribed  to  us :  "Let. us  run  with  patience
the  race  that  is  set  before  us."— "I  have  finished
my  course." — "  That  I  may  finish  my  course  with
joy." — "  Ye  have  need  of  patience,  that,  after  ye
have  done  the  will  of  God,  ye  might  receive  the
promise." — These  expressions  appear  to  me  in-
consistent with  the  opinion,  that  we. are  at  liberty
to  determine  the  duration  of  our  Uvea  for  ourselves.
If  this  were  the  case,  with  what,  propriety  could
life  be  called  a  race  that- is  set  before  us:  or,
which  is  the  same  thing,  "our  course ;"  that  is,
the  course  set  out  or  appointed  to  usl  The  re-
maining quotation  is  equally  strong:—" That  af-
ter ye  have  done  the  will  of  God,  ye  might  receive
the  promise."  The  most  natural  meaning  that
can  oe  given  to  the  words,  "  after  ye  have  done
the  will  of  God."  is,  after  ye  have  discharged  the
duties  of  life  so  long  as  God  is  pleased  to  continue


MORAL  AND  POLITICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


yum  in  it.  According  to  which  interpretation,  the
text. militates  strongly  against  suicide:  and  they
who  reject  this  paraphrase,  will  please  to  propose
Abetter.  '

8.  There  is  not  one  quality  which  Christ  and
his  apostles  inculcate  upon  their  followers  so  often,
or  so  earnestly,  as  that  of  patience  under  affliction.
Now  this  virtue  would  have  been  in  a  great  mea-
sure superseded,  and  the  exhortations  to  it  might
have  been  spared,  if  the  disciples  of  his  religion
had  been  at  liberty  to  quit  the  world  as  soon  as
they  new  weary  of  the  ill  usage  which  they  re-
ceived in  it. — When  the  evils  of  tile  pressed  sore,
they  were  to  look  forward  to  a  "  far  more  exceed*
log  and  eternal  weight  of  glory ;w  they  were  to
receive  them,  "as  chastenings  of  the  Lord  "as
intimations  of  his  care  and  love :  by  these  and  the
tike  reflections  they  were  to  support  and  improve
themselves  under  their  sufferings;  but  not  a  hint
has  anr  where  escaped  of  seeking  relief  in  a  volun-
tary death.  The  following  text  in  particular
strongly  combats  all  impatience  of  distress,  of
which  the  greatest  is  that  whieh  prompts  to  acts
of  suicide : — "  Consider  Him  that  enuured  such
contradiction  of  sinners  against  himself,  lest  ye  be
wearied  and  feint  in  your  minds."  I  would  offer
my  comment  upon  this  passage,  in  these  two
queries:  first,  Whether  a  Christian  convert,  who
had  been  impelled  by  the  continuance  and  urgency
of  his  sufferings  to  destroy  his  own  life,  would  not
have  been  thought  by  the  author  of  this  text  "  to
have  been  weary,"  to  have  "  feinted  in  his  mind,"
Uf  have  fallen  off  from  that  example  which  is  here
proposed  to  the  meditation  of  Christians  in  dis-
tress'? Ane!  yet,  secondly,  Whether  such  an  act
would  not  have  been  attended  with  all  the  circum-
stances of  mitigation  which  can  excuse  or  extenu-
ate suicide  at  this  day  1

3.  The  conduct  of  the  apostles,  and  of  the
Christains  of  the  apostolic  age,  affords  no  obscure
indication  of  their  sentiments  upon  this  point
They  lived,  we  are  sure,  in  a  confirmed  persuasion
of  the  existence,  as  well  as  of  the  happiness,  of  a
future  state.  They  experienced  in  this  world  every
extremity  of  external  injury  and  distress.  To  die,
was  gain.  The  change  which  death  brought
with  it  was,  in  their  expectation,  infinitely  bene-
ficial. Yet  it  never,  that  we  can  find,  entered  into
the  intention  of  one  of  them  to  hasten  this  change
by  an  act  of  siucide ;  from  which  it  is  difficult  to
say  what  motive  could  have  so  universally  with-
held them,  except  an  apprehension  of  some  un-
lawfulness in  the  expedient

Having  stated  what  we  have  been  able  to  collect
in  opposition  to  the  lawfulness  of  suicide,  by  way  of
direct  proo£  it  seems  unnecessary  to  open  a  sepa-
rate controversy  with  all  the  arguments  wluch
are  made  use  of  to  defend  it ;  which  would  only
lead  us  into  a  repetition  of  what  has  been  offered
already.  The  following  argument,  however,  being
somewhat  more  artificial  and  .imposing  than  the
rest,  as  well  as  distinct  from  the  general  consider-
ation of  the  subject,  cannot  so  properly  be  passed
ever.  If  we  deny  to  the  individual  a  right  over
his  own  life,  it  seems  impossible,  it  is  said,  to  re-
concile with  the  law  of  nature  that  right  which  the
state  r)™™*  and  exercises  over  the  lives  of  its  sub-
jects, when  it  ordains  or  inflicts  capital  punish-
ments. For  this  right,  -tike  all  other  just  authority
in  the  state,  can  only  be  derived  from  the  compact
and  virtual  consent  of  the  citizens  which  compose
the  state;  and  it  seems  self-evident,  if  any  prin-


ciple in  morality  be  so,  that  no  one,  by  lik  consent,
can  transfer  to  another  a  right  wluch  he  does  not
possess  himself.  It  will  be  equally  difficult  to  ao
count  for  the  power  of,  the  state  to  commit  its
subjects  to  the  dangers  of  war,  and  to  expose  their
fives  without  scruple  in  the  field  of  battle ;  espe-
cially in  offensive  hostilities,  in  which  the  privi-
leges of  self-defence  cannot  be  pleaded  with  any
appearance  of  .truth :  and  still  more  difficult  to  ex-
plain, how  in  such,  or  in  any  circumstances,  pnv
'  gatity  of  life  can  be  a  virtue,  if  the  preservation
it  be.  a  duty  of  our  nature.
This  whole  reasoning  sets  out  from  one  error,
namely,  that  the  state  acquires  its  right  over  the
life  of  the  subject  from  the  subject's  own  consent,
as  a  part  of  what  originally  and  personally  "belong-
ed to  himself,  and  which  he  has  made  over  to  hie
governors.  The  truth  is,  the  state  derives  this
right  neither  from  the  consent  of  the  subject,  nor
through  the  meuium  of  that  consent;  but,  as  I
may  say,  immediately  from  the  donation  of  the
Deity.  Finding  that  such  a  power  in  the  sove-
reign of  the  community  is  expedient,  if  not  ne-
cessary, for  the  community  itself,  it  is  justly  pre-
sumed to  be  the  will  of  God,  that  the  sovereign
should  possess  and  exercise  it  It  is  this  prtsump-
turn  which  constitutes  the  right :  it  is  the  same
indeed  which  constitutes  every  other :  and  if  there
were  the  like  reasons  to  authorise  the  presumption
in  the  case  of  private  persons,  suicide  would  be  as
justifiable  as  war,  or  capital  executions.  But  un-
til it  can  be  shown  that  the'  power  over  human
life  may  be  converted  to  the  same  advantage  in
the  hands  of  individuals  over  their  own,  as  in
those  of  the  state  over  the  lives  of  its  subjects,
and  that  it  may  I?e  entrusted  with  equal  safety  to
both,  there  is  no  room  for  arguing,  from  the  exist-
ence of  such  a  right  in  the  latter,  to  the  toleration
of  it  in  the  former.


BOOK  V.

DUTIBB  TOWARDS  GOD.


CHAPTER  L

Division  of  these  Duties.

In  one  sense,  every  duty  is  a  duty  towards  God,
since  it  is  his  will  which  makes  it  a  duty :  but
there  are  some  duties  of  which  God  is  the  object,
as  well  as  the  author;  and  these  are  peculiarly,
and  in  a  more  appropriated  sense,  called  duties
towards  God.

That  silent  piety,  which  consists  in  a  habit  of
tracing  out  the  Creator's  wisdom  and  goodness  in
the  objects  around  us,  or  in  the  history  of  hiss
dispensations ;  of  referring  the  blessings  we  enjoy-
to  his  bounty,  and  of  resorting  in  our  distresses  to
his  succour ;  may  possibly  be  more  acceptable  to
the  Deity  than  any  visible  expressions  of  devotion,
whatever.  Yet  these  latter,  (which,  although  they
may  be  excelled,  are  not  superseded,  by  the  for-
mer,) compose  the  only  part  of  the  subject  whielx
admits  of  direction  or  disquisition  from  a  moralisst.
j  Our  duty  towards  God,  so  fer  as  it  is  extern^l^
jL  divided  into  worship  and  reverence. God  is
the  ir™ft'"*iatA  object  of  both ;  and.  the  diflferexxc*


:V


DUTY  AND  EFFICACY  OF  PRAYER.


85


between  them  is,  that  the  one  consists  in  action,
the  other  In  forbearance.  When  we  go  to  church
on  the  Lord's  day,  led  thither  by  a  sense  of  doty
towards  God,  we  perform  an  act  of  worship:
when,  from  the  same  motive,  we  restrin  a  journey
upon  that  day,  we  discharge  a  duty  of  reverence.
Divine  worship  is  made  up  of  adoration,  thanks-
giving, and  prayer. — But,  as  what  we  have  to
offer  concerning  the  two  former  may  be  observed
of  prayer,  we  shall  make  that  the  title  of  the  fol-
lowing chapters,  and  the  direct  subject  of  our


CHAPTER  IL

QftAe  Duty  and  of  the  Efficacy  of  Prayer,  so  far
at  the  same  appear  from  i^J4gH^f  Nature.

When  one  man  desires  to  obtain  any.  thing  of
another,  he  betakes  himself  to  entreaty ;  and  this
may  be  observed  of  mankind  in  all  ages  and  coun-
tries of  the  world.  Now,  what  is  universal,  may
be  called  natural ;  and  it  seems  probable  that  God,
as  our  supreme  governor,  should  expect  that  to-
wards himself;  which,  by  a  natural  impulse,  or.  by
the  irresistible  order  of  our  constitution,  be  has
prompted  us  to  pay  to  every  other  being  on  whom
we  depend.

The  same  may  be  said  of  thanksgiving.  _

Prayer  likewise  is  necessary  to  keep  up  in  the
minds  of  mankind  a  sense  of  God's  agency  in  the
universe,  and  of  their  own  dependency  upon  him.

Yet,  alter  all,  the  duty  of  prayer  depends  upon
its  efficacy :  for  I  confess  myself  unable  to  con-
ceit, how  any  man  can  pray,  or  be  obliged  to
pray,  who  expects  nothing  from  his  prayers ;  but
who  is  persuaded,  at  the  time  he  utters  his  request,
that  it  cannot  possibly  produce  the  smallest  im-
pression upon  the  being  to  whom  it  is  addressed,
or  advantage  to  himself.  Now,  the  efficacy  of
prayer  imports,  that  we  obtain  something  in  con-
sequence of  praying,  which  we  should  not  have
received  without  prayer;  against  all  expectation
of  which,  the  following  objection  has  been  often
and  seriously  alleged  •.  If  it  be  most  agreeable  to
perfect  wisdom  ana  justice  that  we  should  receive
what  we  desire,  God,  as  perfectly  wise  and  just,
will  give  it  to  us  without  asking;  if  it  be  not
agreeable  to  these  attributes  of  his  nature,  our  en-
treaties cannot  move  him  to  give  it  us,  ana  it  were
impious  to  expect  that  they  should."  In  fewer
words,  thai:  "  If  what  we  request  be  fit  for  us,  we
shall  have  it  without  praying;  if  it  be  not  fit  for  us,
we  cannot  obtain  it  by  praying."  This  objection
admits  bat  of  one  answer,  namely,  that  it  may  be
agreeable  to  perfect  wisdom  to  grant  that  to  our
payers,  winch  it  would  not  have  been  agreeable
to  the  same  wisdom  to  have  given  us  without

ing  for. But  what  virtue,  you  will  ask,  is

i  in  prayer,  which  should  make  a  favour  con-
st with  wisdom,  which  would  not  have  been
so  without  if?  To  this  question,  which  contains
the  whole  difficulty  attending  the  subject,  the  fol-
lowing possibilities  are  offered  in  reply :

1~  A  favour  granted  to  prayer  may  be  more  apt,
en  that  very  account,  to  produce  good  effects  upon
the  person  obhged.  It  may  hold  in  the  Divine
bounty,  what  experience  has  raised  into,  a  proverb
m  the  collation  of  human  benefits,  that  what  is
obtained  without  asking,  ie  oftentimes  received
t  gratitude.


2.  It  may  be  consistent  with  the  wisdom  of  the
Deity  to  withhold  his  favours  till  they  be  asked
fbr2  as.  an  expedient  to  encourage  devotion  in  his
rational  creation,  in  order  thereby  to  keep  up  and
circulate  a  knowledge  and  sense  of  their  depen-
dency upon  him.

3.  Prayer  has  a  natural  tendency  to  amend  the
petitioner  himself;  and  thus  to  bnng  him  within
the  rules  which  the  wisdom  of  the  Deity  has  pre-
scribed to  the  dispensation  of  his  favours.

If  these,  or  any  other  assignable  suppositions,
serve  to  remove  the  apparent  repugnancy  between

ge  success  of  prayer  and  the  character  of  the
eity,  it  is  enough ;  for  the  question  with  the  pe-
titioner is  not  from  which,  out  of  many  motives,
God  may  grant  his  petition,  or  in  what  particular
manner  he  is  moved  by  the  supplications  of  his
creatures ;  but  whether  it  be  consistent  with  his
nature  to  be  moved  at  all,  and  whether  there  be
any  conceivable  motives  which  may  dispose  the
Divine  Will  to  grant  the  petitioner  what  he  wants,
in  consequence  of  his  praying  for  it.  It  is  suffi-
cient for  the  petitioner,  that  he  gain  ms  end.  It
is  not  necessary  to  devotion,  perhaps  not  very
consistent  with  it,  that  the  circuit  of  causes,  by
which  his  prayers  prevail,  should  be  known  to  the
petitioner,  much  less  that  they  should  be  present
to  his  imagination  at  the  time.  All  that  is  neces-
sary is,  that  there  be  no  impossibility  apprehended
in  the  matter.

Thus  much  must  be  conceded  to  the  objection:
that  prayer  cannot  reasonably  be  offered  to  God
with  all  the  same  views,  with  which  we  often-
times address  our  entreaties  to  men  (views  which
are  not  commonly  or  easily  separated  from  it,)
viz.  to  inform  them  of  our  wants  and  desires;  to
tease  them  out  by  importunity;  to  work  upon
their  indolence  or  compassion,  in  order  to  per-
suade them  to  do  what  they  ought  jto  have  done
before,  or  ought  not  to  do  at  all.

But  suppose  there  existed  a  prince,  who  was
known  by  nis  subjects  to  act,  of  his  own  accord,'
always  and  invariably  for  the  best ;  the  situation
of  a  petitioner,  who  solicited  a  favour  or  pardon
from  such  a  prince,  would  sufficiently  resemble
ours:  and  the  question  with  him,  as  with  us,
would '  be,  whether,  the  character  of  the  prince
being  considered,  there  remained  any  chance  that
he  should  obtain  from  him  by  prayer,  what  he
would  not  have  received  without  it'  I  oo  not  con-
ceive that  the  character  of  such  a  prince  would
necessarily  exclude  the  effect  of  nis  subjects
prayers;  for  when  that  prince  reflected  that  the
earnestness  and  humility  of  the  supplication  had
generated  in  the  suppliant  a  frame  of  mind,  upon
which  the  pardon  or  favour  asked  would  produce
a  permanent  and  active  sense  of  gratitude;  that
the  granting  of  it  to  prayer  would  put  others  upon
praying  to  him,  and  by  that  means  preserve  the
the  love  and  submission  of  his  subjects,  upon
which  love  and  submission  their  own  happiness,
as  well  as  his  glory,  depended ;  that,  beside  that
the  memory  of  the  particular  kindness  would  be
heightened  and  prolonged  by  the  anxiety  with
which  it  had  been  sued  for,  prayer  had  in  other
respects  so  disposed  and  prepared  the  mindof  the
petitioner,  as  to  render  capable  of  future  services
him  who  before  was  unqualified  for  any:  might
not  that  prince,  I  say,  although  he  proceeded  upon
no  other  considerations  than  the  strict  rectitude
and  expediency  of  the  measure,  grant  a  favour  or
pardon  to  thia  man,  which  he  did  not  grant  to


96


MORAL  AND  POLITICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


another }  who  was  too  proud,  too  lair,  or  too  busy ,
too  indifferent  whether  he  received  it  or  not,  or
too  insensible  of  the  sovereign's  absolute  power  to
give  or  to  withhold  it,  ever  to  ask  for  it  1  or  even
to  the  philosopher,  who,  from  an  opinion  of  the
fruitleaaness  of  all  addresses  to  a  prince  of  the  cha-
racter which  he  had  formed  to  himself,  refused  in
his  own  example,  and  discouraged  in  others,  all
outward  returns  of  gratitude,  acknowledgment  of
duty,  or  application  to  the  sovereign's  mercy  or
bounty ;  the  disuse  of  which,  (seeing  affections  do
not  long  subsist  which  are  never  expressed)  was
followed  by  a  decay  of  loyalty  and  zeal  amongst
his  subjects,  and  threatened  to  end  in  a  forgetlul-
ness  of  his  rights,  and  a  contempt  of  his  authority  1
These,  together  with  other  assignable  considera-
tions, and  some  perhaps  inscrutable,  and  even  in-
conceivable, by  the  persons  'Upon  whom  his  will
was  to  be  exercised;  might  pass  in  the  mind  of  the
princet  and  move  his  counsels ;  whilst  nothing,  in
the  mean  time,  dwelt  in  the  petitioner's  thoughts,
but  a  sense  of  his  own  grief  and  wants;  of  the
power  and  goodness  from  which  alone  he  was  to
.took  for  relief;  and  of  his  obligation  to  endeavour,
bv%  future  obedience,  to  render  that  person  pro-
pitious to  his  happiness,  in  whose  hands,  and  at
the  disposal  of  whose  mercy,  he  found  himself
to  be.

The  objection  to  prayer  supposes,  that  a  per-
fectly wise  being  must  necessarily  be  inexorable  :
but  where  is  the  proof,  that  inexorability  is  any
part  of  perfect  wisdom ;  especially  of  that  wisdom
which  is  explained  to  consist  in  bringing  about
the  most  beneficial  ends  by  the  wisest  means  1

The  objection  likewise  assumes  another  prin-
ciple, which  is  attended  with  considerable  difficulty
and  obscurity,  namely,  that  upon  every  occasion
there  is  one,  and  only  one,  mode  of  acting/or  the
best;  and  that  the  Divine  Will  is  necessarily  de-
termined and  confined  to  that  mode :  both  which
positions  presume  a  knowledge  of  universal  na-
tality much  beyond  what  we  are  capable  of  at-
taining. Indeed,  when  we  apply  to  the  Divine
Nature  such  expressions  as  these,  "God  must
always  do  what  is  right,"  "  God  cannot,  from  the
moral  perfection  and  necessity  of  his  nature,  act
otherwise  than  for  the  best,  we  ought  to  apply
them  with  much  indeterminateness  and  reserve ;
or  rather,  we  ought  to  confess,  that  there  is  some-
thing in  the  subject  out  of  the  reach  of  our  appre-
•  hension;  for,  in  our  apprehension,  to  be  under  a
necessity  of  acting  according  to  any  rule,  is  in-
consistent with  free  agency;  and  it  makes  no
difference  which  we  can  understand,  whether  the
necessity  be  internal  or  external,  or  that 'the  rule
is  the  rule  of  perfect  rectitude.

But  efficacy  is  ascribed  to  prayer  without  the
proof,  we  are  told,  which  can  alone  in  such  a  sub-
ject produce  conviction,— -the  confirmation  of  ex-
perience. Concerning  the  appeal  to  experience,
I  shall  content  myself  with  this  remark,  that  if
prayer  were  suffered  to  disturb  the  order  of  second
causes  appointed  in  the  universe,  too  much,  or  to
produce  its  effects  with  the  same  .regularity  that
they  do,  it  would  introduce  a  change  into  human
affairs,  which,  in  some  important  respects,  would
be  evidently  for  the  worse.  Who,  for  example,
would  labour,  if  his  necessities  could  be  supplied
with  equal  certainty  by  prayer  1  How  few  would
contain  within  any  bounds  of  moderation  those
passions  and  pleasures,  which  at  present  are
checked  only  by  disease,  or  the  dread  of  it,  if


prayer  would  infiJUbly  restore  health  1 1n  short,
if  the  efficacy  of  prayer  were  so  constant  and  ob-
servable as  to  be  relied  upon  beforehand,  it  is  easy
to  foresee  that  the  conduct  of  mankind  would,  in
proportion  to  that  reliance,  become  careless  and
disorderly.  It  is  possible,  in  the  nature  of  things,
that  our  prayers  may,  in  many  instances,  be  ef-
ficacious, and  yet  our  experience  of  their  efficacy
be  du^ous  and  obscure.  Therefore,  if  the  light  of
nature  instruct  us  by  any  other  arguments  to  hope
for  effect  from  prayer ;  still. more,  if  the  Scriptures
authorise  these  hopes  by  promises  of  acceptance  j
it  seems  not  a  sufficient  reason  for  calling  in  que*-,
tion  the  reality  of  such  effects,  that  our  observa-
tions of  them  are  ambiguous;  especially  since  it
appears  probable,  that  this  very  ambiguity  is  ne-
cessary to  the  happiness  and  safety  of  human  hie.
But  some,  whose  objections  do  not  exclude  all
prayer,  are  offended  with  the  mode  of  prayer  in
use  amongst  us,  and  with  many  of  the  subjects
which  are  almost  universally  introduced  into  pub-
lic worship,  and  recommended  to  private  devotion.
To  pray  tor  particular  favours  by  name,  is  to  dic-
tate, it  has  been  said,  to  Divine  wisdom  and  good-
ness :  to  intercede  for  others,  especially  for  whole
nations  and  empires,  is  still  worse ;  it  is  to  presume
that  we  possess  such  an  interest  with  the  Deity,  as
to  be  able,  by  our  applications,  to  bend  the  moat
important  of  his  counsels ;  and  that  the  happiness)
of  others,  and  even  the  prosperity  of  communities,
is  to  depend  upon  this  interest,  and  upon  our
choice.  Now,  how  unequal  soever  our  knowledge
of  the  Divine  economy  may  be  to  the  solution  of
this  difficulty,  which  requires  perhaps  a  compre-
hension of  the  entire  plan,  and  of  all  the  ends  of
God's  moral  government  to  explain  satisfactorily,
we  can  understand  one  thing  concerning  it:  that
it  is,  after  all,  nothing  more  than  the  making  of
one  man  the -instrument  of  happiness  and  misery
to  another ;  which  is  perfectly  of  a  piece  with  the
course  and  order  that  obtain,  and  which  we  must
believe  were  intended  to  obtain,  in  human  affairs.
Why  may  we  not  be  assisted  by  the  prayers  of
other  men,  who  are  beholden  for  our  support  to
their  labour  7  Why  may  not  our  happiness  be
made  in  some  cases  to  depend  upon  the  interces-
sion, as  it  certainly  does  in  many  upon  the  good
offices,  of  our  neighbours  1  The  happiness  and
misery  of  great  numbers  we  see  oftentimes  at  the
disposal  of  one  man's  choice,  or  liable  to  be  much
affected  by  his  conduct:  what  greater  difficulty  is
there  in  supposing,  that  the  prayers  of  an  in-
dividual may  avert  a  calamity  from  multitudes,  or
be  accepted  to  the  benefit  of  whole  communities  1


CHAPTER  IIL
Of  the  Duty  and  Efficacy  of  Prayer  a*  Re-
presented in  Scripture.

The  reader  will  have  observed,  that  tjie  reflec-
tions stated  in  the  preceding  chapter,  whatever
truth  and  weight  they  may  be  allowed  to  contains,
rise  many  of  them  no  higher  than  to  negative  ar-
guments in  favour  of  the  propriety  of  addressinflr
prayer  to  God.  To  prove  that  the  efficacy  o?
prayers  is  not  inconsistent  with  the  attributes  odF
the  Deity,  does  not  prove  that  prayers  are  actually
efficacious:  and  in  the  want  of  that  unequivocal
testimony,  which  experience  alone  could  afiord  to
this  point,  (but  which  we  do  not  possess,  and  he,  w


DUTY  AflTD  EFFICACY  OF  PRAYER.


97


aajni  goou  reason  why  we  are  not  to  expect,)  4he
'fight  of  nature-  leaves  as  to.  controverted  proba-
hOities,  drawn  from  the  impulse  by  which  man-
kind have-been  almost  universally,  prompted  to
devotion;  and  from  some*  beneneial  purposes,
vmich,  it.  is  conceived,  may  be  better  answered  by
the  audience  of  prayer  than  by  any  other  mode  of
communicating  the  same  blespngs.  The  revela-
tions which- we*deera  authentic,  completely  supply
this  defect  of  'natural  religion.  *  They  require
jnyer  to  God  as  a  duty;  and  they  contain  posi-
tive assurance  of  its  efficacy  and  acceptance.  We
could  haw  no  reasonable  motive  for  the  exercise
of  "prayer,  without  beheving  .that  it  may  avail  to
the  relief  of  our  wants.  This  belief  ean  only  be
fwmded,  either  in  a  sensible  experience  ofL  the  ef-
fect of  prayer, -ur  in  promises  of  acceptance  sig-
nified by  tftvine  authority.  Our'knowledge  would
have  come  to  us  in  the  former  way,  less  capable
indeed  of  doubt*  but  subjected  toltne  abuses  and


•  briefly  described  above ;  in  the
latter  way,  that  is,  by  authorized  significations  of
God's  general  disposition  to  near  and  answer  the
devout  supplications  of  his  creatures,  we"  are  en-
couraged to  pray,  but  not  place  such  a  dependence
upon  prayer  as  might  relax  other  obligations,  or
confound  the  order  of  events  and  ef  human  ex-


Tie  Scriptures  not  only  affirm  the  propriety
of  prayer  in  general;  but  furnish  precepts  or  ex:
ample*  which  justify  some  topics  and  some  modes
of  prayer  that  have  been  thought  exceptionable
And  as  the  whole  subject  rests  so  much  upon  the
foundation  of  Scripture,  I  shall  put  down  at  length
texts  appacable  to  the  five  following  heads :  to  the
,  dory,  and  efficacy  of  prayer"  in  general  \f  of  prayer
for  particular  favours  by  name ;  for  public  national
bfeaangs;.  of  intercession  for  others ;  of  the  repe-
tition of  unsuccessful  prayers.  ^

1.  Texts  enjoying  prayer  in  general r "  Ask,  ana1
it  shall  be  given  you :  seek,  and  yejmall  find : — If
ye,  being  evil,  know  how  to  give  good  gifts  ifhto
your  chSdreo,  how  much  more  shall  your  Father,
which  is  in  heaven,  give  good  thingsjto-  them  that
ask  him  ?"— "  Wateh  ye,  therefore,  and  pray  ah
fees*,  that  ye  may  be  accounted  Worthy  to  escape
i  thmge  f


_  that  shall  come  to  pass,  and  to
•tend  before  the  Son  ef  man."—"  Serving  the
tord,  rejoicing  in"  hope,  patient  in  tribulation,
eofttimicftgr  instant  in  prayer.11 — u  Be  careful  for
nothing,  hut  in  every  thing,  by  prayer  and  sup-
pticaiwn,  wHh  thiuiKBgiving,  let  your  requests  be
made  known  unto  God/'— "I  will,  therefore,  that
men  pray  every  wherey  lifting  up  holy  Lands
without  wrath  and  doubting. '—" Pray  without
tearing."  Matt.  viL  7. 11;  Luke  xxi.  36;  Rom.
xn.  IS;  Phil!  iv.  6;  1  These,  v.  17;  1  Tim.  ii.  8.
Add  to  these,  that  Christ's  reproof  of  the  ostenta-
tion and  prolixity  of  Pharisaical  prayers,  and  his
npommendation  to  his  disciples,  of  retirement  and
•innbcity  in  theirs,  -together  with  his  dictating  a
ptrucuiar  form  of  prayer,  all  presuppose  prayer
to  bt  an  acceptable  ana  availing  service.

2.  E^arnpksTof  -prayer  for  particular  favours
ty name :. ''For  this  thing"  [to  wit,  some  bodily
iafirnsty  t  which  he  calls i  a  thorn  given  him  in  the
fcth*)  "  I  besought  the  Lord  thrice,  that  it  might.
fcpart  from  me!" — "  Night  and  day  praying  ex-
*edingry,  that  we  might  see  your  face,  and  per-
fcet  that  which  is  ladcmg  in  your  frith,"  .  2  Cor.
&*:  1  Theas-ni  10.  *

3.  tWtff"  to  pray  fiat  national- or  pubhc


blessings:  "  Pray 'for  the  peaces/ f  Jerusalem."—
"  Ask  ye  of  the  Lord  rainyiH  the  time  of  the  latter
rain;  so  the  Lord' shall Tnake.  bright  clouds,  and

S've  them  showers  of  rain,  to  every  one  grass  in  ~
a  field."—"  I  exhort,  therefore,  that  first  of  afiL
'supplications,  prayers,  intercessions,"  and  giving  of
thanks,  be  luade  for  ,all  men ;  for  'kings,  and  for
all  that  are  in  authority,  that  we  may  lead  a  quiet
and  peaceable  life,  in  all*  godliness  and  honesty :
for  this  is  good  and  acceptable  in  the  sight  of  God
our  Saviour."  Psalm  cxxii".  6:  Zech.  X-l ;  1  Tim.
iU,2,3.

4.  Examples  of  intercession,  and  exhortations
to  intercede  for  others':—11  And  Moses  besought
the  Lord  his  God,  and  sai'd/Lord,  why  doth' thy
wrath  wax  hot  against'  thy  people  1  ^Remeproer  ,
Abraham,  Isaac/  and  v Israel;  thj  servants.  £nd
the  Lord  repented  of  the  evil  which  he  thought
to  -do  unto  nis  people." — "  Feter,  therefore,  was
kept  in  prison,  but  prayer  was  made  without  ceas-
ing of  the  church  unto  God  for  him"—"  For  God
is  my  witness,  that  without  ceasing  /  make  men-
tion of  you  Always  iit^my  prayers.11— "  "NoW  I
beseech  you,  bretheren,  for  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ's
sake,  and  for  the  love  of  the  Spirit,  that  ye  strive
together  with  me,  in  -your  prayers  for  we."-*—
"  Confess  your  faults  one  to  another,  and  pray
one  for  another,  that  ye  may  be  healed  :  the  ef*
fectual  fervent -prayer  of  a  righteous  man  availeth
much."  Exod.  xxxii.  11 ;  Acts  xii  5j  Rotn.  L9.
xv.  30 ;  James  v^  16.  l .

5.  Declarations  and  examples  authorising  the
repetition  of  unsuccessful  prayer :  "  And  he  spake
a  parable  unto  them,  to  this  end,  that  men  ought
always  to- pray;  and  not  to  faint."— u  And  he  left
them,  and  went  away  again,  and  prayed  the  third
time;  saying  the  same  words."— 'J  For  this-  thing
I  besought  the  Lord  thrice,  tyat  it  might  depart
from  me."'  Luke  xviii  1;  Matt,  xxvl  44 ;  9  Cor.

"  8*  •.."".


CHAPTER  IV.  ?

(if  Private  Prayer f  Pamily  Prayer,  and

Public  Worship.  *

Concertino  these  three  descriptions'  of  de-
votion, it  is  first  of  all  to  be  observed,  that  eafch
ha&its  separate  and  peculiar  use ;  arid  therefore,
that  the  exercise  of  one  species  of  worship*  how-'
ever  regular  it  be,  does  not  supersede,  or  dispense
with,  the  obligation  of  either  of  the  other  two".

1.  Private  Prayer  is  recommended  for  the  sake
of  the  following  advantages :

Private  wants -cannot  always  be  made  the  sub-
ject of  public  prayer :  but  whatever  reason  there'
is  for  praying  at  all,  there  is  the  same  fof  making
the  sore  and  grief  of  each  man's,  own  heart  the
business  of  his  application  to  God.  This  must  be
the  office  of  private  exercises  ot  devotion,  being
imperfectly,  if  at  all,  practicable  in*  any  other.  "


*  The  reformed  Churches  of  Christendom,  sticking
close  in  this  article,  to  their  guide,  have  laid  aside  pray-
ers forttte  dead,  as  authorised  by  no  precept  or  preceHent
ftrand  in  Scripture.  Fer  the  same  reason  they  properly
reject  the  invocation  of  saints ;  as  also  because  such  in-
vocations suppose,  in  the  saint*  whom  they  address,  a
knowledge  whichcan  perceive  what  passes  m  different
region*  of  the  earth  at  the  same  time.  And  they  deem
it  too  much  to  take  Ibraranted,  without-the  smallest  in-
timation of  such  a  thing  in  Scripture,  that  any  creajed
bein*  oossesses  a  faculty  little  short  -of  that  oamistianoi
andonmipresera  which  they  ascribe  to  tha  Deity,
9


MORAL  AND  POLITICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


J  prayer  is  generally  more  devout  and
earnest  than  the  share  we  axe  capable  of  taking
in  joint  acta  of  worship;  because  it  affords  leisure
and  opportunity  for  ihe  circumstantial,  recollection
of  those  personal  wants,  by  the  remembrance  and
'Ideas  of  which  the  warmth  and  earnestness  of
prayer  are  chiefly  exsited.

Private  .prayer,  in  proportion  as  it  isTusually  ac-
companied with  more  actual  thought  and  reflection
of  the  petitioner '8  own,  has  a  greater  tendency  than
other  modes  of  devotion  to  revive-  and  lasten  upon
'  the  mind  the  general  impressions  of  religion.  'So-
litude powerfully  assists  thk  Whena.man
finds  himself  alone  in  communication  with  his
Creator,  his  imagination  becomes  filled  with*  a
conflux  of  awful  ideas  concerning  the  universal
agfency,  and  invisible  presence,  \>f  that  Being;
concerning  what  is. likely  to  become  of  himself:
and  of  the  superlative  importance  of  providing  for
the  happiness  of  his  future  existence  by  endea-
vours to  please  him  who,  is  the  arbiter  of  his  des-
tiny :  reflections  which,  whenever  they  gain  ad-
t  mittance.  fpt  a  season  overwhelm  all  others ;  and
leave,  wnen  they  depart,  a  solemnity  upon  the
thoughts*  that  wul  seldom  tail,  in  some  degree,  to
affect  the  conduct  of  life.

Private  prayer,  thus*  recommended  by  its  own
propriety  and  by  advantages.nbt  attainable  in  any
farm' of  religious  communion,  receives  a  superior
sanction&omthe  authority  and  example  of  (jurist :
"When  thou  prayest,  enter  into  thy  closet;  and
when  thou  hast  shut  the  door,  Dray  to  fhy  Father,
4 which  is  in  secret;  and  thy  Father,  which  seeth  in
-secret,  shall  reward  thee  openly." — "  And  when
-ho .had  sent  the  multitudes, away,  he  went  up
into  a  mountain  apart  to  pray"  Matt,  vL  6;
adv.  58.

II,  Family  Prayer.

The  peculiar  use  of  family  piety  consists  in  its
influence  iiponw  servants,  and  the  young  members
of  a  family,  who  want, sufficient  seriousness  and
reflection  to  retire  of 'their  own  accord  to  the-  ex-
ercise of  private  devotion,  and  whose  atteiftionyou
cannot  easily  command  in  public  worship.  *  The
example  also  and  authority  of  a  father  and  master
•eg  in  this  way  with  the  greatest  force ;  for  his
private  prayers,  to  which  his  children  and  servants
are  not  witnesses,  aet  not  at  all  upon  them  as  ex-
amples ;  and  his  attendance  upon  public  worship
they  will  readily  impute  to  fashion,  to  a  care  to
preserve  appearances,  to  a  concern  for  decency  and
character,  and  to  many  motives  besides  a  sense  of
duty  to  God:  Add  to'  this,  that  forms  of  public
worship,  in  proportion  as  they  are  more  compre-
hensive, are  always  less  interesting,  .than  family
prayers ;  and  that  the  ardour  of  devotion,  is  better
supported,  and  the*  sympathy  more  easily  propaga-
ted, through  a  small  assembly,  connected  by  the
afiecQons  of  domestic  society,  thanin  the  presence
if  .a  mixed  congregation.  .

III.  Public  fgorahip. •

If  the  worship  of  God  be  a  duty  of  religion,
public  worship  is  a  necessary  institution;  foras-
much as  without  it,  the  greater  part  of  mankind
would  exercise  no  religious^worship  at  all..  '
.  These  assemblies  afford  also,  at  the  same  time,;
opportunities  for  moral  and  religious  instruction  to
tpose  who  otherwise  would  receive  none.  In  all
protestant,  and  in  most  Christian  countries,  the
elements  of  natural  religion,  and  the  important
parts  of  the  Evangelic  history,  are  familiar  to  the
lowest  of  the  people. This  competent  degree  and


general  diffusion  of  religious  knowledge  amongst
all  orders  of  Christians,  which  will  appear  a  great
thing  when  comparetxwith  the  mteUectualconauibn
of  barbarous  nations,  can  fairly,!  think,  be  ascrib-
ed to  no  other  cause  than  the  regular  establishment
pf  assemblies  for  divine  worship';,  in  which,  either
portions  of  Scripture,  are  recited  and  explaincdKar
the  principles  of  Christian  erudition  are  so  con-
stantly taught  in  sermons,  incorporated  •  with  li-
turgies, or  expressed  in  extempore  prayer,  as  to
imprint,  by  the  very  repetition,  some  knowledge
and  memory  of  these  subjects  upon  the  most  jun-
(Jualified  ana  careless  hearer.

The  two  reasons  above  stated,  bind  all  the  mem-
bers of  a  community  to  uphold  pubjic  worship,  by
their  presence  and  example,  although  the  helps  ana
opportunities  which  it  anurds  may  not  be  necessary
to  .the  devotion  or  edification  of  all ;  and  to  some
may  be  uselear:  for  it  is  easily  foreseen,  how  soon
rehgious-assemblies  would  fall  into  contempt  and
disuse,  if  that  class  of  mankind  who  are  above
seeking  instruction  in  them,  and  want  not  that
their  own  piety  should  be  assisted  -by  either  .forms
or  society  in  devotion,  were  to  withdraw-their  at-
tendance; especially  when  it  is  considered,  that
all  who  please,  are  at  liberty  to  rank  themselves
of  this  class.  This  argument  meets  the  only  se-
rious apology  that  can  be  made  for  the  absenting
of  ourselye*  from  public  worship. — "  Surely  (some
will  say)  I~may  be  excused  from  going  to  eh'urch,
so  long  as  I  pray  at  home :  and  have  no  reason  to
doubt  that  my  prayers  are  as  acceptable  and  effi-
cacious in-  my  closet,  as  in  a  cathedral ;  still  less  can
I  think  myself  obliged  to  sit  out  a  tedious  sermon,
in  order  to  hear  what  is  known  already,  what  is
better  leamt  from  books,  or  suggested  by  medita-
tion-."— They,  whose  qualifications  and'  habit*
best  supply  to  themselves,  all  the  effect  of  public
ordinances^  will  be  the  last  to  prefer  this  excuse,
when  they  advert  /to  the  general  consequence  of
setting  up  such  an  exemption,  as  well  as  when
they  consider  the  turn  which  is  sure  to  -be  given
in  the  neighbourhood  to  their  absence  from  public
worship.  You  stay  from  church,  to  employ  the
Sabbath  at,  home  in  exercises  and  studies -suited  to
its  proper  business:  your  next  neighbour  stays
from  church  to  spend  the  seventh  day  less  reli-
giously than  he  passed  any  of  the  six,  in  a  sleepy,
stupid  rest,  or  at  some  rendezvous  of  drunkenness
ana  debauchery,  and  yet  thinks  that  he  is  only
imitating  you,  because  you  both  agree  in  not  going
to  church.  The  same  consideration  should  over-
rule many  small  scruples  concerning  the  rigorous
propriety  of  some  things,  which  may  be  contained
m  toe  forms,  or  admitted  into  the  administration,
of  the  puf>lic  worship -of  our  communion:  for  it
seems  impossible  that  even  "  two  or  three  should
be  gathered  together''  in  any  act  of  social  worship,
if  each  one  require  ftom  the  rest  an  implicit  sub-
mission to  his  objections,  an4  if  no  man  will  at-
tend upon'*  religious  service  which  in  any,  point
contradicts  his  opinion  of  truth,  or  falls  short  of
his  ideas  of  perfection.  .  ^

Beside  the  direct  necessity  of  public  worship  to
the  greater  part  of  everv  Christian  community,
(supposing  worship  at  all  to  be  a  Christian  duty,)
there  are  other  valuable  advantages  growing  out
of  the  use  of  reli^ous  assemblies,  without  being
designed  in  the  institution  or  thought  of  by  the
individuals  who  compose  them.  \

1.  Joining  in. prayer  and  praises  to  their  com-
mon Creator  and  Governor,  has  a  sensible  tea-


OF  FORMS  OF  PRAYER.


taty  to  tmketDankfaid  together,  and  to  cherish
and  enlarge  the  generous  affections.
-  So  many  pathetic  reflections  are 'awakened  by
e^ery  exercise  ef  social  uevotieh,  that  most  men,  I
believe,  carry  away  from  public  worship  a  better,
temper  towards  toe  -rest  of  mankind,  than  they
bjpught  with  them.  ,  Sprung  from  the  same  ex-
traction, preparing  together  for  the  period  of  all
worldly  dUtinetions,  reminded  of  their  mutual  hv
firmities  and  common  dependency,  imploring  and '
leoerving  support  and  supj>lie*>from  the  same  great
souiee  of  power  and  bounty,  having  all  one  in-
terest to  secure,  one  Lord  to  serf  e,  one  judgment,
thr  supreme  object  to  all  of  their  hopes  ana  fears,
to  look  towards;  it  is  hardly  possible,  in  this  po-
ttooii,lo  behold  maiikindas  strangers,  competitors,
or  sherries:  or  not  to  regaYd  \hem  as  children  or
the  same  family,  assembled  before  their  .common
parent,  and  with  some  portion  of  the  tenderness
which  belongs  to  the  most  endearing  of  our  do-
mestic relations.  It  is  not  to  be  expected,  that  any
single  effect  of  this  kind  should  be  considerable  or
hating ;  but  the  frequent  return  of  such  sentiments
as  the  presence  of  a  devout  congregation  naturally
suggests,  will  gradually  melt  down  the  rugged-
rieos  of  many  unkind  passions,  and  may  generate,
in  time?  a  permanent  and  productive  benevolence.
2.  Assemblies  for  the  purpose  of  divine  wor-
ship, placing  men  under  impressions  by  which
they  are  taught  to  consider  their  relation  to  the
.  Deity,  and  to  contemplate  those  around*  them  with
a  view  to  that  relation,  force  upon  their  .thoughts
the  natural  equality  of  the  human  species,  and
thereby  promote  humility  and  condescension  in
the  highest  orders  of  the  community,  and  in-
«  t£e-lowest  with  a  sense  of  their  rights. The

teutons  'of  c|vil  life  are  almost  always  insisted
too  much,  and  urged  too  for. 'Whatever,.

fere,  conduces  to  restore  the  level,  by  quali-
the  dispositions  which  grew  out  of -great

ion  or  depression  of  rank,  improves  the  cha-
saeter  on  both  rides.  Now  things  are  made  to
appear  little,  by  neing  placed  beside  what  is  great.
In  which  manner,  superiorities,  that  occupy  the
•  whole  -field  of  imagination,  will,  vanish  or  shrink
to  their  proper  dimmutrveness,  when  compared
with  the  mstanfp  by  which  even  the  highest-  of
men  ate  removed  from  the  Supreme  Being;,  and
this  comparison  is  naturally  introduced  by  all  acts
of  joint  worship.  If  ever  the  poor  man  holds  up
hia  head,  it  is  at  church:  if  ever  the  rich  man
views  him  with  respect,  it  is  there-*  and  both  will
be  the  better,  and  the  public  profited,  the  oftener
they  meet  in  a  situation,  in  which  the  conscious-
ness), of  dignity  in  the-  one  ^tempered  and  miti-
gated, anqthe  spirit  of  the  other  erected  and  con-
firmed. We  recommend  nothing  adverse  to  sub-
ordinations which  are  established  and  necessary :
bat  then  it.  should  be  remembered,  that  subordi-'
nation  itself  is  an  evH,  being  an  evil  tb  the  sub-
ordinate, who  are  the  majority,  and  therefore
ought  not  to  be  carried  a  tittle  beyond  what  the
greater  good,  the  peaceable  government  of  the
oenapjHinity.  requires.

The  puhne  worship,  of  Christians  is  a  duty  of
Divine  appointment  "Where  two  or  three/'
says  Christ,  "are  gathered  together  in  my  name,
there  ami  m  the  midst  of  .them."*  This  invita-
tion arfll  want  nothing  of  the  force  of  a  command
willi  those  who  respect  the  person  and  authority
■ ■  ■■  ■  ■....,

•  Katl  xviil.90.


tying  the  d
cSevanoii  of


from  wMch  ft  proceeds.  Again,  in  die  Epistle  to
tfie  Hebrews;  "not forsaking  the  assembling  of
ourselves  together,  -as  the  manner  of  80000-  is  ;""*
which  reproof  seems  as  applicable  to  the  desertion
of  our  public  worship  at  this  day,  as  to  the  for-  .
saking  the  religious  assemblies'  of  Christians  in
the  age  of  the.  apostle.  Independently  of  these
passages  of  Scripture,  a  disciple  of  Christianity
will  hardly  think  himself  at  liberty  to  dispute  a
practice  set  on  foot  by  the  inspired  preachers  of.
his  religion,  coeval  •  with  its  institution,  and  re-
tained by  every  sect  into  which  it  has  been  since
divided. .  * .


. CHAPTER  V.

Qf.Form*  of  Prayer  in  Public  Worek^ .

LiTcttoiES,  er  preconcerted  forms  of  public  de-  •
volion,  being  neither  enjoined  in  Scripture,  nor
forbidden,  there  can  be  no  good  reason  for  either
receiving  or  rejecting  them,'  but  that  ef  •  expe-
diency ;  which  expediency  is  to  be  gathered  from
a  comparison  of  the  advantages  and  disadvantages,
attending  upon  this  mode  of  worship,  with  those
which  usually  accompany,  extemporary  prayer.
%  The  advantages  of  a  nturgy  are  these : .

I.  That  it  prevents  absurd^  extravagant,  or -im-
pious addresses  to  God,  which,  in  an  order  of
men  so  numerous  as  the  sacexdojal,  the  folly,  and
enthusiasm  of  many  must  always  be  in  danger  of*
producing,  where  the  conduct  of  the  public  wor-
ship is  entrusted,  without  restraint  or  assistance,
to  the  discretion  and  abilities  of  the  officiating
minister.

II.  That  it  prevents  the  wrtfuaton  of  extem-
porary '"prayer,  nrwhictr-the  congregation,  being
ignorant  of  each  petition  before  they  hear  it,  and
having  tittle  or  no  time  to  ioinin  it  after  they  have
heard  it,  are  confounded  between  their  attention
to  the  minister,  and  to  their  own  devotion.  The,
devotion  of  the  hearer  is  necessarily  suspended,
until  a  petitionee  concluded?  and  before  he  can
assent  to  it,  or  properly  adopt  it,  thflVis.  beforejie
can  address  the  same  -request  to  Ged  for  himself
and  from  himself,  his  attention  is  called  off  to  keep
pace  with  what  succeeds.  Add  to  this,  that  the
mind  of  the  hearer  is' held  in  continual  expecta-
tion, and  detained  from  its  proper  business,  by  the
very  novelty  with  which  it  is  gratified,  A  con*,
gregation  may  be  pleased  and  affected  with  the
prayers  and  devotion  of  their  minister,  -without
joining  in  them;  in  like  manner  as  an  audience,
oftentimes  are  with  the  representation  of  devotion
upon  the  stage,  who,  nevertheless,  come  away
without  being  conscious  of  having  exercised  toy
act  of  devotion  themselves.  Joint  prayer,  whicn
amongst  ail  denominations  .of  Christians  is  the*
declared  design  of  ".coming  together/'  is  prayer
in  which.alr  join  ;  and  not  that  which  one  alone
in  the  congregation  conceives  and  delivers,  arid  of
which  the  rest  are  merely  hearersi .  This  objection
seems  fundamental,  ana  .holds  even  where  the
ministers  office  is  discharged  with  every  possible
advantage  and"*  accomplishment.  The  labouring
recollection,  and  embarrassed  or  tumultuous  de-
livery, of  many  extempore  speakers,  form  an  ad-
ditional objection  to  tins  mode  of -public  worship;
for  these  imperfections  are  very  general,  and  give


•Heb.x.S5.


160


MORAL  AND  POLITICAL,  PHILOSOPHY.


great  pain  to  the  9011000  part  of  9  poBenaption,  as
well  a*  afford  a  prolans  diversion  to  tnelevity  of
the  other  part.  •  j

These  advantages  of  a  liturgy  are  connected
with  two  principal  inconveniences:  first,  that
forms  of  prayer  composed  in  one  age  become  unfit
for  another,  by  the  unavoidable  change  of  lan-
guage, circumstances,  and  opinions :  secondly,  that
the  perpetual  repetition  oflne  same  form  of  words
produces  weariness  and  inattetitiveness  in  the
congregation.  However,  both  these  inconveniences
are  in  their  nature  vincible.  Occasional  revisions
of  a  liturgy  may  obviate  the  firet/and  devotion
will  supply  a  remedy  for  the  second :  or  they  may
both  subsist  in  a  considerable  degree,  and  yet  be
out-weighed  by  the  objections  which  are  insepara-
ble from  extemporary  prayer.  ~  .
.  The  Lord's  Prayer  is  a  precedent,  as  well  as  a
pattern,  for  forms  of  prayer.  Our  Lord  appears,
if  not  to  have  prescribed,  at  least  to  have  au-
thorized;-the  use  of  fixed  forms,  when  he  com-
plied with  the  -request  of  the  disciple,  who  said
.tinto  him,  "  Lord,  teach  us  to  pray,  as  John  also
taught  his  disciples."  Luke  xi.  I.

The  properties  required  in  a  public  liturgy  are,
that  it  be  compendious ;  that  it  express  just  con-
ceptions of  the  Divine  Attributes;  that  it  recite
such  wants  as  a  congregation  are  likely  to  feel,
and  no  other*;  and  that  it  contain  as  few  contro-
v^rtedproposiuons as  possible.
fc  I.  Tnat  it  be  compendious.
-.  It  were  no  difficult  task  to  contract  the  liturgies
of  moat  churches  into  half  their  present  compass,
and  yet  retain  every  distinct  petition,  as  well  as
the  substance  of  every  sentiment  which  can  be
found  in  them.  But. brevity  may- be  studied'too
much.  The  composer  of  a  liturgy  must  not  sit
down  to  his  work  with  the  hope,  that  the  devotion
of  the  congregation  will  be  uniformly  sustained
throughout^  or  that  every  part  will  be  attended  to
by  every  hearer.  If  this  could  be  dependeoVupon,
a  very  short  service  would  be  sufjicient  for  every
purpose  that  .can  be  answered  or  designed  by  so-
cial worship:  but  seeing  theattention  of  most  men
is*  apt  to  wander  and  return  at  intervals,  and  by
starts,  he  will  admit  a  certain  degree-of  amplifica-
tfonanfl  repetition,  of  diversity  of  expression  upon
too  same^'subject,  and  variety  of  phrase  and  form
with  little  addition  to  the  sense,  to  the  end  that
theattention,  which  has  been  slumbering  or  ab-
sent during  one  part  of  the  service,  may  be  ex-
cited and  recalled  by  anotherj  and  the  assembly
kept  together  until  it  may  reasonably  be  presume/!,
that  the  most  ^eedless  and, inadvertent  have  per-
formed some  act  of  devotion,  and  the  most  de-
sultory attention  been,  caught  by  some  part  or
other  of  the  public  service.  %  On  the  other  hand,
the  too  great  length  of  church^erviees  is  more
unfr vourable  to  piety,  than  almost  any  fault  of
composition  can  be.  It  begets,  in  many,  an  early
and  unconquerable  dislike  to  the  public  worship
of  their  country  or  communion.  They  come  to
church  seldom,  and  erjter  the  doors,  when  they
do  come,  under  the  apprehension  of  a  tedious-
attendance,  which  they  prepare  for  at  first,  or
soon  after  relieve,  by  composing  themselves  to  a
drowsy  fofgetfulness  of  the  place  and  duty,  or  by
sending  abroad  their  thoughts  in  search  of  more
amusing  occupation.  Although  there  may -be
some  few  of  a  disposition  not  to  be  Wearied  with
religious  exercises;  yet.  Where  a  ritual  is  prolix,
and  the  celebration  of  divine  service  long,  no  ef-


is  in  general  to  bs  looked  for,  bm*  that  in*
nee  will  find  in  it-an excuse,and piety ^e  ois-


fcet

dolencei

concerted  by  impatience.
.  Tho  length'  and  repetitions  complained  of  m
our  liturgy .  are  not  so  much  the  fault  of  the  com-
pilers','as  the  effect  of  uniting  into  on*  service'
what  was  originally,  but  with  very  litde  regard  to
the  conyeniency  01  the  people,  distributed  into
three.  Notwithstanding,  that  dread  of  innovations
in  religion,  which  seems  to  have  hseomethe  panic
of  the  age,-few,  I  should  suppose,  wpukt  he  dia-  .
pleased  with  such  omissions,'  abridgements,  of
change  in  the  arrangement,  as  the  combination
of  separate  services  must  necessarily  require,  even
supposing  each  to  have  been  faultless  in  itself!  -
Jf,  together  with  these  alterations,  the  Epistles
and  Gospels,  and  Collects-  which  precede  them,
werecQmposeu*  and  selected  with  more  regard  to
unity  of  subject  and  design :  and  the  Psalms  and
Lessons  either  left  to  the  choice  of  the  minister,
or  better  accommodated  to  the  capacity  of  the  an-  •
diehce,  and  the  edification,  of  modern  life;  tho
church  of  England  would  be  in  possession  of  a
liturgy,  in  which  those  who  assent  to  her  doctrines,
would  have  little,  to  blame,  and  the  most  dis*
satisfied  must  acknowledge. many  beauties.  The),
style  throughout  is  excellent';  calm,  without  cold-
ness ;  and,toough'every  where  sedate,  oftentimes
affecting.  The  pauses  in  the  service  are  disposed
at  proper  intervals.  The  transitions  from  one
office  of  devotion  to  another,  from  confession  to
prayer,  from  prayer  to  thanksgiving,  from  thanks-
giving to  "hearinff  of  the  word."  are  contrived
like  scenes  in  the  drama,  to  supply  ihe  mind  with
a  succession  of  diversified  engagements.  As  much
variety  is  introduced  also  in  the  form  of  praying,-
as  this  kind  of  composition  seems  capable  of  ad-


mitting. The  prayer  at  one  tune  is  continued;
at  another,  broken  by  responses,  or  cast  into  short
articulate  ejaculations :  and  sometimes  the  con-
gregation is  called  unon.to  take  its  share,  in  the
service,  by  being  left  ~to  complete  a  sentence
which  the  minister  had  begun.  The  enumeration
of  human  wants  and  sufierings  in  the  Litany  is
almost  complete.  A  Christian  petitioner  can  have
few  things  to  ask  of  God,  or  to  deprecate,  which.
he  will  not  find  there  expressed,  and  for  the  most
part  with  inimitable  'tenderness  and  simplicity.

II.  That  it  express  just  conceptions  of  the  Di-
vine  Attributes.  _,

This  is  an.  article  in  which  no  care  can  bs  too
great..  The  popular  notions  of  Gad  are  formed,
in  a  great  measure,  from  the  accounts  which  the
people  receive  of  his  nature  and  character  in  their
religious  assemblies.  An  error  here  becomes  the
error  of  multitudes :  and  as  it  is  a  subject  in  which.
almost  every  opinion  leads  the  way  to  some  prao-
ticar  consequence,  the  purity  or  depravation  of
public  manners  will  be  .affected,  amongst  other
.causes,'  by  the  truth  or  corruption  of  the  pabhtt
forms  ef  worship.

•  HI.  That  it  recite  such  wants  as  the congregav-
tion  are  likely  to  feel,  and  no  other* *

Of  forms  of  prayer  which  offend  not  egregionsljr
against  truth  and  decency,  that,  has  the  moot
merit,  which  is  best  calculated  To  keep-alive  tho
devotion  of  the  assembly.  It  were  to  be  wishted,
therefore,  that  every  part  of  a  liturgy  were  pe*-r
serially  applicable  to  every  individual  in  the  cosrv*
gregation ;  and  that  nothing  were  introduced  ^o
interrupt  the  passion,  or  damp  the  flame,  which  it
is  not  easy  to  rekindle. Upon  tnis  principle,  tl^


USB  OF  S ABB ATCCAU INSTITUTIONS.,


101


ansit  prayriin  our  Htnrgy  should  be- fewer  and
ehortar.^Whatever  may  bo  pretended,  the  con-
gregaJbon  do  not  feel  thai  concern  in*  the  subject
Of  Sum  prayer*,,  which  must  be  felt,  ere'  ever
prayer*  be  made  to  God  with  earnestness.  The
state  style  likewise  seems  unseasonably  introduced
into  these  prayer*,  aa  ill  -according  with  that
fwf^ihiu.fi^y  of  human  greatness,  of  which  every
act  thai  carries  thernmdto  GtJd,  presents  the  idea.
*  IV.  Thai  it  contain  aa  few  controverted  pro-


"We  allow  to  each  church  the  troth  of  its  pe-
culiar tenets*  and  all 'the  importance  which  zeal
can  ascribe  to  them.  We  dispute  not  here  the
right  or  the  expediency  of  framing  creeds,  or  of
imposing  subscriptions.  But  whyehould  evqry
position  w&ich  a  church  maintains,  be  woven
srith  so  much  industry  into  her  forms  of  public
Worship?  Some  are  offended,  and  some  are  ex-
etaoed;  this  Is  an  evil  of  itself,  at  least  to  them :
and  what  advantage  or  satisfaction  can  be  derived
to  the  ffeaf ,  from  the  separation  of  their  brethren,
it  is  difficult  to  imagine ;  -unless  it  were  a  duty  to
puntiah  our  system  of  polemic  divinity,  under  the
name  of  inuring  -ccnmsston  of  our  feith,  every
time  wo  worship  God :  or  a  sin  to  agree  in  re-
Mgions  exercises  with  those  from  whom  we  differ
in  sunns  rehrious  opinions.'  Indeed,  where  one
man  thinks  it  his  uury  constantry  to  worsbipa
being,  whom  another  cannot,  with  the  assent  of
De^  permit  himself  to  worship  at  all*
to  be  no  place  for  comprehension,  or
t  left  but  a  o^riet  secession.  All  other
ay  be  compromised  by  silence.  If
isjns  be  an  evil,they  are  as  much  to
be  avoided  by  one  side  as  the  otyer.  If  sectaries
are  heuned  for  taking  unnecessary  offence,  es-
tshftahfd  churches  are  no  less  culpable  for  unne-
rssairily  giving  it;  they  are  bound  at  least  to
pgajhcw  a  command^  or  a  reason  of  equivalent
utifity,  for  shutting  out  any  from  their  communion,
by  mixing  with  divine  worship  doctrines,  which,
" '  true  or  folse,  are  nnfttniiected  in  their


CHAPTER  VL

Qf  the  Use  of  Sabbatical  Institution*.

Ax  assembly  cannot.be  collected,^  unless  the
time  of  ssannilaing  be  fixed  and  known  before-
hand: and  if  the  design  of  the  assembly  require
that  it  beholden  frequently,  it  is  easiest  that  it
should  return  at  stated  intervals.  This  produces
a  necessity  of  appropriating  jet  seasons  to  the  se-
em! offices  of  religion,  It  is  also  highly  convenient
mat  the  same  seasons  be  observed  throughout  the
country,  that  all  may  be  employed,  or  all  at  leisure,
together;  for  if  the  recess  from  worldly  occupation
■e  not  general*  one  man's  business  will  perpetually


i  with  another  man's  devotion :  the  buyc_
wifl  be  Gaffing  at  the  shop  when  the  seller  is  gone
toduuah,  This  part,  therefore,  of  the  religious
«M»rtMfi  of  seasons,  namely,  a  general  inter*
jgMMP  of  labour  and  business  during  times  pre-
nously  set  apart  for  the.  exercise  of  public.wor-
■up,  is  founded  in  the  reasons  which  make  public
warship  itself  a  duty.  Bui  the  celebration  of  di-
▼me  service  never  occupies  thewhole  day.  What


r j,  of  Sunday ,  beside  the  part  of


mere  rest  ^rom  the  ordinary  occupations  of  dvfl
life:  and  he  who  would  defend  the  institution,  aa
is  is  required  by  Jaw  to  be  observed* -in  'Christian
countries,  unless  he  can  produce  a  command  for
a  Christian  Sabbath,  must  point  out  the  uses  of
it  in.  that  view.  '*-

FirsC,  then,  that  interval  of  relaxation  which
Sunday  affords  to  the  laborious  part  of  mankind,
contributes  greatly  to- the  comfort  and  satisfaction
of  their,  lives,  both  aa  it  refreshes  them  for  the
time,  and  as  it-  relieves  their  six  days'  labour  byv
the  prospect  of  a  day  of  rest  always  approaching :
which  could  not  be  said  of  casual  indulgences  of
leisure  and  rest,  even  were  they  more  frequent'
than  there,  is  reason  to  expect  they  .would  Be  if.
left  to  'the  discretion  or  humanity  of  interested
task- masters.  To  this  difference  it  may  be  added,
that  holy-day*  which  come  seldomand unexpected;
are  unprovided;  when  they  do  come,  with  any
duty  br  employment;  and  the  manner  of  spending
them  being  regulated  by  no  public  decency  er.  es-
tablished usage,  they  are  commonly  consumed  in
rude,  if  not  criminal  pastimes,  in  stupid  sloth,  or
brutiah  intemperance.  'Whoever  considers  how
much  sabbatical  institutions  conduce,  in  this  re-
spect, to  the  hapniness'and  cjviliationof  the  la-
bouring classes  or  mankind,  and  reflects  how  great


a  majority  of  the  human  species  these  c
pose,  will  acknowledge  the  utility  whatever»he.
may  believe.of  the  ongin;  of  this  distinction;  and
will  consequently  perceive  it  to  be  every  man's
duty  to  uphold  the  observation  of  Sunday  whoa
once  established,  let  the  establishment  have  pro*
ceeded  from  whom  or  from  what  authority  it  wilL

Nor  is  there  any  thing  lost  to  the  community
br  the  intermission  of  public  mdustry  one  day  in
the  week.  Form  countries  toterably  advanced  in
population  and  the  arts  of  civil  fife,  there  is  al-
ways enough  of  hums*  labour,  and  to  spare.  The
difficulty  is  not  so  much  to  procure,  as  to  employ
it  The  addition  of  the  seventh  day's  labour  to
that  of  .the  other  six,  would  have  no  other  effect
than  to  roduce  the  price.  The  labourer  hhnaelfj
who  deserved  and  suffered  most  by  the  change,
would  gam  nothing.

8.  Sunday,  by  suspending  'many  public  diver*
sions,  and  the  ordinary  rotation  or  employment
leaves  to  men  of  all  ranks  and  professions  suf-
ficient leisure,  and  not  more  than  what  is  sufr
ficient,  both  for  the  external  offices  cf  i^hristianitr.
and  the  retired,  but  eoually  necessary  duties  of
religious  meditation  ana  inquiry.  It  is  .true,  that
many  do  not  convert  their,  leisure  to  this  purpose;
built  is  of  moment,  and  is  all  which  a  pubhe  con-
stitution can  effect,  that  to  every  one  oe  allowed
the  opportunity. .

3..  They,  whose  humanity  embraces  the  whom
sensitive  creation,  will  esteem  if  no  inconsiderabst
recommendation  of  a  weekly  return  of  public  rest,
that  it  affords  a  respite  to  the  toil  of  brutes.  Nor
can  we  omit  to  recount  this  among  the  uses  which
the  Divine  Founder  of  the  Jewish  Sabbath  ex-
pressly appointed  a  law  of  the  institution.

We  admit,  that  none  of  these  reasons  show
why  Sunday  should  be  preferred  to  any  other  day
in  the  week,  or  one  day  in  seven  to  one  day  in  six,
or  eight :  but  .these  points,  which  in  their  nature
are  of  arbitrary  determination,  being  established  to
our  hands,  our  obligation  applies  to  the  subsisting
establishment,  so  king  as  we  confess  that  some  such
institution  hi  necessary,  and  are  neither  able  nor
attempt  to  tabstitute  any  other  in  to  place.
•oe


M


MORAL  AND  POLITICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


CHAPTER  VIL


Qf  the  Scripture.  Account  qf  Sabbatical  Institu-
tion*, j

The  subject  to  for  as*  it'  makes  any  part  of
Christian  morality, is  contained  in  two  questions"!

I.  Whether  the  command,  by  which  the  Jew-
ish Sabbath  was  inatitut^  extend*  to  ChrwtianB'?

II.  Whether  any  new  command  was  delivered
by  Christ:  or  any  other  day  substituted  in  the
plat*  of  the  Jewish  Sabbath  by  the  authority  or
example  of  his  apostles.?

In  treating  of  the  first  question,  it  will  be  ne-
cessary to  collect  the  accounts  which  are  pre-
served of  the  institution,  in  the  Jewish  history:
for  the  seeing  these  accounts  together,  and  in
one  point  of  vjew,  will  be  the  ljcst  preparation  for
the  discussing  or  judging  of  any  arguments  on
one  side  or  the  other.

•  In  the  second  chanter  of  Genesis,  the  historian,
having  concluded  his  account  of  the  ftix^dsys*
creation,  paoeeeds  thus:  "And  on  the  seventh
day  God  ended  his  work  which  he  had  made;  and
he  rested  on  the  seventh  day  from  sil  his  work
Which  he  had  made;  and  God  blessed  the  seventh
day  .anil  sanctified  it,  because  that  in  it  he  had
pasted  from  all  his  work  which  God  created  and
made/1  After  this,  we  hear  no  more  of  the  Sab-
bath, or  of  the  seventh  day,  as  in  any  manner
distinguished' from  the  other  six,  until  the  history
brings  us  down  to  the  sojourning  of  the  Jews  in
the -wilderness,  when  the  following  remarkable
passage  occurs.  Upon  the^complaint  of  the  peo-
ple for  want  of  food,  God  was  pleased  to  provide.
lor  their  relief  by  a  miraculous  supply  of  manna,
which  was  found  every  morning  ufcon  the  ground
about  the  camp:  "and  they  gathered  it  every
morning,  every  man  according 4o  his  eating;  and
when  the  sun  waxed  hot,  it  melted:  and  ft  came
to  pass,  that  on  the  sixth  day  they  gathered  twice
as  much  bread,  two  omers  for  one  man;  and  all
the  rulers  of  the  congregation  came  and  told
Moses:  and  he  said untf  them,  this  is  that  which
the  Lord  hath  said,  To-morrow  is  the  rest  qf  the
Boly-Sabbath  unto  the  Lord:,  bake,  that  which
jb  will  bake  to-day,  and  seethe  that  ye  will  seethe ;
and  that  which  remaineth  over ,  lay  up  for  yoUj  to  be
kept  until  the  morning.  And  they  laid  it  up  oil  the
morning,  as  Moses-bade;  and  it  did  not  stink  [as
it  had  dons  before,  when  some  of  them  left  it  till
the  morning  J  neither  was  there  any  worm  therein.
And  Moses  said,  Eat  that  to-day :  for,to-day  is  a
Sabbath  unto  the  Lords  today  ye  shall  not  find
it  in  the  field  Six  days  ye  shall  gather  it,  but  on
Che  seventh  day,  which  is  the  Sabbath,  in  it  there'
•hall  be  none.  And  it  came  to  pass,  that  there
went  out  some  of  the  people  on  the  seventh  day
for  to  gather,  and  they  found  none.  And  the  Lord
•aid  unto  Moses,  How  long  refuse  ye  to  keep  my
commandments  and  my  laws?  See,  for  that  the
Lord  hath  given  you  the  Sabbath,  therefore  he*
»  giveth  you  on  the  sixth  day  the  bread  of  two  days:
abide  ye  every  man  in  his  place:  let  no  man  go
out  of  his  place  on  the  seventh  day.  So  the  peo-
ple rested  on  the  seventh  day." Exodus  avi.  <

Not  long  a|ter  this,  the  Sabbath,  as  is  well
known,  was  established  with  great  solemnity,  in
Ihejburth  conimandment.

Now,  in  my  opinion,  the  transaction  in  the
Wilderness  above  recited,  was  the  first  actual  in-
stitution of  the  Sabbath. Forif  the  Sabbath  had


been  instituted  at  the  time  of  the  creation,  as  the
words  in  Genesis  may  seem  .at  first  sight  to  im-
port ;  and  if  it  had  been  observed  all  along  from
that  time  to  the  departure  of  the  Jews' out  of
Egypt,  a  period  of  about  two  thousand  five  hun-
dred years ;  it  appears  unaccountable  that  no  men-
tion of-  it,  no  occasion  of  even  the  obscurest  allu-
sion* to.  it,  should  occur,  either  in  the  general
history  of  the  world  before-  the  calTof  Abraham."
which  contains, .we  admit,  only  a  few  nfeAoirsol
its  early  ages,  and  those  extremely  abridged*  or,
which  is  mors  to  be  wondered  at, -in  that  or  the
fives  of  the  first  three  Jewish  patriarchs,  which,
in  many  parts  of  the  account,  is  sufficiently  cir-
cumstantial and  domestic.  •  Nor  is  there,  in  thai
passage  above  ouoted  from  the  sixteenth  chapter
of  Exodus,  any  intimation  that  the  Sabbath,  when
appointed  to  be  observed,  was  only  Che  revival  of
an  ancient  institution,  which  had  been  neglected,
forgotten,  or  suspended :  nor  is  any  such  neglect
imputed  either  to  the  inhabitants  of  the  old  world,
or  to  anypart  of  the  family  of  Noah;  nor,  lastly,
is  any  permission  recorded  to  4ispense  with  the)
institution  during  the.  captivity  of  the  Jews  in
Egypt,  or  on  any  other  public  emergency.

The  passage  in  tins  wcund  chapter  of  Genesis,
which  creates  the  whole  controversy  upon  the
subject,  is  not- inconsistent  with  this  opinion :  for
as  toe  seventh  day  was  erected  into  a  Sabbath,  on
account  of  God's  resting  upon  that  day  from  the
"work  of  the  creation,  it  was  natural  in  the  histo-
rian, when  he  had  velated  the,  history  of  the  crea-
tion, and  of  God's  ceasing  from  it  on  -the  seventh
day,  to  add :  "  And  (rod  blessed  the  seventh  day.
and  sanctified  it,  because  that  on  it  he  had  rested
from  all  his  work  which  God  created  and  made ;"
although  the  blessing  and  Banctification,  t.  0.  the
religious  distinction  and  appropriation  of  that  day,
were  not  actually  made  till  many  ages  afterwards.
The  words  do  not  assert  that  God  then  "  blessed"
and  "  sanctified?  the  seventh  day,  but  that  he
blessed  and  sanctified  it  for  that  reason  ;  and  if
any  ask,  why  the  Sabbath,  or  aaiictificaiion  of  the
seventh  day,  was  Men  mentioned,  if  it  was  not
then  apjpointed,  the  answer  is  at  hand :  the  order
of  connexion,  and  not  of  time2  introduced  the
.mention  of  the  Sabbath,  in  the  history  of  the  sub- '
ject  which  it  was  ordained  to  commemorate.

This  interpretation  is  strongly  supported  by  a
passage  in  the  prophet  Ezekiel,  where  the  Sab-
bath is  plainly  spoken  of  as  given,  (and  what
else  can  that  mean,  but  as  first  instituted?')  in
the  wilderness.  S'  Wherefore  I  caused  them  to
go  "forth  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt,  and  brought
mem  into  the  wilderness :  ana  I  gave  them  my.
statutes  and  showed  them  my  judgments,  wfajba
if  a  man  do,  he  shall  even  live  in  them :  moreover
also  I  gar c them  my  Sabbaths,  to  be  a  sign  between
me  and  them,  that  they  might 'know  that  I  am  the
Lord  Chat  sanctify  them." Ezek.  xx.  10, 1 1,  19. .

Nehemiah  also  recounts  the  promulgation  of
the  sabbatical  law  amongst  the  transactions  in  the
wilderness ;  which  'supplies  another  considerable
argument  in  aid  of  our  opinion : — "  Moreover  them
leddest  them  in  the  day  by  a  cloudy  pillar,  andin
the  night  by  a  pillar  of  fire,  to  give  them  fight' in
the  way  wherein  they  should  go.  Thou  earnest
down  also  upon  mount  Sinai,  and  spakest  with
theta  from  heaven,  and  gavest  them  right  judg-
ments and  true  laws,  good  statutes  and  com-
mandments, and  modest  fenoibn  unto  them  thy
holy  Sabbath,  and  commftndedst  them  precepts,


SABBATICAL  INSTITUTIONS.


168


■tftftntaSfB&ikws,  fcjp  Che  hand  of  Moses  thy  ser-
vant, and  gavest  them  bread  from  heaven  for  their
hunger,  and  broughtest  forth  water  for  them  out
of  the  rock."* Nehem.  ix.  13.

If  it  be  inquired  what  duties  were  appointed
for  the.  Jewish  Sabbath,  and  under  what  penalties
and  in  what  manner  it  was  observed  .amongst  the
ancient  Jews ;  we  find  that,'  by  the  fourth  com-
mandment, a  strict  cessation  from  work  was  en-
joined, hot  only  upon  Jews  by  birth,  or  religious
profession,  but 'upon  all  who  resided  within  the
limits  of  the  Jewish  state-;  that  the  same  was  to
be  permitted  to  tnetr  slaves  and  their  cattle ;  that
this  vest  was  not  -to  be  violated,  under  pain  of
death:  w  Whosoever  doeth  any  work  in  the  Sab-
bath-das;, he  shall  surely  be  put  to  death."  Exod.
zxxL'15.  Beside  which,  the  seventh  day  was  to.
be  solemnized  by  double  sacrifices  in  the  temple*: —
*  And  on  the  Sabbath-day  two  lambs  of  the, first
year  without  spot,  and  two  tenth-deals  of  flour  for
a  meatroflering,  mingled  with  oil,  and  the  drink-
oflerjnc  thereof ;  this  is  the  burntroflering  of  every
SabbatL  beside  the  continual  burnt-offering  and
his  drink-offering-."  Numb,  xxviii.  9,  10.  Also
holy  convocations,  which  mean,  we  presume,'  as-
semblies for. the  purpose  of  public  worship  or  re-
ligious instruction,  were  directed  to  be  houten  en-
the  Sabbath-day:  "the  seventh  day  is  a  sabbath
of  rest,  an  holy  convocation*'* Levi!,  xxiii.  3:

And  accordingly  we  read,  that  the  Sabbath  was
In  fact  observed  amongst  the  Jews  by  a  scrupulous
ahttin*"™'  from  every  thing  which,  by  any  pos-
sible construction,  could  be  deemed  labour ;  as
from  dressing  meat,  firam*  travelling  beyond  a
Sabbath-day's  journey,  or  about  a  single  mile.  In
the  Maccabean  wars,  they  suffered  athdusand  of
their  number  to  be  slain,  rather  than  do  any  thing
in  their  own  defence  on  the  Sabbath-day.  In  the
final  siege,  of  Jerusalem,  after  they  had  so  Jar
overcome  their  scruples  as  tp  defend  their  persons
when  attacked,  they  refused  any  operation  on  the
Sabbath-day,  by  which  they  might  have  inter-
rupted the  enemy  in  filling  up  the  trench.  After
the  establishment  of  synagogues,  (of  the  origin  of
which  we  have  no  account,)  it  was  the  custom  to
assemble  in  them  on  the*  Sabbath-day,  for  the
purpose  of  hearing  the-  law  rehearsed  and  ex-
plained, and  for  the  exercise,  it  is  probable 'of
pubhc  devotion;  "For  Moses  of  old  time  hath  in
every  city  them  that  preach  him,  being  read  in
tie  synagogues  every  Sabbath-day."  .Thp  seventh
day  js  Saturday;  and  agreeably  to  the  Jewish
way  of  computing  the  day,  the  Sabbath  held,  from
six  o'clock  on  the  Friday  evening,  to  six  o'clock
en  Saturday  evening. — These  observations  being
premised,  wo  approach  the  main  question.  Whe-
ther the  command  by  which  the  Jewish  Sabbath
was  instituted,  extend  to  us  1

If  the  Divine  command  was  actually  delivered
at  the  creation,  it  was  addressed,  no  doubt,  to  the
whole  human  species  alike,  and  continues,  unless


i  tee  mention  of  the  Babbatta  in  so  olose  a  con-
aexioo  with  the  descent  of  God  upon  mount  Si  naj.  and
the  delivery  of  the  law  from  thence,  one  would  be  in-
dined  to  believe  that  Nebemiah  roferrM  solely  to  the
forth  commandment.  But  the  fourth  commariUment
•maialy  did  not  first  make  known  the  Sabbath:  And
n  is  apparent,  that  Nebemiah  observed  not  the  ordVr  of
events ;  lor  he  speaks  of  what  pasted  upon  mount  Sinai
before  he  mentions  the  miraculous  supplies  of  bread
sad  wafer,  though  the  Jews  did  not  arrive" at  mount
**-'.  tin  soms  time  after  both  time  iriracles  were


repealed  by  somevubsequent  revelation,  binding
upon  all  who  come  to  the  knowledge  of  it.  If  tip
command  was  published  for  the  host  time  in  the
wilderness,  then  it  was  immediately  directed  to
the  Jewish  people  alone;  and  something  further,'
either  in  the  subject  or  circumstances  of  the  com-
mand, will  be  necessary  to  show,  that  it  was  de*
signed  for  any  other.  It  is  on  this  account  that
the  question  concerning  the  date  of  the  institution
was  first  to  be  considered.  The  former,  opinion
pncludes  all  debate  about  the  extent  of  the  ob-
ligation :  the  latter  admits,,  and,  prima  facie  in*
duces  a  belief;  that  the  Sabbath  ought  to  be  con-
sidered as  part  of  the  peculiar  law  of  the  Jewish
poticy.  "  •  .  . "

Which  belief  receives  grea^confinnation  fjom
the  following  arguments.:

The  Sabbath  is  described  as  a  sign  between
God  and  the  people  of  Israel:—"  Wherefore  the
children  of  Israel  shall  keep  the  Sabbath,  to  ob-
serve the  Sabbath  throughout  their  generations,
for  a  perpetual  covenant ;  it  is  a  sign  bctweemne
and  the-  children  of  Israel  for  ever."  Exodus
xxxi.  16,- 17.  Again :  "  And  I  gave  them  my
statutes,  and  showed  them  my  judgments,  which
if  a  man  do  he  shall 'even  live  in  them ;  moreover
also  r  gave  them  my  Sabbaths,  to  be  a  sign  be-
tween me  and  them,  that  they  might  know  that  I
am  the  Lord  thateanctify  them."  Ezek.  xx.  12  New
it  does  not  seem  easy  to  understand  how  the  Sab-
bath, could  be  a  sign  between  God  and  the  people
of  Israel,  unless  the  observance  of  it  was  peculiar
to  that  people,  and  designed  to  be  so.
. '  The  distinction  of  the  Sabbath  is,  in  its  nature,
as  much  a  uoeitive  ceremonial  institution,  as  that
of  many  other  seasons,  which  were  appointed  by
the  Levitkal  law  ttf-be  kept  holy,  ana  to  be  ob-
served by  a. strict  rest;  as  the  first  and  seventh
days  of  unleavened  bread ;- the  feast  of  Pentecost :
the  feast  of  tabernacles;  and  in  the  twenty-third
chapter  of  Exodus,  the  Sabbath- and  these  are  re-
cited together.'  x

Jf  the  command  by  which  the  Sabbath  was  in-
stituted be  binding  upon  .Christians,  it  must  be
binding  as  to  the  day,  tftjr  duties,  and  the  penalty  j
in  none  of  which  it,  is  received.  . *

The  observance  of  the  Sabbath  was  nqt  one  o£.
the  articles  enjoined  by  the  Apostles,  in  the  fif-
teenth chapter  of  Acts,  upon  theni-^"  which,  from
among-the  Gentiles,  were  turned  -junto  God."

St.  Paul  evidently -appears  to  have  considered
the  Sabbath  as  part  6f  the  Jewish  ritual,  and  not
obligatory  upon  Christians  as  such:-— "Let  he
man  therefore  judge  you  in  meat  or  in  drink,  or
in  respect  of  an.  holy  day,  or  of  the  new  moon,  or
.of  the  Sabbath  days,  which  are  .a  shadow  of
things  to  come,  but  the  body  is  of  Christ." .  CoL
iii  16, 17.  .  .>

I  am  aware  of  only  two  objections  which.can  be
"  to  the-  force  of  these 'arguments;  one  is,


that  the  reason  assigned  in,  the  fourth  command-
ment for  hallowing  thev.  seventh  day,  namely,
"  because  God  rested  on  the  seventh  day  from  the
work  bf  tlfe  creation,",  is  a  reason  which  pertains
to  all:  mankind:  the  other,  that  "the  command
which  enjoins  the  observance  of  the  Sabbath  is
inserted  in  the  Decalogue,  of  which  all  the  other
precepts  and  prohibitions  are  of  moral  and  univer-
sal obligation.

Upon  tlic  first  objection  it  may  be  remarked,
that  although  in  Exodus  the  commandment  is
founded  upon  God's  rest  from  the  creation,  in


104


MORAL  AND  POLITICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


Deuteronomy  the  eonuaandmenfr  is  repeated  with
a  reference  to  a  different  event  :— "  Six  days  shalt
thou  labour,  and  do  all  thy  work  j  bat  the  seventh
day  is  the  Sabbath  of  the~Lord  thy  God  ;.in  it
thou  shalt  not  do  any  work;  thou,  nor  thy  son,
nor  thy  daughter,  nor  thy  man-servant,  .nor  thy
maid-servant,  nor  thine  ox,  nor  thine  ass{  nor  any
of  thy  cattle,  nor  the  stranger  that  is  within  thy
gates;  that  thy  man-servant  and  thy  maid-servant
may  lest- as  well  as  thou:  and  remember  that  thou
wast  a  servant  in  the  land  of  Egypt,  and  that  the
Lord  thy  God  brought  thee  Out  thence-,  through  a
mighty  hand,  and  by  a  stretched-out  arm ;  there-
fore the  Lard  thy  God  commanded  thee  to  keep
£he  Sabbath-day*  It  is  fiuther  observable,  that
.God's  rest-  from  the.  creation  is  proposed  as  the
reason  of  the  institution,  even  where- the  institu-
tion itself  is  spoken  of  as  peculiar  to  the  Jews : —
"  Wherefore  the  children  of  Israel  shall  keep  the
Sabbath,  to  observe  the  Sabbath  throughout  their
ijenerations,~Yor  a  perpetual'covenant:  it  is  a  sign
between  'me  and  the  children  of  Israel  for  ever:
ybr'in  six-days  the  Lord  made  heaven  and  earth,
and  on  the  seventh  day  he  rested  and  was  re-
freshed." The  truth  is,  these  different  reasons
Were  assigned,  to  account  for 'different  circum-
stances in  the  command.  If  a  Jew  inquired,  why
th^  seventh  day  was  sanctified  nftffer  than  the
sixth  or  -eighth,. his  law  told  him*  because  God
tested  on,' the  seventh  day  from  the  creation.  If
he  asked,  why  was  the  same  rest  indulged  to"
staves  7  his  law  bade  him  remember,:  that  he  ulse~
was  a  slave  iri  the  land  of .  Egypt,  and  "  that  the
Lord  his  God  brought  him  out  thence."  In  this
view,  the  two  reasons  are  perfectly  compatible
with  each  other;  and  wtth  a  third  end  of  the-in-
stituticm,  its  being  a  sign  between  *God  and  the
people  of  Israel  -,  hut  in  this  view  .they  determine
nothing  concerning  the  extent -of  the  obligation.
If  the  reason  by  its  proper  energy  had  constituted
a  natural  obligation,' or  if  it  had  been  mentioned
with  a  view  to  the  extent  of  the  obligation,  we
should4  submit  to  the  conclusion  that  all  were
comprehended  by  the  command  who  are  concerned
in  the  reason.  But'  the  sabbatic  rest  being  a  duty
which  results  from  the  ordination  and  authority
of  a  positive  law,  the  reason  can  be  alleged  no
fiuther  than  as  it  explains  the  design  of  the  fegis-
lator?  and  if  ^t  appear  to  be  recited  with  an  in-
tentional application  to  ort apart  of  the  law,  it  ex-
plains his-design  upon  no  other}  if  it  be  mentioned
merely  to  account  for  the  choice  of  the  day,  it
<}oes  not  explain  his  desigiuas  to  the  extent  of  the
obligation.

'  With  respect  to  the  second  objection,  that  in-
asmuch as  the  other  nine  commandments  are  con-
fessedly of  "moral  and  universal  obligation,  it  may
reasonably  be  presumed  that  this  is  of  the  same;
we  i  answer,  that  this  argument  will  have  less
weight,  when  it  is  considered  tjjat  the  distinction
between. positive  and.  natural  duties,  like  other
distinctions  of  modern  ethics,  was  unknown  to  the
simplicity  of  ancient  language ;  and  that  there  are
various  passages  in  Scripture,  in  wruch  duties  6f
a*  political,  or  ceremonial,  or  positive  nature;  and
confessedly  of  partial  obligation,  are  enumerated,
and  without  any  mark  of  discrimination,  along
with  others  which  are  natural  and  universal.  Or
this  the  following  is  anancontestable  example.'
"But  if  a  man  be  just,  and  do  that  which  n  law-
ful and  right :  and  hath  not  eaten  upon  the  moun-
tains, nor Tiaiii  lined  up  his  eyes  to  the  idols  of  the


house  of  Israel;  neither  hath  defiled  his  neigh-
bour's wife,' nettAer  hath  come  near  to  a  men-
siruou*  woman ;  and  hath  not  oppressed  any,  but
hath  restored  to  the  debtor  his  pledge;  bath  spoiled
none  by  violence ;  hath  .given  his  bread  to  the
hungry,  and  hath  covered  the  naked  with  a  gar-
ment ;  he  that  hath  not  given  upon  usury ,  ntU
•  their  hath  taken  any  increase  ;  that  halh»  with-
drawn his  hand  from  iniquity ;  hath  executed
true  judgment  between  man  and  man;  hath  walk-
ed in  my  statutes,  and  hath  kept  my  judgments,
to  deal  truly ;  he  is  just,  he  shall  surely  Kve,  saith.
the  Lord  God. *  Ezokiel  xviii.  5— 9.  The- same
thing  may  be  observed- of  the  apostolic  decree  re-
corded in  the -fifteenth  chapter  of  the  Acts :— "-It
seemed  good  to  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  to  us,  to  lay
upon  you  no  greater  burthen  than  these  necessary
things,  that  ye  abstain  from  meats  offered  .toidofa.
and  -from  blood,  and  from  things  strangled,'  and
from  fornioation:  from  which  if  ye  keep  your-
selves, ye  shall  do  well.",

II,  If  the  law  by  which  the  Sabbath  was  in-
stituted, was  a  law  only  to  the  Jews',  it  becomes  an
important  question  with  the  Christian  inquirer,
whether  the  Founder  of  his  religion  delivered  any
new  command  upon  the  subject ;  or,  if  that  should
not  appear  to-be  the  case,  whether  any  day  was
appropriated  to  the  service  of  religion  by  the  au-
thority or  example  of  his-  apostles.

The  practice  of  holding  religious  assemblies
upon  the  first  day  of  the  week,  was  so  early  and
universal  in  the  Christian  Church,  that  it  carries
with  it  considerable  proof  of  having  originated
from-  some  .precept  of  Christ;  or  of  his  apostles,
though  none  such  be  now  extant  It  was  upon
the  first  day  of  the  week  "that  the  disciples  were
assembled,  when  Christ  appeared  to  them  for  the
first  time  after  his  resurrection  j  "  then  the  same
d>y  at  evening,"  being,  the  first  day  of  the  week,
when  the  doors  were  shut  where  the  disciples  Were
assembled,  for  /ear.  of-  the  Jews,  came  Jesus,  and
stood  in  trie  midst  of-them."  John  xx.  19.  This,
fpr  any  thing  that  appears  in  the  account,  might,
as  to  the  day,  have  Been  accidental ;  but  in  the
36th  verse  of  the  same  chapter  we  read,  that
"  after  eight  days,"  that  is,  on  theirs*  day  of  the
weekfbuowihg,  **' again  the  disciples  were  with-
in ;"  which  second  meeting  upon  the  same  day  of
the  week  looks  fike  an*  appointment  and  design  v
to  meet  on  that  particular  day.  In  the  twentieth
chapter  of  the  Acts,  of  the  Apostles,  we  find  the
same  custom  in  a  Christian  church  at  a- great
distance  from  Jerusalem  :-£**  And  we- came  unto
them  to  Troas  m  five  days,  where  we  ajxxle  seven
days ;  and  upon  the  first  day  of  the  ibeeR,  when  -
the  disciples  came  together  to  oreakoread^  Paul
preached  unto  them."  Acts  xx.  6,  7.  The  man-
ner in  which  the  historian  mention*  the  disciples  .
coming  M  together  to  break*  bread  on  theirs*  day
of  the  week,  shows,  I  tffink.  that  the  practice  by
this  time  was  familiar  and  established.  St  Paul
to  the.  Corinthians  writes  thus :  "  Concerning  the
collection  for  the  saints,  as  I  have  .given  order  to
the  Churches  of  Gahtia,  even  so  dd  ye ;  upon  the
first  day  of  the  week  let  every  one  qf>  you  lay*  by
him  fn  store  as  God  liath  prospered  him,  that  there
be  no  gathering  when  I  come."  1  Cor.  xvi.il,  9l
Which  trirection  affords,  a  probable  proof,  that  the
first  day  of  the  week  was  already,  amongst  the
Christians  both  of  Corinth  and  Galatia,  distu*-
guiahed  from  the  rest  by  some  religious  applicsv-
Uon  or  other. At  the  tune  that  St.  John  wrote*


VIOLATION  OF  THE  CHRISTIAN  SABBATH.


105


the  book  of  me  Revelation,  the  first  day  of  the
week  had  obtained  the  name  of  the  Lords  day; —
"I  was  in  the  spirit,"  aays  he,  M  on  the  Lord's
day."  Rev.  i  10.  Which  name,  and  St  John's
use  of  it,  sufficiently  denote  the  appropriation  of
this  day  to  the  service  of  religion,  ana  that  this
appropriation  was  perfectly  known  to  the  Churches
of  Ana.  I  make  no  doubt  that  by  the  Lord's
day  was  meant  thejirst  day  of  the  week;  for  we
find  no  footsteps  of  any  distinction  of  days,  which
could  entitle  any  other  to  that  appellation.  The
subsequent  history  of  Christianity  corresponds
with  the  accounts  delivered  on  this  subject  in


It  will  be  remembered,  that  we  are  contending,
by  these  proofs,  for  no  other-  duty  upon  the  first
day  of  the  week,  than  that  of  holding  -and  fre-
quenting religious  assemblies.  A  cessation  upon
that  day  from  labour,  beyond  the  time  of  attend-
ance upon  public  worship,  is  not  intimated  in  any
ptssage  of  the  New  Testament;  nor  did  Christ
or  his  apostles  deliver,  that  we  know  of,  any  com-
mand to  their  disciples  for  tf  discontinuance,  upon
that  day,  of  the  common  offices  of  their  profes-
sions; a  rescue  which  none  will  see  reason  to
wonder  at,  or  to  blame  as  a  delect  in  the  institu-
tion, who  consider  that,  in  the  primitive  condition
of  Christianity,  the  observance  of  a  new  Sabbath
would  have  been  useless,  or  inconvenient,  or  im-
eracticahfe.  During  Christ's  personal  ministry,
am  religion  was  preached  to  the  Jews  alone.
Tktg  already  had  a  Sabbath,  which,  as  citizens
and  subjects  of  that  economy,  they  were  obliged
to  keep;  and  did  keep.  It  was  not  therefore  pro-
bable that  Christ  would  enjoin  another  day  of  rest
in  conjunction  with  this.  When  the  new  re-
hgion  came  forth  into  the  Gentile  world,  converts
to  it  were,  for  the  most  part,  made  from  those
rlsssfw  of  society  who  have  not  their  tune  and
labour  at  their  own  disposal :  and  it  was  scarcely
to  be  expected,  that  unbelieving  masters  and
magistrates,  and  they  who  directed  the  employ-
ment of  others,  would  permit  their  slaves  and  la-
bourers to  rest  from  their  work  every  seventh
day:  or  that  civil  government,  indeed,  would
have  submitted  to  the  loss  of  a  seventh  part  of
too  public  industry,  and  that  too  in  addition  to
the  numerous  festivals  which  the  national  re-
ligions indulged  to  the  people;  at  least,  this  would
have  been  an  incumbrance,  which  might  haye
greatly  retarded  the  reception  of  Christianity  in
the  world.  In  reality,  the  institution  of  a  weekly
Sabbath  is  so  connected  with  the  functions  of
civil  file,  and  requires  so  much  of  the  concurrence
of  civil  law,  m  its  regulation  and  support,  that  it
cannot,  perhaps,  properly  be  made  the  ordinance
of  any  religion,  all  that  religion  be  received  as
the  religion  of  the  state.

The  opinion,  that  Christ  and  his  apostles
t  to  retain  the  duties  of  the  Jewish  Sabbath,


v  only  the  day  from  the  seventh  to  the  first,
to  prevail  without  sufficient  proof  j  nor  does


any  evidence  remain  in  Scripture  (of  what,  how-
ever, is  not  improbable,)  that  the  first  day  of  the
week  was  thus  distinguished  in  commemoration
of  our  Lord's  resurrection.

The  conclusion  from  the  whole  inquiry  (for  it
■  our  business  to  follow  the  arguments,  to  what-
ever profaabOity  they  conduct  us.)  is  this:  The
auraiafiiy  upon  the  first  day  of  the  week  for  the
purpose  of  public  worship  and  religious  instruc-
tisn,  is*  law  of  Christianity  of  Divine  appoint-


ment ;  the  resting  on  that  day  from  oar  employ-
ments longer  than  we  are  detained  from  them  by
attendance  upon  these  assemblies,  is  to  Christians
an  ordinance  of  human  institution ;  binding  never-
theless upon  the  conscience  of  every  individual  of
a  country  in  which  a  weekly  Sabbath  is  esta-
blished, for  the  sake  of  the  beneficial  purposes
which  the  public  and  regular  observance  of  it  pro-
motes, and  recommended  perhaps  in  some  de-
gree to  the  Divine  approbation,  by  the  resem-
blance it  bears  to  what  Uod  was  pleased  to  make
a  solemn  part  of  the  law  which  he  delivered  to  the
people  of  Israel,  and  by  its  subserviency  to  many
of  the  «


CHAPTER  VIII.

By  ichat  Acts  and  Omissions  the  Duty  of  the
Christian  Sabbath  is  violated.

Since  the  obligation  upon  Christians  to  com-
ply with  the  religious  Observance  of  Sunday,  arises
from  the  public  uses  of  the  institution,  and  t^e
authority  of  the  apostolic  practice,  the  manner  of
observing  it  ought  to  be  that  which  best  fulfils
these  uses,  and  conforms  the  nearest  to  this  prac-
tice.

The  usee  proposed  by  the  institution  are :

1.  To  facilitate  attendance  upon  public  wor-
ship.

£.  To  meliorate  the  condition  of  the  laborious
classes  of  mankind,  by  regular  and  seasonable
returns  of  rest.

3.  By  a  general  suspension  of  business  and
amusement,  to  invite  and  enable  persons  of  every
description  to  apply  their  time  and  thoughts  to
subjects  appertaining  to  their  salvation.

With  the  primitive  Christians,  the  peculiar,
and  probably  tot  sometime  the  only,  distinction  of
the  first  day  of  the  week,  was  the  holding,  of  re-
ligious assemblies  upon  that  day.  We  learn,
however,  from  the  testimony  of  a  very  early
writer  amongst  them,  that  they  also  reserved  the
day  for  religious  meditations ; — Unusquisque  nos-
trum (saith  Irensus)  sabbatizat  spiritualiter,  me-
ditations legis  gaudens,  opiflcium  Dei  admit ans.

Wherefore  the  duty  of  the  day  is  violated, ^

1st,  By  all  such  employments  or  engagements
as  (though  differing  from  our  ordinary  occupation)
hinder  our  attendance  upon  public  worsnip,  or
take  up  so  much  of  our  time  as  not  to  leave  a
sufficient  part  of  the  day  at  leisure  for  religious
reflection ;  as  the  going  of  journeys,  the  paying  or
receiving  of  visits,  which  engage  the  whole  day,  or
employing  the  time  at  home  in  writing  letters,  set-
tling accounts,  or  in  applying  ourselves  to  studies,
or  the  reading  of  books,  which  bear  no  relation
to  the  business  of  religion.

2dly,  By  unnecessary  encroachments  on  the  rest
and  liberty  which  Sunday  ought  to  bring  to  the
inferior  orders  of  the  community :  as  by  Keeping
servants  on  that  day  confined  and  busied  in  pre-
parations for  the  superfluous  elegancies  of  our
table,  or  dress.

3dly,  Bjr  such  recreations  as  are  customarily
forborne  out  of  respect  to  the  day ;  as  hunting,
shooting,  fishing,  public  diversions,  frequenting
taverns,  playing  at  cards  or  dice.

If  it  be  asked,  as  it  often  has  been,  wherein
consists  the  difference  between  walking  out  with
your  staff  or  with  your  gun  1  between  spending


106


MORAL  AND  POLITICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


the  evening  at  home,  or  in  »  tavern  1  between
peering  the  Sunday  afternoon  at  a  game  of  cards,
or  in  conversation  not  more  edifying,  not  always
eo  inoffensive  T— to  these,  and  to  the  same  question
under  a  variety  of  forms,  and  in  a  multitude  of
similar  examples,  we  return  the  following  an-
swer : — That  the  religious  observance  of  Sunday,
if  it  ought  to  be  retained  at  all,  mint  be  upholden
by  some  public  and  visible  distinction* :  that,  draw
the  Jine  of  distinction  where  you  will,  many  ac-
tions which  are  situated  on  toe  confines  of  the
line,  will  diner  very  little,  and  yet  lie  on  the  op-
>  posh*  sides  of  it :— that  every  trespass  upon  that
reserve  which  public  decency  has  established,
breaks  down  the  fence  by  which  the  day  is  sepa-
rated to  the  service  of  religion : — that  it  is  unsafe
to  trifle  with  scruples  and  habits  that  have  a
beneficial  tendency,  although  founded  merely  in
custom: — that  these  liberties,  however  intended,
will  certainly  be  considered  by  those  who  observe
them,  not  only  as  disrespectful  to  the  day  and  in-
stitution, but  as  proceeding  from  a  secret  contempt
of  the  Christian  frith :— that  consequently,  they
diminish  a  reverence  lor  religion  in  others,  so  far
as  the  authority  of  our  opinion,  or  the  efficacy  of
our  example,  reaches  ;  or  rather,  so  far  as  either
will  serve  for  an  excuse  of  negligence  to  those  who
are  dad  of  any :  that  as  to  caras  and  dice,  which
put  in  their  claim  to  be  considered  among  the
harmltM  occupations  of  a  vacant  hour,  it  may  be
observed  that  few  find  any  difficulty  in  refraining
from  play  on  Sunday,  except  they  who  sit  down
to  it  with  the  views  and  eagerness  of  game-
sters : — that  gaming  is  seldom  innocent : — that
the  anxiety  and  perturbations,  however,  which
it  excites,  are  inconsistent  with  the  tranquillity  and
frame  of  temper  in  which  the  duties  and  thoughts
of  religion  should  always  both  find  and  leave  us :
and  lastly,  we  shall  remark,  that  the  example  of
other  countries,  where  the  same  and  greater  li-
cence is  allowed,  affords  no  apology  for  irregularities
in  our  own ;  because  a  practice  which  is  tolerated
by  public  usage,  neither  receives  the  same  con-
struction, nor  gives  the  same  offence,  as  where  it
is  censured  and  prohibited.


CHAPTER  IX.
Of  Reverencing  the  Deity.

Ik  many  persons,  a  seriousness,  and  sense  of
awe,  overspread  the  imagination,  whenever  the
idea  of  the  Supreme  Being  is  presented  to  their
thoughts.  This  effect,  which  forms  a  considera-
ble security  against  vice,  is  the  consequence  not
eo  much  of  reflection,  as  of  habit ;  which  habit
being  generated  by  the  external  expressions  of
reverence  which  we  use  ourselves,  or  observe  in
others,  may  be  destroyed  by  causes  opposite  to
these,  and  especially  by  that  familiar  levity  with
which  some  learn  to  speak  of  the  Deity,  qf  his
attributes,  providence,  revelations,  or  worship.

God  hath  been  pleased  (no  matter  for  what  rea-
son, although  probably  for  this)  to  forbid  the  vain
mention  ofhis  name : — "  Thou  shalt  not  take  the
>  of  the  Lord  thy  God  in  vain."  Now  the
n  is  vain,  when  it  is  useless:  and  it  is
,  when  it  is  neither  likely  nor  intended  to
serve  any  good  purpose;  as  when  it  flows  from
the  lips  idle  and  unmeaning,  or  is  applied,  on  oc-
casions inconsistent  with  any  consideration  of  re-


ligion and  devotion,  to  eiprosa  our
earnestness,  our  courage,  or  our  mirth :  or  indeed
when  it  is  used  at  all,  except  in  acts  of  religion,  or
in  serious  and  seasonable  discourse  upon  religious
subjects.

The  prohibition  of  the  third  commandment  is
recognised  by  Christ,  in  his  sermon  upon  the
mount;  which  sermon  adverts  to  none  but  the
mora]  parts  of  the  Jewish  law :  "  I  say  unto  you,
Swear  not  at  all;  but  let  your  communication  be
Yea,  yea ;  Nay,  nay :  for  whatsoever  is  move  than
these,  cometh  of  evil."  The  Jews  probably  in-
terpreted the  prohibition  as  restrained  to  the  name
Jehovah,  the  name  which  the  Deity  had  appointed
and  appropriated  to  himself;  Exod.  vL  a.  The
words  of  Christ  extend  the  prohibition  beyond  the
name  of  God,  to  every  thing  associated  with  the
idea : — "  Swear  not,  neither  by  heaven,  for  it  i*
God's  throne ;  nor  by  the  earth,  for  it  is  his  foot-
stool: neither  by  Jerusalem,  for  it  is  the  city  of
the  Great  King." Matt.  v.  35.

The  offence  of  profane  swearing  is  aggravated
by  the  consideration,  that  in  it  duty  anudecency
are  sacrificed  to  the  slenderest  of  temptation*.
Suppose  the  habit,  either  from  affectation,  or  by
negligence  and  inadvertency,  to  be  already  rarmea,
it  must  always  remain  within  the  power  of  the
most  ordinary  resolution  to  correct  it;  and  it  can-
not, one  would  think,  •cost  a  great  deal  to  relinquish
the  pleasure  and  honour  which  it  confers.  A
concern  for  duty  is  in  fact  never  strong,  when  the
exertion  requisite  to  vanish  a  habit  founded  in  no
antecedent  propensity,  is  thought  too  much,  or  too
painful.

A  contempt  of  positive  duties,  or  rather  of  those
duties  for  which  the  reason  is  not  so  plain  as  the
command,  indicates  a  disposition  upon  which  the
authority  of  Revelation  nas  obtained  little  influ-
ence.—This  remark  is  applicable  to  the  offence  of
profane  swearing,  and  describes,  perhaps,  pretty
exactly,  the  general  character  of  those  who  are
most  addicted  to  it.

Mockery  and  ridicule,  when  exercised  upon  the
Scriptures,  or  even  upon  the  places,  persons,  and
forms,  set  apart  for  the  ministration  of  religion,
fall  within  the  meaning  of  the  law  which  forbids
the  profanation  of  Gc«rs  name;  especially  as  that
law  is  extended  by  Christ's  interpretation.  They
are,  moreover,  inconsistent  with  a  religious  frame
of  mind :  for,  as  rib  one  ever  feels  liimself  disposed
to  pleasantry,  or  capable  of  being  diverted  -with
the  pleasantry  of  others,  Upon  matters  in  which
he  is  deeply  interested ;  so  a  mind  intent  upon  the
acquisition  of  heaven,  rejects  with  indignation
every  attempt  to  entertain  it  with  jeets,  calculated
to  degrade  or  deride  subjects  which  it  never  recol-
lects but  with  seriousness  and  anxiety.  (  Nothing
but  stupidity,  or  the  most  frivolous  dissipation  o?
thought,  can  make  even  the  inconsiderate  forget
the  supreme  importance  of  every  thing  which  re-
lates to  the  expectation  of  a  future  existence.
Whilst  the  infidel  mocks  at  -the  superstitions  of
the  vulgar,  insults  over  their  credulous  fears,  their
childish  errors,  or  fantastic  rites,  it  does  not  occur
to  him  to  observe,  that  the  most  preposterous  de-
vice by  which  the  weakest  devotee  ever  believed
Ire  was  securing  the  happiness  of  a  future  life,
is  more  rational  than  unconcern  about  it.  Upon.
this  subject,  nothing  »  eo  absurd  as  indifference  ;
no  folly  so  contemptible  as  thoughtlessness  axid
-levity.

Finally;  the  knowledge  of  what  is  due  to  ties


OF  REVERENCING  THE  DEITY.


107


of  those  interests,  concerning  which
Revelation  professes  to  inform  and  direct  us,  may
i  those  wh<


»  who  are  least  inclined  to  respect
the  prejndxaeg  of  mankind,  to  observe  a  decorum
in  the  style  and  conduct  of  religious  disquisitions.
-with  the  neglect  of  which  'many  adversaries  of
Christianity  are  justly -chargeable. Serious  ar-
guments are  nix  on  all  aides. Christianity  is  but
3l  defended  by  refusing  audience  or  toleration  to
the  objections,  of  unbelievers. But  whilst  we
would  have  freedom  of  inquiry  restrained  by  no
bws  but  those  of  decency,  we  are  entitled  to  de-
mand, on  behalf  of  a  religion  which  holds  forth
to  mankind  assniances  of  immortality,  that  its
credit  be  assailed  by  no  other  weapons  than  those
of  sober  discussion  and  legitimate  reasoning : — that
the  truth  or  falsehood  of  Christianity  be  never
made  a  topic  of  raillery,  a  theme  for  the  exercise  of
wit  or  eloquence,  or  a  subject  of  contention  for
literary  fame  and  victory :— that  the  cause  be  tried
upon  its  merits : — that  all  applications  to  the  fancy,
passions,  or  prejudices  of  the  reader,  all  attempts
to  pre-occupy,  ensnare,. or  perplex  his  judgment,
by  any  art,  influence,  or  impression  whatsoever,
extrinsic  to  the  proper  grounds  and  evidence  upon
which  his  assent  ought  to  proceed,  be  rejected
from  a  question  which  involves  in  its  determination
the  hopes,  the  virtue,  and  the  repose,  of  millions : —
that  toe  controversy  be  managed  on  both  sides
with  sincerity;  that  is,  that  nothing  be  produced,
in  the  writings  of  either,  contrary  to,  or  beyond,
the  writer's  own  knowledge  and  persuasion: —
that  objections  and  difficulties  be  proposed,  from
no  other  motive  than  an  honest  ana  serious  desire
to  obtain  asiismctkm,  or  to  communicate  informa-
tion which  may  promote  the  discovery  and  pro-
gress of  truth : — that  in  conformity  with  this  de-
sign, every  thing  be  stated  with  integrity,  with
inetnodL  precision,  and  simplicity;  and  above  ail,
mat  whatever  is  published  in  opposition  to  re-
ceived and  confessedly  beneficial  persoasipns,  be
set  forth  under  a  form  which  is  likely  to  invite  in-
and  to  meet  examination. If  with  these
lie  and  eamtaMe  conditions  be  compared  the
r  in  which  hostilities  have  been  waged
t  the  Christian  religion,  not  only  the  votaries
'  the  prevailing  faith,  but  ever^  man  who  looks
forward  with  anxiety  to  the  destination  of  his  being,
will  see  much  to  blame  andtocomplain  of  By  one
unbeliever,  all  the  follies  which  have  adhered,  in  a
long  course  of  dark  and  superstitious  ages,  to  the
popular  creed,  axe  assumed  as  so  many  doctrines
of  Christ  and  his  apostles,  for  the  purpose  of  sub-
verting  the  whole  system  by  the  absurdities  which
it  is  thus  represented  to  contain.  By  another,  the
ignorance  and  vices  of  the  sacerdotal  order,  their
>  and  persecutions,  their  usur-
chments  upon  the  intellectual
j  and  civil  rights  of  mankind,  have  been  dis-
pktyeKi  with  no  small  triumph  and  invective ;  not
as  much  to  guard  the  -Christian  laity  against  a
npetition  of  the  same  injuries,  (which  is  the  only
proper  use  to  be  made  of  the  most  flagrant  exam-
ples of  the  peet,)  a*  to  prepare  the  way  for  an  in-
snraetBon,  tnat  the  religion  itself  is  nothing  but  a
profitable  fable,  imposed  upon  the  fears  and  cre-
dulity of  the  multitude,  and  upheld  by  the  frauds
and  influence  of  an  interested  and  crafty  priest-
hood. And  yet,  how  remotely  is  the  character  of
the  denry  connected  wijth  the  truth  of  Christiani-
ty! What,  after  all,  do  the  most  disgraceful  pages
'  " I  hutfory  prow,  but  that  the  passions


any  an
moderate


against
of  the  i


of  our  common  nature  are  not  altered  or  excluded
by  distinctions  of  name,  and  that  the  characters  of
men  are  formed  much  more  by  the  temptations
than  the  duties  of  their  profession  ?  A  third  finds
delight  in  collecting  and  repeating  accounts  of  wars
and  massacres,  of  tumults  and  insurrections,  exci-
ted in  almost  every  age  of  the  Christian  era  by  reli-
gious zeal ;  as  though  the  vices  of  Christians  were
parts  of  Christianity ;  intolerance  and  extirpation
precepts  of  the  Gospel ;  or  as  if  its  spirit  could  be
judged  of  from  the  counsels  of  princes,  the  in-
trigues of  statesmen,  the  pretences  of  malice  and
ambition,  or  the  unauthorised  cruelties  of  some
gloomy  and  virulent  superstition. By  a  fourth,
the  succession  and  variety  of  popular  religions ;
the  vicissitudes  with  which  sects  and  tenets  have
flourished  and  decayed;  the  zeal  with  which  they
were  once  supported,  the  negligence  with  which
they  are  now  remembered ;  the  little  share  which
reason  and.  argument  appetu*  to  have  had  in  fram-
ing the  creed,  or  regulating  the  religious  conduct,
of  the  multitude ;  the  indifference  and  submission
with  which  the  religion  of  the  state  is  generally
received  by* the  common  people;  the  caprice  and
vehemence  with  which  it  is  sometimes  opposed:
the  phrensy  with  which  men  have  been  brought
to  contend  for  opinions  and  ceremonies,  of  which
they  knew  neither  the  proof,  the  meaning,  nor  the
original :  lastly,  the  equal  and  undoubting  confi-
dence with  which  we  hear  the  doctrines  of  Christ
or  of  Confucius,  the  law  of  Moses  or  of  Mahomet,
the  Bible,  the  Koran,  or  the  Shaster,  maintained
or  anathematized,  taught  or  abjured,  revered  or
derided,  according  as  we  live  on  this  or  on  that
side  of  a  river ;  keep  within  or  step  over  the  boun-
daries of  a  state ;  or  even  in  the  same  country,  and
by  the  same  people,  so  often  as  the  event  of  battle,
or  the  issue  of  a  negociation,  delivers  them  to  the
dominion  of  anew  master ; — points,  I  say,  of  this
sort  are  exhibited  to  the  public  attention,  as  so
many  arguments  against  the  truth  of  the  Christian
religion ;— and  with  success. For  these  topics,
r^eing  brought  together,  and  set  off  with  some  ag-
gravation of  circumstances,  and  with  a  vivacity
of  style  and  description  familiar  enough  to  the
writings  and  conversation  of  free-thinkers,  insen-
sibly lead  the  imagination  into  a  habit  of  classing
Christianity  with  the  delusions  that  have  taken
possession,  by  turns,  of  the  public  belief;  and  of
regarding  it,  as  what  the  scoffers  of  our  faith  re-
present  it  to  be, the  superstition  of  Vie  day.
But  is  this  to  deal  honestly  by  the  subject,  or
with  the  world  1  May  not  the  same  things  be  said,
may  not  the  same  prejudices  be  excited  by  these
representations,  whether  Christianity  be  true  or
false,  or  by  whatever  poofs  its  truth  be  attested  1
May  not  truth  as  well  as  falsehood  be  taken  upon
credit  1  May  not  a  religion  be  founded  upon  evi-
dence accessible  and  satisfactory  to  every  mind  com-
petent to  the  inquiry,  which  yet,  by  the  greatest
part  of  its  professors,  is  received  upon,  authority?
But  if  the  matter  of  those  objections  be  repre-
hensible,jis  calculated  to  produce  an  effect  upon
the  reader  beyond  what  their  real  weight  and  place
in  the  argument  deserve,  still  more  shall  we  disco-
ver of  management  and  disingenuousness  in  the
form  under  which  they  are  dispersed  among  the
public. Infidelity  is  served  up  in  every  shape
that  is  likely  to  allure,  surprise,  or  beguile  the
imagination;  in  a  fable,  a  tale,  a  novel,  a  poem;
in  interspersed  and  broken  hints,  remote  and  ob-
lique surmises}  in  books  of  travels,  of  philosophy,


106


MORAL  AND  POLITICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


of  natural  history;  in  a  word,  in  any  form  rather
than  the  right  one.  that  of  a  professed  and  regular
disquisition.  And  because  the  coarse  buffoonery,
and  broad  laugh,  pf  the  old  and  rude  adversaries
of  the  Christian  faith,  would  offend  the  taste,
perhaps,  rather  than  the  virtue,  of  this  cultivated
age,  a  graver  irony,  a  more  skilful  and  delicate
banter,  is  substituted  in  their  place.  An  eloquent
historian,  beside  his  more  direct,  and  therefore
fairer  attacks  upon  the  credibility  of  Evangelic
story,  has  contrived  to  weave  into  his  narration  one
continued  sneer  upon  the  cause  of  Christianity,
and  upon  the  writings  and  characters  of  its  ancient
patrons.  The  knowledge  which  this  author  pos-
sesses of  the  frame  and  conduct  of  the  human
mind,  must  have  led  him  to  observe,  that  such  at-
tacks do  their  execution  without  inquiry.  Who
can  refute  a  sneer  ?  Who  can  compute  the  num-
ber, much  less,  one  by  one,  scrutinize  the  justice,
of  those  disparaging  insinuations  which  crowd  the
pages  of  this  elaborate  history  ?  What  reader  sus-
pends his  curiosity,  or  calls  off  his  attention  from
the  principal  narrative,  to  examine  references,  or
to  search  into  the  foundation,  or  to  weigh  the
reason,  propriety,  and  force,  of  every  transient
sarcasm,  aha  sly  allusion,  by  which  the  Christian
testimony  is  depreciated  and  traduced:  and  by
which,  nevertheless,  he  may  find  his  persuasion
afterwards  unsettled  and  perplexed  1

But  the  enemies  of  Christianity  have  pursued
her  with  poisoned  arrows.  Obscurity  itself  is
made  the  vehicle  of  infidelity.  The  awful  doc-
trines, if  we  be  not  permitted  to  call  them  the  sa-
cred truths,  of  our  religion,  together  with  all  the
adjuncts  and  appendages  of  its  worship  and  ex-
ternal profession,  have  been  sometimes  impudent-
ly profaned  by  an  unnatural  conjunction  with
impure  and  lascivious  images.  The  fondness  for
ridicule  is  almost  universal:  and  ridicule,  to  many
minds,  is  never  so  irresistible,  as  when  seasoned
with  obscenity,  and  employed  upon  religion.  But
in  proportion  aa  these  noxious  prindples  take  hold
of  the  imagination,  they  infatuate  the  judgment  :
for  trains  of  ludicrous  and  unchaste  associations
adhering  to  every  sentiment  and  mention  of  re-
ligion, render  the  mind  indisposed  to  receive  either
conviction  from  its  evidence,  or  impressions  from
its  authority.  And  this  effect  being  exerted  upon
the  sensitive  part  of  our  frame,  is  altogether  inde-
pendent of  argument,  proof,  or  reason ;  is  as  for-
midable to  a  true  religion,  as  to  a  false  one ;  to  a
well  grounded  faith,  as  to  a  chimerical  mythology,
or  fabulous  tradition.  Neither,  let  it  be  observed,
is  the  crime  or  danger  less,  because  impure  ideas
arc  exhibited  under  a  veil,  in  covert  ana  chastised


eriousness  is  not  constraint  of  thought ;  nor
levity,  freedom.  Every  mind  which  wishes  the
advancement  of  truth  and  knowledge,  in  the  most
important  of  all  human  researches,  must  abhor
this  licentiousness,  as  violating  no  less  the  laws  of
reasoning,  than  the  rights  of  decency.  There  is
but  one  description  ofmen,  to  whose  principles  it
ought  to  be  tolerable ;  I  mean  that  class  of  reason-
en  who  can  see  little  in  Christianity,  even  sup-
posing it  to  be  true.  To  such  adversaries  we
address  this  reflection — Had  Jesus  Christ  deliver-
ed no  other  declaration  than  the  following — "  The
hour  is  coming,  in  the  which  all  that  are  in  the
nave  shall  hear  his  voice,  and  shall  come  forth:
they  that  have  done  good,  unto  the  resurrection
of  tye;  and  they  that  nave  done  evil,  unto  the  re-


surrection of  damnations—he  had  pronounced  a
message  of  inestimable  importance,  and  well  wor-
thy of  that  splendid  apparatus  of  prophecy  and  mira-
cles with  which  his  mission  was  introduced  and  at-
tested :  a  message  in  which  the  wisest  of  mankind
would  rejoice  to  find  an  answer  to  their  doubts,
and  rest  to  their  inquiries.  It  is  idle  to  say,  that
a  future  state  had  been  discovered  already: — it
had  been  discovered  as  the  Copernican  system
was, — it  was  one  guess  among  many.  He  alone
discovers,  who  proves;  and  no  man  can  prove
this  point,  but  the  teacher  who  testifies  by  miracles
that  his  doctrine  comes  from  God.


BOOK  VI.

ELEMENTS  OF  POLITICAL  KNOWLEDGE.


CHAPTER  I.

Of  the  Origin  of  Civil  Chvernment.

Government;  at  first,  was  either  patriarchal  or
military :  that  of  a  parent  over  his  family,  or  of  a
commander  over  his  fellow-warriors.

I.  Paternal  authority,  and  the  order  of  domestic
life,  supplied  the  foundation  of  civil  government*
Did  mankind  spring  out  of  the  earth  mature  and
independent,  it  would  be  found  perhaps  impossible
to  introduce  subjection  and  subordination  among
them :  but  the  condition  of  human  infancy  pre-
pares men  for  society,  by  combining  individuals
into  small  communities,  and  by  placing  them  from
the  beginning,  under  direction  and  control.  A
family  contains  the  rudiments  of  an  empire.  The
authority  of  one  over  many,  and  the  disposition  to
govern  and  to  be  governed,  are  in  this  way  inci-
dental to  the  very  nature,  and  coeval  no  doubt  with
the  existence,  of  the  human  species.

Moreover,  the  constitution  of  families  not  only
assists  the  formation  of  civil  government,  by  the
dispositions  which  it  generates,  but  also  furnishes
the  first  steps'  of  the  process  by  which


have  been  actually  reared.  A  parent  would  retain
a  considerable  part  of  his  authority  after  his  chil-
dren were  grown  up,  and  had  formed  families  of
their  own.  The  obedience  of  which  they  remem-
bered not  the  beginning,  would  be  considered  as
natural ;  and  would  scarcely,  during  the  parent's
life,  be  entirely  or  abruptly  withdrawn.  Here
then  we  see  the  second  stage  in  the  progress  of
dominion.  The  first  was,  that  of  a  parent  oner
his  young  children ;  this,  that  of  an  ancestor  pre-
siding over  his  adult  descendants.

Although  the  original  progenitor  was  the  centre
of  union  to  his  posterity,  yet  it  is  not  probable
that  the  association  would  be  immediately  or  alto-
gether dissolved  by  his  death.  Connected  by  ha-
bits of  intercourse  and  affection,  and  by  some
common  rights,  necessities,  and  interests,  they
would  consider  themselves  as  allied  to  each  .other
in  a  nearer  degree  than  to  the  rest  of  the  species.
Almost  all  would  be  sensible  of  an  inclination
to  continue  in  the  society  in  which  they  had  been
brought  up;  and  experiencing,  as  they  soon  would
do,  many  inconveniences  from  the  absence  of  that
authority  which  their  common  ancestor  exercised,
especially  in  deciding  their  disputes,  and  directing
their  operations  in  matters  in  which  it  was  na*


ORIGIN  OF  CtVtL  GOVERNMENT.


109


cowry  to  act  in  conjunction,  they  might  be  in-
duced to  supply  hie  place  fay  a  formal  choice  of
a.  successor ;  or  rather  might  willingly,  and  almost
imperceptibly,  transfer  their  obedience  to  some
one  of  toe  family,  who  by  bis  age  or  services,  or
by  the  part  he  possessed  in  the  direction  of  their
affair*  daring  the  lifetime  of  the  parent,  had  al-
ready taught  them  to  respect  his  advice,  or  to  at-
tend to  his  commands ;  or  lastly,  the  prospect  of
these  inconveniences  might  prompt  the  first  an-
cestor to  appoint  a  successor;  and  his  posterity,
from  the  same  motive,  united  with  an  hantual  de-
ference to  the  ancestor's  authority,  might  receive
the  appointment  with  submission.  Here  then  we
have  a  tribe  or  clan*  incorporated  under  one  chief
Such  communities  might  be  increased  by  consider-
able numbers,  and  fulfil  the  purposes  of  civil
union  without  any  other  or  more  regular  conven-
tion, constitution,  or  form  of  government,  than
what  we  have  described.  Every  branch  which
was  stopped  off  from  the  primitive  stock,  and  re-
moved to  a  distance  from  it,  would  in  like  manner
take  root,  and  grow  into  a  separate  clan.  Two
or  three  of  these  dans  *««re  frequently,  we  may

mutual  defence,  common  uisxress,  o*  viore  acci-
dental coalitions,  might  produce  this  effect

II.  A  second  source  or  personal  authority,  and
which  might  easily  extend,  or  sometimes  perhaps
supersede,  the  patriarchal,  is  that  which  results
from  military  arrangement.  In  wars,  either  of
iggHaaiun  or  defence,  manifest  necessity  would
prompt  those  who  fought  on  the  same  side  to  ar-
ray themselves  under  one  leader.  And  although
their  leader  was  advanced  to  this  eminence  tor
>  only,  and  during  the  operations,  of


f  thai  advantage  were  added  to  the  au-
thority of  the  patriarchal  chief,  or  favoured  by  any
previous  dwtmrtktn  of  ancestry,  H  would  be  no
amscolt  undertaking  for  the  person  who  possessed
it,  to  obtain  the  almost  absolute  direction  of  the
asm  of  the  community ;  especially  if  he  was
1  to  ■aonrsrfr  to  himself  proper  auxiliaries,

t  to  practise  the  obvious  art  of  gratify-
ing or  removing  those  who  opposed  his  preten-


B*.^..^*!.  (?«***


i  or  fortune  one  man
>  rule  over  many,  yet  it  seems  more
t  to  explain  how  empire  became  hereditary,
or  in  what  manner  sovereign  power,  which  is
■ever  acquired  without  great  merit  or  manaffe-
ssent,  learns  to  descend  in  a  succession  which  has
no  ascendance  upon  any  qualities  either  of  un-
derstanding or  activity.  Toe  causes  which  have
introduoed  hereditary  dominion  into  so  general  a
receptiuu  in  the  world,  are  principally  the  follow-
ing'— the  influence  of  association,  which  com-
■niikalie  to  the  son  a  portion  of  the  same  respect
which  was  wont  to  be  paid  to  the  virtues  or  sta-
tion of  the  ftther;  the  mutual  jealousy  of  other
rorejiethnrs;  the  greater  envy  with  which  all  be-
the  exaltation  of  an  equal,  than  the  con-
ofanacknowtedgedsxiperiority-areign-
einee  leaving  behind  him  many  adherents,
can  preserve  their  own  importance  only  by


supporting  the  succession  of  his  children,!  add  to
these  reasons,  that  elections  to  the  supreme  power
having,  upon  trial,  produced  destructive  conten-
tions, many  states  would  take  a  refuge  from  a  re-
turn of  the  same  calamities  in  a  rule  of  succession:
and  no  rule  presents  itself  so  obvious,  certain,  ana
intelligible,  as  consanguinity  of  birth.

The  ancient  state  of  society  in  most  countries,
and  the  modern  condition  of  some  uncivilized  parts
of  the  world,  exhibit  that  appearance  which  this
account  of  the  origin  of  civil  government  would
feed  ea  to  expect  The  eartiasThistories  of  Pa-
lestine, Greece,  Italy,  Gaul,  Britain,  inform  us.
that  these  countries  were  occupied  by  many  small
independent  nations,  not  much  perhaps  unlike
those  which  are  found  at  present  amongst  the
savage  inhabitants  of  North  America,  and  upon
the  coast  of  Africa, These  nations  I  conr  J—


as  the  amphflcationfl  of  so  many  single  families;
or  as  derived  from  the  junction  of  two  or  three
femities,  whom  society  in  war,  or  the  approach  of
some  common  danger,  had  united.  -  Suppose  a
country  to  have  been  first  peopled  by  shipwreck
on  its  coasts,  or  by  emigrants  or  exiles  from  e
neighbouring  country ;  the  new  settlers,  having
no  enemy  to  provide  against,  and  occupied  with
the  care  of  their  personal  subsistence,  would  think
**tje  of  digesting  a  system  of  laws,  of  contriving
a  fon».  of  government,  or  indeed  of  any  political
union  whatever;  but  each  settler  would  remain
at  the  head  of  his  own  family,  and  each  family
would  include  all  of  every  age  and  generation
who  were  descended  from  him.  So  many  of  these
families  as  were  holden  together  after  the  death
of  the  original  ancestor,  by  the  reasons  and  in  the
method  above  recited,  would  wax,  as  the  indi-
viduals were  multiplied,  into  tribw,  dans,  hordes,
or  nations,  similar  to  those  into  which  the  ancient
inhabitants  of  many  countries  are  known  to  have
been  divided,  and  which  are  still  found  wherever
the  state  of  society  and  maimers  is  innnatnreand
uncultivated.

Nor  need  we  be  surprised  at  the  early  exist-
ence in  the  world  of  some  vast  empires,  or  at  the
rapidity  with  which  they  advanced  to  then  great-
ness, from  comparatively  small  and  obscure  ori-
ginals. Whilst  the  inhabitants  of  so  many  coun-
tries were  broken  into  numerous  communities,
unconnected,  and  oftentimes  contending  with
each  other ;  before  experience  had  taught  these
little  states  to  see  their  own  danger  in  then  neigh-
bour's ruin ;  or  had  instructed  them  in  the  neces-
sity of  resisting  the  aggrandizement  of  an  as-
piring power,  by  alliances,  and  timely  prepara-
tions; in  this  condition  of  civil  policy,  a  particular
tribe,  which  by  any  means  had  gotten  the  start  of
the  rest  in  strength  or  discipline,  and  happened  to
fell  under  the  conduct  of  an  ambitious  chief,  by
directing  their  first  attempts  to  the  part  where
success  was  most  secure,  and  by  assuming,  as
they  went  slong.  those  whom  they  oonquereuinto
a  share  of  their  future  enterprises,  might  soon  ga-
ther a  force  which  would  infallibly  overbear  any
opposition  that  the  scattered  power  and  unpro-
vided state  of  such  enemies  could  make  to  the
progress  of  their  victories.

Lastly,  our  theory  affords  a  presumption,  that
the  earliest  governments  were  monarchies  j  because
the  government  of  families,  and  of  armies,  from*

uch,  according  to  our  account,  civil  government
derived  its  institution,  and  probably  its  form,  is
aniversally  monarchical.
10


119


MORAL  AND  POLITICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


fag  iti  protection,  consent  to  fae  bound  by  its  laws;
inhke  manner,  a*  whoever  voluntarily  enter*  into
a  private  society  is  understood,  without  any  other
or  more  explicit  stipulation,  to  promise  a  con-
formity with  the  rubs,  and  obedience  to  the  go-
vernment of  that  society,  as  the  known  conditions
upon  which  he  is  admitted  to  a  participation  of  its
.privileges.

I This  account  of  die  subject,  although  specious,

(  and  patronised  by  names  the  most  respectable,

appears  to  labour  under  the  following  objections:

that  it  is  founded  upon  a  supposition  false  in  met,

and  leading  to  dangerous  conclusions.

No  social  compact,  similar  to  what  is  here  de-
scribed, was  ever  made  or  entered  into  in  reality:
no  sucn  original  convention  of  the  people  was
ever  actually  holden,  or  in  any  country  could  be
hoklen,  antecedent  to  the  existence  of  civil  govern-
ment in  that  country.  It  is  to  suppose  it  pos-
sible to  call  savages  out  of  caves  and  deserts,  to  de-
liberate and  vote  upon  topics,  which  the  expe-
rience, and  studies,  and  refinements,  of  civil  life,
alone  suggest  Therefore  no  government  in  the
universe  te^jran  from  this  original  Some  imita-
tion of  a  soaal  compact  may  have  taken  place  at  a
revolution.  The  present  age  has  been  witness  to
a  transaction,  which  bears  the  nearest  resemblance
to  this  political  idea,  of  any  of  which  history  has
preserved  the  account  or  memory :  I  refer  to  the

ent  of  the  United  States  of  North

We  saw  the  peopfe  assembled  to  elect
,  for  the  avowed  purpose  of  framing  the
constitution  of  a  new  empire.  We  saw  this
deputation  of  the  people  deliberating  and  re-
solving upon  a  form  of  government,  erecting  a
permanent  legislature,  distributing  the  functions
of  sovereignty,  establishing  and  promulgating  a
code  of  fundamental  ordinances,  which  were  to
be  considered  by  succeeding  generations,  not
merely  as  laws  and  acts  of  the  state,  but  as  the
very  terms  and  conditions  of  the  confederation^  as
binding  not  only  upon  the  subjects  and  magis-
trates of  the  state,  but  as  limitations  of  power,
which  were  to  control  and  regulate  the  future
legislature.  Yet  even  here  much  was  presupposed.
In  settling  the  constitution,  many  important  parts
were  presumed  to  be  already  settled.  The  quali-
fications of  the  constituents  who  were  admitted  to
vote  in  the  election  of  members  of  congress,  as
well  as  the  mode  of  electing  the  representatives,
were  taken  from  the  old  forms  of  government.
That  was  wanting,  from  which  every  social  union
should  set  off,  and  which  alone  makes  the  resolu-
tions of  the  society  the  act  of  the  individual, — the
unconstrained  consent  of .  all  to  be  bound  by  the
decision  of  the  majority;  and  yet  without  this
previous  consent,  the  revolt,  and  the  regulations
which  followed  it,  were  compulsory  upon  dis-
sentients.

But  the  original  compact,  we  are  told,  is  not
proposed  as  a.  fact,  but  as  a  fiction,  which  furnishes
a  commodious  explication  of  the  mutual  rights  and
duties  of  sovereigns  and  subjects.  In  answer  to
this  representation  of  the  matter,  we  observe,  that
the  original  compact,  if  it  be  not  a  fact,  is  no-
thing; can  confer  no  actual  authority  upon  laws
or  magistrates;  nor  afford  any  foundation  to  rights
which  are  supposed  to  be  real  and  existing.  But
the  truth  is,  that  in  the  books,  and  in  the  appre-
hension, of  those  who  deduce  our  civil  rights  and
obtigarion*  a  pactU,  the  original  convention  is  ap-
pealed to  and  treated  of  as  a  reality. Whenever


the  disciples  of  this  system  speak  of  die  constitu-
tion; of  the  fundamental  articles  of  the  constin>


toon;  of  laws  being  constitutional  or  unconsti-
tutional i  of  inherent,  unalienable,  mexaWui&habte
rights,  either  in  the  prince  or  in  the  people ;  or  in-
deed of  any  laws,  usages,  or  civil  rights,  as  trans*
eending  the  authority  of  the  subsisting  legislature,
or  possessing  a  force  and  sanction  superior  to  what
belong  to  the  modern  acts  and  edicts  of  the  legisla-
ture; they  secretly  refer  us  to  what  passed  at  the
original  convention.  They  would  teach  us  to  be-
lieve, that  certain  rules  and  ordinances  were  esta-
blished by  the  people,  at  the  same  time  that  they
settled  the  charter  of  government,  and  the  powers
as  well  as  the  form  of  the  future  legislature ;  that
this  legislature  consequently,  deriving  its  commis-
sion and  existence  from  the  consent  and  act  of  the
primitive  assembly  (of  which  indeed  it  is  only  the
standing  deputation))  continues  subject,  in  the  ex-
ercise of  its  offices,  and  as  to  the  extent  Of  ite  power,
to  the  rules,  reservations,  and  limitations,  which
the  same  assembly  then  made  and  prescribed  t»  it.

"  As  the  first  members  of  the  state  were  bound
by  express  stipulation  to  obey  the  government
which  they  had  erected;  so  the  succeeding  uv
habitants  of  the  country  are  understood  to  promise
allegiance  to  the  constitution  and  government  the  j
find  established,  by  accepting  its  protection,  clainv
ing  its  privileges,  and  acquiescing  in  its  laws :  mora
especially,  by  the  purchase  or  inheritance  of  lands
to  the  possession  of  which,  allegiance  to  the  state
is  annexed,  as  the  very  service  and  condition  of
the  tenure.11 Smoothly  as  this  train  of  argument
proceeds,  little  of  it  will  endure  examination.  The
native  subjects  of  modem  states  are'  not  conscious
of  any  stipulation  with  the  sovereigns,  of  ever  ex-
ercising an  election  whether  they  will  be  bound  or
not  by  the  acts  of  the  legislature,  of  any  alterna-
tive being  proposed  to  their  choice,  of  a  promise
either  required  or  given ;  nor  do  they  apprehend
that  the  validity  or  authority  of  the  law  depends
at  all  upon  their  recognition  or  consent. In  aU
stipulations,  whether  they  be  expressed  or  implied,
private  or  public,  formal  or  constructive,  the  par-
ties stipulating must  both  ponncao the  liberty
of  assent  and  refusal,  and  also  be  conscious  of  this
liberty ;  which  cannot  with  truth  be  affirmed  of  the
subjects  of  civil  government  as  government  is  now,
or  ever  was,  actuwy  administered.  This  is  a  defect,
which  no  arguments  can  excuse  or  supply :  all
presumptions  of  consent^  without  this  conscious-
ness, or  in  opposition  to  it,  are  vain  and  erroneous.
Still  less  is  it  possible  to  reconcile  with  any  idea
of  stipulation,  tne  practice,  in  which  all  European
nations  agree,  of  founding  allegiance  upon  the  cir-
cumstance of  nativity,  that  is.  of  claiming  and
treating  as  subjects  all  those  who  are  born  within
the  confines  of  their  dominions,  although  removed
to  another  country  in  their  youth  or  infancy. In
this  instance  certainly,  the  state  does  not  presume
a  compact. Also  if  the  subject  be  bound  only  by
his  own  consent,  and  if  the  voluntary  abiding  in
the  country  be  the  proof  and  intimation  of  that
consent,  by  what  arguments  should  we  defend  the
right,  which  sovereigns  universally  assume,  of  pro-
hibiting, when  they  please,  the  departure  of  their
subjects  out  of  the  realm  1

Again,  when  it  is  contended  that  the  taking  and
holding  possession  of  land  amounts  to  an  acknow-
ledgment of  the  sovereign,  and  a  virtual  promise
of  allegiance  to  his  laws,  it  is  necessary  to  the  va-
lidity of  the  argument  to  prove ,  that  the  inh^}J^n^


SUBMISSION  TO  CIVIL  GOVERNMENT  EXPLAINED.


113


who  fir*  composed  and  constituted  the  state,  col-
Ljctrvely  uomewed  a  right  to  the  soil  of  the  coun-
try ;—*  fight  to  parcel  it  out  to  whom  they  pleased,
and  to  annex  to  the  donation  what  conditions  they
thought  fit.  .  How  came  they  by  this  right?  An,
agreement  amongst  themselves  would  not  confer
it ;  that  could  only  adjust  what  already  belonged
to  them.  A  society  of  men  vote  themselves  to  be
the  owners  of  a  region  of  the  world;— does  that
rote,  unaccompanied  especially  with'  any  culture,
enclosure,  or  proper  act  of  occupation,  make  it
theirs?  does  it  entitle  them  to  exclude  others  from
it,  or  to  dictate  the  conditions  upon  which  it  shall
be  enjoyed  ?  Yet  this  original  collective  right-and
ownership  b  the  foundation  for  all. the  reasoning
by  which  the  duty  of  allegiance-  js  inferred  from
taejBoaacssion  of  tend.

h  The  theory  of  government  which  affirms  the  ex-
istence and  the  obligation  of  a  social  compact,
would,  afterall,  merit  little  discussion,  and  however
groundless  and  unnecessary,  should  receive  no
opposition  from  us,  did  itnotappearto  lead  to  con-
clusions unfavourable  to  the  improvement,  and  to
the  peace  of  human  society.

1st.  Opon  the  supposition  that  government  was
lint  erected  by,  and  that  it  derives  all  its  just  au-
thority from,  resolutions  entered  into  by  a  conven-
tion of  the  people,  it  is  capable  of  being  presumed,
that  many  points  were  settled  Jry  that  convention,
anterior  to  the  establishment  of  the  subsisting  le-
gaaature,  and  which  the  legislature,  consequently
Ins  no  right  to  alter,  or  interfere  with.  These
points  are  called  the  fundamental*  of  the  consti-
tution: and  as  it  is  impossible  to  determine  how
many,  or  what,  they- are,  the  suggesting  of  any
such  serves  extremely  to  embarrass  the  delibera-
tions of  the  legislature,  and  affords  a  dangerous  pre-
tence for  disputing  the  authority  of  the  laws.  It
was  tins  sort  of  reasoning  (so  far  as  reasoning  of
any  kind  was  employed  m  the  question)  that  pro-
duced in  this  nation  the  doubt,  which  so  much
fgfrwM  the  minds  of  men  in  the  reign  of  the
second  Charles,  whether  an  Act  of  Parliament
eonld  of  right  alter  or  limit  the  succession  of  the
Crown.

affly.  If  it  be  br  virtue  of  a  compact,  that  (he
subject  owes  obedience  to  civil  government,  it  will
fofiow  that  he  ought  toabide  by  the  form  of  govern-
ment which  he  finds  eetahhsned,  be  it  ever  so  ab-
snrd  or  inconvenient  He  is  bound  by  his  bargain.
It  is  not  permitted  to  any  man  to  retreat  from  his
engagement,  merely  because  he  finds  the  perform-
ance disadvantageous,  or  because.be  has  air  oppor-
tunity of  entering  into  a  better.  This  law  of  con-
tract, isunrrersal:  and  to  call  the  relation  between
the  sovereign  and  the  subjects  a  contract;  yet  not  to
apply  to  it  the  rules,  or  aflow  of  the  effects  of  aeon-
tract,  m  an  arbitrary  use  of  names,  and  an  un-
i  in  reasoning,  which  can  teach  nothing.
i  to  the  encroachments  o{  the  supreme

\  may  be  justified  on  this  principle;  re-

e  to  arms,  for  the  purpose  of  bringing  aboutan

t  of  the  constitution,  never  can.  No  form

ot  contains  a  provision  for  its  own  dis-

i;  anffew  governors  will  consent  to  the  ex-

,  or  even  to  any  abridgement,  of  their  own-
It  does  not  therefore  appear,  how  despotic

tents  can  ever,  in  consistency  with  the  obli-
■  of  the  subject,  be  changed  or  mitigated.  Des-

u  the  constitution  of  many  stales:  and
9.  exacts  from  his  subjects  the
lccofduigtolhis  account,  he


is  only  holding  them  to  their  agreement.  A  people
may  vindicate,  by  force,  the  rights,  which  .the  con-
stitution has  left  them ;  but  every  attempt  tolnarrow
the  prerogative  of  the  xrown  by  new  limitations,,
and  in  opposition  to  the  will  of  the  reigning  prince/
whatever  opportunities  may  invite,  or  success  follow
it,  must  be  condemned  as  an  infraction  of  the  com-
pact-between the  sovereign  and  the  subject:

'3dly.  Every  violation  of  the  compact  on  the  part
of  the  governor,  releases  the  subject  from  his  alle-
giance, and  dissolves  the  government. I  do  not
perceive  how  we  can  avoid  this  consequence,  if  we
found  the  duty  of  allegiance  upon  compact,  and
confess  any  analogy  between  the  social  compact v
end  other  contracts'.  In  private  contracts,  the  viola-  .'
tion  and  non-performance  of  the  conditions,  by  one  : \
of  the  parties,  vacates  the  obligation  of  the  other.
Now  the  terms  and  articles  of  the  social  compact  '
being  no  where  extant  or  expressed :  the  rights  and
offices  of  the  administrator  of  an  cmflfee  being  'so
many  and  various ;  the  imaginary  ana  controverted '.
line  of' his  prerogative  being  so  liable  to  be  over- i
-stepped  in  one  part  or  other  of  it;  the  position
that  every  such  transgression  amounts  to  a  forfeiture
of  the  government,  and  consequently  authorises
the  people  to  withdraw  their  obedience,  and  pro-
vide for  themselves  by  a  new  settlement,  would  en- \
danger  the  stability  of  every  political  fabric  in  the /
world,  and  has  in  fact  always  supplied  the  disaf-
fected with  a  topic  of  seditious  declamation. If
occasions  have  arisen,  in  which  this  plea  has  been
resorted  to  with  justice  and  success,  they  have  been
occasions  in  which  a  revolution  was  defensible  upon
other  and  plainer  principles. The  plea  itself  is  at
all  tunes  captious  and  unsafe.

Wherefore,  rejecting  the  intervention  of  a  com-
pact, as  unfounded  in  its  principle,  and  dangerous
in  the  application,  we  assign  for  the  only  jgrbund  '

of  the  subject's  obligation,  the  will  of  God  as  '

COLLECTED  FROM  EXPEDIENCY.

The  steps  by  which  the  argument  proceeds,  are
few  and  direct.— "It  is  the  will  of  God  that  the
happiness  of  human  life  be  promoted :" — thin  is  the
first  step,  and  the  foundation  not  only-of  {his;  but
of  every,  moral  conclusion.  "  Civil  society  conduces
to  that  end:" — this  is  the  second  proposition.  "  Civil
societies  cannot  be  upholden,  unless,  in  each/  the
interest  of  the  whole  society  be  binding  upon  every
part  and  member  of  it :" — this  is  the  third  step,  and  ^
conducts  us  to  the  conclusion,  namely,  "that  so
long  as  the  interest  of  the  whole  society  requires
it,  that  is,  so  long  as  the -established  government
cannot  be  resisted  or  changed  without  public  incon-
veniency,  it  is  the  will  of  God  (which  adM  tuiiver-
sally  determines  our  duty)  that  the  established  go-,
vernmeht  be  obeyed," — and  ho  longer.

This  principle  being  admitted,  the  justice  of
every  particular  case  of  resistance  is  reduced -to  a
computation  of  the  quantity  of  the  danger  and
grievance  on  the  one  side,  and  of  the  probability
and  expense  of 'redressing  it  on  the  other.

But  who  shall  judge  this  7  We  answer,  "Every
man  for  himself" In  contentions  tetween  the;
sovereign  and  the  subject,  the  parties  acknowledge '.
no  common  arbitrator ;  and  it  would  be  absurd  to  ,
refer  the  decision  to  those  whose  conduct  hat  pro-  •
voked  the  question,  and  whose-own  interest,  anthsfc^
rity ,  and  fete,  are  immediately  concerned  in  it  The  <
danger  of  error-and  abuse  is  no  objection  to  the  y
rule  of  expediency,  because  every  ether  rule  is  liable
10"


114


MORAL  AND  POLITICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


or  greater:  and  evert  rule  that  can  bo
|  propounded  upon  the  subject  (like  ail  rule*  indeed
■  which  appeal  to,  or  bind  the  conscience)  must  in
'the  application'  depend  upon  private  judgment.  It
nay  be  observed,  however,  that  it  ought  equally  to
be  accounted  the  exercise  of  a  man  «  own  private
judgment,  whether  he  be  determined  by  reason-
ings and  conclusions  of  his  own,  or  submit  to  be
directed  by  the  advice  of  others,  provided  he  be  free
to  choose  his  guide. «

We -proceed  to  point  out  some  easy  but  imr
portant  inferences,  which  result  from  the  sub-
stitution of  public  expediency  into  the  place  of
all  implied  compacts,  promises,  or  conventions,
/  whatsoever.
•  I.  It  may  be  as  touch  a  duty,  at  one  time,  to
resist  government,  as  it  is,  at  another,  to  obey  it ;
to  wit,  whenever  more  advantage  will,  in  our
opinion,  accrue  to  the  community  from  resist-
ance, than


'  IL'  The  lawfulness  of  resistance, -or  the  law-

fulness of  a  revolt,  does  not  depend  alone  upon
the  grievance  which  is  sustained  or  feared,  but
also  upon  the  probable  expense  and  event  of  the
contest  They  who  concerted  the  Revolution  in
England,  were  justifiable  in  their  counsels,  be-
cause, from  the  apparent  disposition  of  the  nation,
and  tne  strength  and  character  of  the  parties  en-
gaged, the  measure  was  likely  to  be  brought
•bout  with  little  mischief  or  bloodshed ;  whereas
it  might  have  been  a  question  with  many  fivnds
of  their  country,  whether  the  injuries  then  endur-
ed and  threatened  would  have  authorised  the  re-
newal of  a  doubtful  civil  war.

J  HI.  Irregularity  in  the  first  foundation  of  a

state,  or  subsequent  violence,  fraud,  or  injustice,
in  getting  possession  of.  the  supreme  power,  are
not  sufljpient  reasons  for  resistance,  after  the
government  is  once  peaceably  settled.  No  sub-
ject of  the  British  empire  conceives  himself  en-
gagedto  vindicate  the  justice  of  the  Norman  claim
or  conquest,  or  apprehends  that  his  duty  in  any
manner  depends  upon  that  controversy.  So,
likewise,  if  the  house  of  Lancaster,  or  even  the
posterity  of  Cromwell,  had  been  at  this  day  seat-
ed upon  the  throne  of  England,  we  should  have
been  as  little  concerned  to  inquire  how  the  found-
er of  the  family  came  there.  No  civil  contests
are  so  futile,  although  none  Have  been  so  furious
and  sanguinary,  as  those  which  are  excited  by  a


Not  every  invasion  of  the  subject's  rights,
or  liberty,  or  of  tne  constitution ;  not  every  breach
of  promise,  or  of  oath ;  not  every  stretch  of  pre-
rogative, abuse  of  power,  or  neglect  of  duty  by
the  chief  magistrate^  or  by  the  whole  or  any
branch  of  the  legislative  body,  justifies  resistance,
unless  these  crimes  draw  after  them  public  con-
sequences of  sufficient  magnitude  to  outweigh  the
evus  of  civil  disturbance.  Nevertheless,  every
violation  of  the  constitution  ought  to  be  watched
with  jealousy,  and  resented  as  such,  beyond
what  the  quantity  of  estimable  damage  would  re-
quire or  warrant  j  because  a  xnown  and  settled
usage  of  governing  affords  the  only  security
against  the  enormities  of  uncontrolled  dominion,
and  because  this  serurity  is  weakened  by  every
encroachment  which  is  made  without  opposition,
or  opposed  without  affect.

V.  No  usage,  law,  or  authority  whatsoever,
is  so  binding,  that  it  need  or  ought  to  be  con-
tinued, when  it  may  be  changed  with  advantage  .


to  the  community.  The  family  of  the  prince,  too
order  ot*  succession,  the  prerogative  of  the  crown,
the  form  and  parts  of  the  legislature,  together
with  the  respective  powers,  office,  duration,  and
mutual  dependency,  of  t^c  several  parts,  are  all
only  so  many  laics,  mutable  like  other  laws,
whenever  expediency  requires,  either  by  the  ordi-
nal" act  of  tne  legislature,  or,  if  the  occasion  de-
serve it,  by  the  interposition  of  -the  people.
These  points  are  wont  to  be  approached  with  m
kind  of  awe ;  they  are  represented  to  the  mind  as
principles  of  the  constitution  settled  by  our  ances-
tors, and,  being  settled, « to  be  no  more  committed
to  innovation  and  debate;  as  foundations  never  to>
be  stirred ;  as  the  terms  and  conditions  of  the  so-
cial compact,  to  which  every  citizen  of  the  state
has  engaged  his  fidelity,  by  virtue  of  a  promise
which  he  cannot  now  recall.  Such  reasons  have
no  place  in  our  system :  to  us,  if  there  be  any.
good  reason  for  treating  these  with  more  defer-
ence and  respect  than  other  laws,  it  is  either  the
advantage  of  the  present  constitution  of  govern-
ment (which  reason  must  be  of  different  force  in
different  countries,)  or  because  in  all  countries  it
is  of  importance  that  the  form  and  usage  of  gov-
erning be  acknowledged  and  understood,  as  well
by  the  governors  as  by  the  governed,  and  because,
the  seldomer  it  is  changed,  the  more  perfectly  it
wiH  be  known  by  both  sides,

VI.  As  all  civil  obligation  ie  resolved  into  ex-
pediency, what,  it  may  be  asked,  is  the  difference
between  the  obligation  of  an  Englishman  and  a
Frenchman  1  or  why,  since  the.  obligation  of  both
appears  to  be  founded  in  the  same  reason,  is  a
Frenchman  bound  in  conscience  to  bear  any
thing  from  his  king,  which  an  Englishman  would
not  be  bound  to  bear  1  -Their  conditions  may
differ,  but  their  rights,  according  to  account,
should  seem  to  be -equal :  and  yet  we  are  accus-
tomed to  speak  of  the  rights,  as  well  as  of  the
happiness  of  a  free  people,  compared  with  what
belong  to  the  subjects  of  absolute  monarchies ;
how,  you  will  say,  can  tins  comparison  be  ex-
plained, unless  we  refer  to  a  difference  in  the
compacts  by  which  they  are  respectively  bound  1
— This  is  a  fair  question,  and  the  answer  to  it
will  afford  a  farther  illustration  of  our  principles.
We  admit  then  that  there  are  many  things  which
a  Frenchman  is  bound  in'  conscience,  as  well  as
by  coercion,  to  endure  at  the  hands  of  his  prince,
to  which  an  Englishman  would  not  be  obliged  to
submit:  but  we  assert,  that  it  is  for  these  two  rea-
sons alone :  first,  because  the  same  act  of  the
prince  is  not  the  same  grievance,  where  it  is
agreeable  to  the  constitution,  and  where  it  in-
fringes it;  secondly,  because  redress  in  the  two
'cases  is  not  equally  attainable.  Resistance  cannot
be  attempted  with  equal  hopes  of  success,  or  with
the  same  prospect  of  receiving  support  from
others,  where  tne  people  are  reconciled  to  their
suficrings,  as  where  they  are  alarmed  by  In-
novation. In  this  way,  and  no  otherwise,  the
subjects  of  different  states  possess  different  civil
rights ;  the  duty  of  obedience  is  defined  by  differ-
ent boundaries ;  and  the  point  of  justifiable  resist-
ance placed  at  different  parts  of  the  scale  of  suf-
fering ;  all  which  is  sufficiently  intelligible  with-
out a  social  compact.

VII.  "  The  interest  of  the  whole  society  Is
binding  upon  every  part  of  it.  No  rule,  short  of
this, .  will  provide  for  th&  stability  of  civil  govern-
ment, or  for  the  peace  and  safety,  of  social  life.


DUTY  OP  CIVIL  OBEDIENCE.


Wherefore,  as  Individual  member*  of  the  stele
we  not  permitted  to  pursue  their  emolument  Co
the  prejudice  of  the  community,  so  is  it  equally
a  consequence  of  this  rule,  that  no  particular  co-
lony, province,  town,  or  district,  can  justly  concert
measures  for  their  separate  interest,  which  shall
appear  at  the  same  tune  to  diminish  the  *vto  of
prosperity.  1  do  not  mean,  that  it  is  necessary  to
the  justice  of  a  measure,  that  it  profit  each  and
every  part  of  the  community,  (for,  as  the  happi-
i  of  the  whole  may  be  increased,  whilst  that  of
,  it  is  possible  that,  the


conduct  of  one  part  of  an  empire  may  be  detri-
mental to  some  other  part,  and  yet  just,  provided
?  one  part  gain  more  in  happiness  than  the  other
*  [  part  loses,  so  that  the  common  weal  be  augment-
i  j  ed  by  the.  change ;)  but  what  I  affirm  is,  that  those
\\  counsels  can  never  be  reconciled  with  the  obli/ra-
;j  tioos  resulting  from  civil  union,  which  cause  the
~>  whole  happiness  of  the  society  to  be  impaired  for
\  the  conveniency  of  a  part. This  conclusion  is
1  applicable  to  the  question  of  right  between  Great
Britain  and  her  revolted  colonies.  'Had  I  been
an  American,  1  should  not  have  thought  ifcnough
to  have  had  it  even  demonstrated,,  that  a  separa-
tion from  the  parent  state  would  produce  effects
beneficial  to  America ;  my  relation  to  that  state
imposed  upon  me  a  further inquiry,  namely,
whether  the  whole  happiness  of  the  empire  was
likely  to  be  promoted  by  such  a  measure:  not  in-
deed the  happiness  of  every  part ;  that  was  not
necessary,  npr  to  be  expected-;  but  whether  what
Great  Britian  would  lose  by  the  separation,  was
likely  to  be  compensated  to  the  joint  stock  of  hap-
,  by  the  advantages  which  America  would
i  from  it. The  contested  claims  of  sove-


reign states  and  their  remote  dependencies,  may  be
submitted  to  the  adjudication  of  this  rule  with
mutual  safety.  'A  public  advantage  is  measured
by  the  advantage,  which  each  individual  receives,
and  by  the  number  of  those  who  receive  it.  A
public  evil  is  compounded  of  the*  same  proportions,
whilst,  therefore,  a  colony  is  smaller  a  province
thinly  inhabited,  if  a  competition  of  interests  arises
between  the  original  country  and  their  acquired
the  former ought  to  be  preferred ;


s  it  is  fit  that,  if  one  must  necessarily  be
sacrificed,  the  less  give  place  to  the  greater ;  but
when,  by  an  increase  of  population,  the  interest
of  the  provinces  begins  to  bear  a  considerable  pro-
portion to  the  entire  interest  of  the  community,  it
is  possible  that  they- may  suffer  so  much  by  their
subjection,  that  not  only  theirs,,  but  the  woole
of  the  empire,  may  be  obstructed  by
ml The  rule  and  principle  of  the  cal-

t  being  still  the  same,  the  result  is  differ-
ent :  and  this  difference  begets  a  new  situation,
which  entitles  the  subordinate  parts  of  the  states
to  more  equal  terms  of  confederation,  and  if  these
be  irfusnu,  to  independency.


CHAPTER  IV.

T%e  Duty  qf  Civil  Qbedience,  as  stated  in' the
Christian  Scriptures^

We  affirm  that,  as  to  the  extent  of  our  civil
rights  and  obligations.  Christianity  hatMeft  us
where  ahe  found  us ;  that  she  hath  neither  altered
it  nor  ascertained  it ;  thai  the  New  Testament  con-
tame  not  one  passage,  which,  fairly  interpreted,


lift


aflbrds  either  argument  or  objection  appfcable  to
any  conclusions  upon  the  subject,  that  are  de-
duced from  the  law  and  religion  of  nature.

The  only  passages  which  have  been  seriously
alleged  in  the  controversy,,  or  which  it  is  neces-
sary for  us  to  state  and  examine,  are  the  two  fol-
lowing ;  the  one  extracted  from  St.  Paul's  Epistle
to  the  Romans,  the  other  from  the  First  General
Epistle  of  St  Peter:—

Romans  xiii.  1—7.

"  Let  every  soul  he  subject  unto  the  higher
powers:  for  there  is  no  power  but  of  God:  the
powers  that  be,  are;  ordained  of  God.  Who-
soever therefore  resisteth  the  power,  ressrtetfe  th*
ordinance  of  God;  and  they  that  resist,  shall  re-
ceive to  themselves  damnation.  For  rulers  are
not  a  terror  to  good  works,  but  to  the  evil.  Wilt
thou  then  not  be  afraid  of  the  power  1  Do  that
which  is  good,  and  thou  shalt  have  praise  of  the
same;  for  he  is  the  minister  of  God  to  thee  for
good.  But  if  you  do  that  which  is  evil,  be  afraid ;
tor  he  beareth  not  the  sword  in  vain :  for  he  is  the  ~
minister  of  God,  a  revenger  to  execute  wrath  •
upon  him  that  doeth  evil.  Wherefore  ye  must
needs  be  subject,  not  only  for  wrath,  out  also
for  conscience'  sake.  For,  for  this  cause  pay  ye
tribute  also ;  for  they  are  God's  ministers,  attending
continually  upon  this  very  thing.  Render  there-
fore to  all  their  dues;  tribute  to  whom  tribute  is
due,  custom  to  whom  custom,  fear  to  whom  fear,
honour  to  whom  honour:"

1  Peter  ii.  .13—18.

"  Submit  yourselves  to  every  ordinance  of  man,
for  the  Lord's  sake ;  whether  it  be  to  the  king,  as
supreme;  or  unto  governors,  as.  unto  them  that
are  sent  by  him  for  the  punishment  of  evil-doers,
and  for  the  praise  of  them  that  do  well.-  For  so
is  the  will  of  God,  that,  with  well-doing  ye  may
put  to  silence  the  ignorance  of  foolish  men :  se
free,  and  not  .using  your  liberty  for  a  cloak  of  ma-
liciousness, but  as  the  servants  of  God."

To  comprehend  the  proper  import  of  these  in-
structions, let  the  reader  reflect,  mat  upon  the
subject  of  civil  obedience  there'  are  two  questions :
the  first,  whether  to  obey  government  be  a  moral
duty  and  obligation  upon  the  conscience  at  all ;
-the  second,  how  for,  and  to  what  cases,  that  obe-
dience ought  to  extend  1  that  these  two  questions
are  so  distinguishable '  in  the  imagination,  that  it
is  possible  to  treat  of  the  one,  without  any  thought
of  the  other. ;  and  lastly,  that  if  expressions  which
relate  to  one  of  these  questions  be  transferred  and
applied  to  the  other,  it  is  with  great  danger  of
giving  them  a  signification  very  different  from  the
author's,  meaning.  This  distinction  is  not  only
possible,  but  natural.  If  I  met  with  a  person  who
appeared  to  entertain  doubts,  whether  civil  obe-
dience were  a  moral  duty  which  ought  to  be  vo-
luntarily discharged,  or  whether  it  were  not  a
mere  submission  to  force,  like  that  which  we
yield  to  a  robber  who  holds  a'  pistol  to  our  breast.
I  should  represent  to  him  the  use  and  offices  of
civil  government,  the  end  and  the  necessity  of
civil  subjection ;  or,  if  I  preferred  a  different  theory,
I  should  explain  to  him  the  social  compact,  urge
him  with  the  obligation -and  the  equity  of  his  im-
plied promise  ana  tacit  consent  to  be  governed  by
the  laws  of  the  state  from  which  he  received  pro-
jection ;  or  I  should  argue,  perhaps,  that  Nature
herself  dictate*  |he  law  of  subordination,  when


116


MORAL  AND  POLITICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


f


she  planted  within  os^nJiyKiMirion  to  associate
with,  oar  specie*,  and  framed  us  with  rapacities
so  various  arid  unequal.  From  whatever  prin-
ciple- I  set  out,  I  should  labour  to  infer  from  it
this  conclusion,  "  That  obedience  to  the  state  is
to  be  numbered  among  the  relative  duties  of  hu-
man life,  for  the  transgression  of  which  we  shall
be'  accountable  at  the  tribunal  of  Diwne  justice,
whether  the  magistrate  be  able  to  punish  us  for
it  or  not;"  and  .being  arrived  at  this  conclusion,  I
should  stop,  having  delivered  tad  conclusion  itself,
and  throughout  the  Whole  argument  expressed  the
obedience,  which  I  inculcated,  in  the  most  general,
and  unqualified  terms :  all  reservations  and  re-
strictions being  surjcrfruous,  and  foreign  to  the
doubt  I  was  employed*  to  remove.

If,  in  a  short  time  afterwards,  }  should  be  ac-
costed by  the  same  person,  with  complaints  of
^public  -grievances,  of  exorbitant  taxes;  of  acts  of
cruelty  and  oppression,  of  tyrannical  encroach-
ments upon  the  ancient  or  stipulated  rights  of  the
people,  and- should  he  consulted  whether  it  were
lawful- to  revolt,  or  justifiable  to  join  in  an  attempt
to  shake  off  the  yoke  by  open  resistance ;  I  should
certainly  consider  myself  as  having  a  case  and
[uestibn  before  me  very  different  from  the  former,
should  now  define  and  di^riminate.  I  should
reply,  thafif  public  expediency  be  the  foundation,
it  is  also  the  measure,  of  civil  obedience :  that  the
obligation  of  subjects  and  sovereigns  is  recipro-
cal ;  that  the  duty  of  allegiance,  whether  it  be
founded  in  utility  or  compact,  is^neither  unlimited
nor  unconditional ;  that  peace  may  be  purchased
too  dearly ;  that  patience  becomes  culpable  pusil-
lanimity, when  it  serves-  only  to  encourage  our
rulers  to  increase  the  weight  of  our  burthen,  or  to
bind  it  the  faster;  that  the  submission  which  sur-
renders the  liberty  of  a  nation,  and  entails  slavery
upon  future  generations,  is  enjoined  by  no  law  of
rational  morality ;  finally,  I  should  instruct  the
inquirer  to  compare  the  peril  and  expense  of  his
enterprise  with  the  effects  it  was  expected  to  pro-
duce, and  to  make  choice  of  the  alternative  by
vfhiclrnot  his  own  present  relief  or  profit,  but  the
whole  and  permanent  interest  of  the  state,  was
likely  to  bo  Met  promoted.  •  If  any  one- who  had
been  present  at  both  these  conversations  should
upbraid  me  with  change  or  inconsistency  of
opinion,  should  retort  upon  me  the  passive  doc;
.trine  which  I  before  taught,  the  large  and  ab^
aolute  terms  in  which  I  then  delivered  lessons  of
obedience  and  submission.  I  should  account  my-
self un&iriy  dealt  with..  I  should  reply,  that  the
only  difference  which  the  language  of  the  two
conversations  presented  was,  that  I  added  now
many  exceptions  and  limitations,  which  were
omitted  or  unthought  of  then :  thaUhis  difference
arose  naturally  from  the  two  occasions,-  such  ex-
ceptions being  as  necessary  to  the  subject  of  our
present  conference,  as  they  would  have  been  su-
perfluous and  unseasonable  in  the  former.

Now  the  difference  in  these,  two  conversations
is  precisely  the  distinction  to  be  taken  in  inter-
preting those  passages  of  Scripture,  concerning
which  we  are  debating. .  They  inculcate  the  duty,
they  do  not  describe  the  extent  of  it  They  en-
force the  obligation  by  the  proper  sanctions  of
Christianity,  without  intending  either  to  enlarge
or  contract,  without  considering,  indeed,  the  limits
by  which  it  is  bounded.  This  is  also  the  method
in  which  the  same  apostles  enjoin  the  duty  of  ser-
vants to  their  masters,  of  children  to  their  parents;


of  wrres  to  their  husbands:  u  Servants,  be  subject
to  your  masters." — "  Children,  obey  your  parents
in  all  things.'- — "  Wives,  submit  yourselves  unto
your- own  husbands."  The  same  concise  and
absolute  form  of  expression  occurs  in  all  these
precepts ;  the  same  silence  as  to  any  exceptions
or  distinctions:  yet  no  one  doubts  that  the  com-
mands oPrnasters,  parents,  and  husbands,  are
often  so.  immoderate,  unjust,  and  inconsistent
with  other  obligations,  that  they  both  may  and
ought  to  be  resisted.  In  letters  or  dissertations)
written  professedly'  upon  separate  articles  of  mo-
rality, we  might  with  more  reason  have  looked  for
a  precise  delineation  of  our  duty,'  and  some  degree
of  modern  accuracy  in  the  rules  which  were  laid
down  for  our  direction :  but  in  those  short  collec-
tions of  practical  maiims  which  compose  the  con-
clusion, or  some  small  portion;  of  a  doctrinal  or
perhaps  controversial  epistle,  we  cannot  be  sur-
prised to  find  the  author  more  solicitous  to  impress
the  duty,-  than  curious  to  enumerate  exceptions.
The  consideration  of  this  distinction  —  -■- —


sufficient  to  vindicate  these  passages  of  Scripture
from  any  explanation  which  may  be  put  upon
them,  in  favour  of  an  unlimited  passive  obedience.
But  if  we  be  permitted  to  -assume  a  suppositioa
which  many  commentators  proceed  upon  as  a
certainty,  that  the  first  Christians  privately  che-
rished an  opinion,  that  their  conversion  to  Chris-
tianity entitled  them  to  new  immunities,  to  an
exemption  as  of  right  (however  they  might  give
way  to  necessity,)  from  the  authority  of  the  Ro-
man sovereign;  we  are  furnished  with  a  sol]
more  apt  and  satisfactory  interpretation  of  the
apostles'  words.  The  two  passages  apply  with
great  propriety  to  the  refutation  of  this  error:
they  teach  the  Christian  convert  to  obey  the  ma-
gistrate "for  the  Lord's  sake;"—"  not  only;  for
wrath,  but  for  conscience' sake;"--"that  there  is  no
power  but  of  God  ;u— "  that  the  powers  that  be/*
even  the  present  rulers,  of  the  Roman  empire,
though  heathens  and  usurpers,  seeing.they  are  in
possession  of  the  actual  and  necessary  authority
of  civfl  government,  "  are  ordained  of  God ;"  and,
consequently,  entitled  to  receive  obedience  from
those  who  profess  themselves  the  peculiar  ser-
vants of  God,  in  a  greater  (certainly  not  in  a  less)
degree  than  from  any  others.  They  briefly  de-
scribe the  office  of  "civil  governors,  the  punish-
ment of  evil-doers,  and  the  praise  of  them  that  do
well ;"  from- which  description  of  the  use  of  govern-
ment they  justly  infer  the  duty  of  subjection?
which  duty,  being  as  extensive  as  the  reason  upon
which  it  is  founded,  belongs  to  Christians,  no  lea*
than  to  the  heathen  members,  of  the  community.
If  it  be  admitted,  that  the  two  apostles  wrote  with
a  view  to  this  particular  question,  it  will  be  con-
fessed, that  their  wofds  cannot  be  transferred  to  a
question  totally  different  from  this,  with  any  cer-
tainty of  carrying  along  with  us  their  authority
and  intention.  There  exists  no  resemblance  be-
tween the  case  of  a  primitive  convert,  who  dis-
puted the  jurisdiction  of  the  Roman  government
over  a  disciple  of  Christianity,  and  kts  who,  ac-
knowledging the  general,  authority  of  the  state
over  all  its  subjects,  doubts  whether  that  authority
be  not,  in  •some  important  branch  of  it,  so  ill  con-
stituted or  abusedj  as  to  warrant  die  endeavours
of  the  people  to  bring  about  a  reformation  by  force.
Nor  .can  we  judge  what  reply  the  apostles  would
have  made  to  this  second  question  if  it  had  been
proposed  to  them/from  any  thing  they  have  ds-


OF  CIVIL  LIBERTY.


117


fivered  mwathejfrtf  j  anyMDore  than,  in  the  two
consultations  above  described,  it  could  be  known
beforehand  what  I  would  say  in>  the  latter,  from
the  answer  which  I  gave  the  former.  •

The  only  defect  to  this  account  is,t|pt  neither
ton  Sainton*}  nor  "V  ««hsequent  history  "of  the
early  ages  of  the  Church,  furnish  any  direct  at-
.  testohon  of  the  existence  of  such  disaffected  sen-
timents amongst  the  primitive  converts.  They
supply  indeed  some  circumstance*  which  render,
probable  the  opinion,  that  extravt£ant>netions  of
die  potties!  rights  of  the  Christian  slate  were  at
that  tune  entertained  by  many  proselytes  to  the  re-

-Prom  the  question  proposed  unto  Christ,

i  it  lawful  to  five  tribute  to  Csjser  1"  it  may  be
presumed  that  doubts  had  been  started  in  the
Jewish  schools  concerning  the  obligation,  or  even
the  lawfulness;  of  submission  to  the  Roman  yoke.
The  account*  delivered  by  Jostphus,  of  various
ntssnreetkms  of  the  Jews  of  that  and  the  following
age,'  excited  by  this  principle,  or  upon  this  pre-
tence, confirm  the  presumption.  Now,  as  the
Christians  were  at  nmt  chiefly  taken  from  the
Jews,  confounded  -with  tbem  hy  the  rest  of  the
world,  and,  from  the  affinity  of  the  two  religions,
apt  to  intermix  the  doctrines  of  both,  it  is  not  to
be  wondered  at,  that  a  tenet,  so  flattering  to  the
se&unportanee  at  those  who  embraced  it,  should
have  been  communicated  to  the  new  institution.
Again,  the  teachers  of  Christianity,  amongst  the
privileges  which  their  religion  conferred  upon  hs
umfessars,  were  wont'  to  extol  the  "  liberty  into
winch  they  were  called,"— "in  which  Christ  had
made  them  free."  This  liberty,  which'  was  in-
tended of  a  deliverance  from  the  various  servitude,
in  which  they  had  heretofore  lived,  to  the  domina-
tion of  sinful  passions,  to  the'  superstition  of  the
Gentile  idolatry,  or  the  encumbered  ritual  of  the
Jewish  dispensation,  might  by  some  be  interpreted
tp  signify  an  eniancipatiori  from  all  restraint  which
was  imposed  by  an  authority  merely  human.  At
least,  they  might  be  represented  by  their
M  jnaintaimng  notions  of  tins  dangerous  fc
To  seme  error  or  calumny  of  this  kind,  the
of  8t  Peter  seem  to  allude;--'' For  so  is  the  will
ef  God,  that  with  well-doing  ye  may  not  to  silence
the  ignorance  of  fbohsh  men :  as  free,  and  not
using  your  liberty  for  a  cloak  of  maliciousness  (i.  e.
seoW^)  but  as  the  servants  of  God."  After  all,  if
any  one  think  this  conjecture  too  feebly  supported
by  testimony,  to  beretied  uponln  the  interpretation
of  Scripture,  he  will  then  revert  to  the  consider-
eftktns  alleged  in  the  preceding  part  of  this  chapter.
Alter  so  copious  an  account  of  what  we  appre-
hend to  be  the  general  design  and  doctrine  of
these  much-agitated  passages,  little  need  be  added
an  explanation  of  particular  clauses.  St  Paul
sad,  "  Whosoever  resisteth  the  power,  re-
~i  the  ordinance  of  God."  This  phrase,  "the
i  of  God,"  is  by  many  so  interpreted  as


to  authorise  the  most  exalted  and  superstitious
ideas  of  the  regal  character.  But  surely,  such
interpreters  have  sacrificed  troth  to  adulation.  For,
in  the  first  place,  the  expression,  as  used  by
Bt  Paul,  is  just  as  applicable  to  one  kind  of
government,  and  to  one  kind  of  succession,  as  to
another;— to  the  elective  magistrates  of  a  pure'
ispiib&^astoanabsohiteliereaWyinonarch.  In
the  next  place,  it  is  not  affirmed  of  .the  supreme
ftrate  exclusively,  that  he  is  the  ordinance  of
the  title,  whatever  it  imports,  belongs  to
rolficerofthestatoesmuchastathe


highest.  The  divine  right ' of  K»^». is,  Ike  the
divine  right  of  other  ibagistrates,— the  law  of  the
land,  or  even  actual  and  quiet  possession  4>f  their
office  ;-r-a  right  ratified,  we  humbly  presume,  by
the  divine  approbation,  so  long  as  obedience  to
their  authority  appears  to  be  necessary  or  condu-
cive to  the  common  welfare.  Princes  are  ordain-
ed of  God  by  virtue  only  of  that  general  decree
by  which  he  assents,  and  adds  the  sanction  W  his
.will,  to  every  law  of  society  which  promotes  hie
own  purpose,  the  communication  of  human  hap-
piness; according  to  which  idea' of  their  origm
and  constitution  (and  without  any  repugnancy  to
the  words  of  St.  Paul,)  they  am  by  St/Peter  ue»  '
nominated  the  ordinance  of  man.


CHAPTER  V.

. Of  Civil  Liberty.

Citil  Liberty  -to  the  not  being  restrained  by
any  law,  but  what  conduces  in  a  gteater  -degree
to  the  public  welfare.  J  •

To  do  what. we  will,  is  natural  liberty:  to  dbS
what  we  will,  consistently  with  the  interest  of  the  '
community  to  which  we  belong^w  civil  liberty;
that  is  to  say,  the  only  liberty  to  be  desised  in  a
state. of  civil  society.

I  should  wish,  no  doubt,  to  be  allowed  to  act  in
every  instance  as  I  pleased,  but  I  reflect  that  the
rest  also  of ,  mankind  would  then  do  the  same ;  in
which  state  of  universal  independence  and  sel£*
direction,  I  should  meet  with  so  many  checks  and
obstacles  to  my  own  will,  from  the  interference  and
opposition  of  other-men's,  that  not  only  my  hap-
piness, but  my  liberty,  would  be  less,  than  whilst
the  whole  community  were  subject  to  the  domi-  •
■ion  of  equal  laws.

The  boasted  liberty  of.  a  state  of  nature  exists  i
only  in  a  state  of  solitude.  In  every  kind  and  de-
gree of  union  and  intercourse  with  bis  enecies,  it
is  possible  that  the  liberty  of  the  individual  may
be  augmented  by  the  very  laws  which  restrain  it  j
because  he  may  gain  more  from  the  limitation  or
other  men's  freedom  than  he  suffers  by  the  dimi-
nution of  his  own.  Natural  liberty  is  the  right
of  common  upon  a  waste ;  civil  liberty  is  the  safe.
exclusive,  unmolested  enjoyment  ef  a  cultivated  .
enclosure.

Thedefinhion  of  civil  libertyelxwelaiddown,  im-
ports that  the  laws  of  a  free  people  impose  no  re*
straints  upon  the  private  will  of  the  subject,  which
do  not  conduce  in  a  greater  degree  to  the  public
happiness ;  by  which  it  is  intimated.  1st,  that  re*
straint  itself  is  an  evil;  Sdly,  that  tms  evil  ought  to
he  overbalanced  by  some  pnbhc  advantage ;  Sdly,
that  the  proof  of  this  advantage  lies  upon  the  le-
gislature; 4thly,  that  a  law  being  found  to  pro-
duce no  sensible  good  effects,  is  a  sufficient  i


for  repealing  it,  as  adverse  and  injurious'  to  the
rights  of  a  See  citizen,  without  demanding  spa*
ctfie  evidence  of  its  bad  effects.  This  maxim
might  be  remembered  with  advantage  in  arevision
of  many  laws  of  this,  country ;  especially  of  the
game-laws;  of  the  poor-laws,  so  far  as  they  lay
restrictions  upon  the  poor  themselves ;  of  the  laws
against  Papists  and  Dissenters:  and,  amongst
people  enamoured  to  excess  and  jealous  of  their
liberty,  it  seems  a  matter  of  surprise  that  this
Tirinciple  has  been  so  imperfectly  attended  to.
The  degree  of  actual  Kberty  always  bearing,


118


MORAL  AND  POLITICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


according  Co  thai  account  of  it,  a  iwemd  propor-
tion to  tne  number  and  severity  of  the  restriction*
which  are*  either  useless,  or  1ae  utility  of  which
does  netoutweigh  the  evil  of  the  restraint,  it  fol-
low*, thabevery  nation  possesses  some,  no  nation
perfect,  liberty:  that  this  liberty  may  De  enjoyed
under  every  form  of  government:  that  it  may  be
impaired  indeed,  or  increased,  but  that  it  is  neither
gained,  nor  lost,  nor  recovered,  by  any  single  re-
gulation, change,  or  event  whatever :  that  conse-
gueatry,  those  popular  phrases  which  speak  of  a
nee  people;  of  a  nation  of  slayes;  which  call  one
revolution  the  »ra  of  liberty,  or  another  the  loss
of  it ;  with  many  expressions  of  a* like  absolute
form ;  are  intelligible  only  ii*a  comparative  sense.
Hence  also  we  are  enabled  to  apprehend  the
distinction  between  pergonal  and  civil  liberty.
A  citizen  of  the^  freest  republic  in  the  world  may
be  imprisoned  for  his  crimes ;  and  thoug h  his  per-
sonal  freedom  be  restrained  by  bolts  and  fetters,  so
long  as  his  confinement  is  the  effect  of  a  benefi-
cial public  law,  his  civil  liberty  is  not  invaded.  If
this  instance  appear  dubious,  the  following  will  be
plainer.  A  passenger  from  the  Levant,  who.  upon
nis  return  to  England,  should  be  conveyed  to  a
lazaretto  by  an  order  of 'quarantine,  with  what-
ever impatience  he  might  desire  his  enlargement,
and  though  he  saw  a  guard  placed  at  the  door  "to
oppose  his  escape,  or  even  ready  to  destroy  his
life  if  he  attempted  it,  would  hardly  accuse  govern-
ment of  entroaching  upon  his  civil  freedom ;  nay,
might,  perhaps,  be  all  the  while  congratulating
himself  that  he  had  at  length  set  his  foot  again  in
a  land  of  liberty.  The  manifest  expediency  of
the  measure  not  only  justifies  it,  but  reconciles  the
most  odious  confinement  with  the  perfect  pos-
session, and  the  loftiest  notions,  of  civil  liberty.
And  if  this  be  true  of  the  coercion  of  a  prison,
that  it  is' compatible  with  a  state  of  civil  freedom,
it  cannot  with  reason  be  disputed  of  those  more  mo-
derate constraints  which  the  ordinary  operation  of
government  imposes  upon  the  will  of  the  individual.
It  is  not  the  rigour,  but  the  inexpediency  of  laws
and  acts  of  authority ,  which  makes  them  tyrannical.
These  is  another  idea  of  civil  liberty,  which,
'  though  neither  so  simple  nor  so  'accurate  as  the
former,  agrees  better  with  the  signification,  which
the  usage  of  common  discourse,  as  well  as  the  ex-
ample of  many  respectable  writers  upon  the  sub-
fehas  affixed  to  the  term.  This  idea  places
y  in  security ;  making  it  ,to  consist  not  merely
in  an  actual  exemption  pom  the  constraint,  of
useless  and  noxious  Iswb  and  acta  of  dominion,
but  in  being  free  from  the  danger  of  having  such
hereafter  imposed  or  exercised.  Thus,  speaking
of  the  political  state  of  modern  Europe,  we  are,
accustomed  to  say  of  Sweden,  that  she  hath  lost
her  Hberty  by  the  revolution  which  lately  took
place  in  that  country ;  and  yet  we  are  assured  that
the  people  continue  to  be  governed  by  the  same
lawB  <as  before,  or  by  others  which  axe  wiser,
milder,  and  more  equitable.  What  then  have
they  lost  1  They  have  lost  the  power  and  func-
tions of  their  diet;  the  constitution  of  their  states
and  orders,  whose  deliberations  and  concurrence
were  required  in  the  formation  and  establishment
of  every  public  law;  and  thereby  have  parted
with  the  security  which  they  possessed  against
any  attempts  of  the  crown  to  harass  its  subjects,
by  oppressive  and  useless  exertions  of  prerogative.
The  iossof  this  security  wedenominate  the  toss  of
hberty. They  ham  changed,  net  their  laws,  but


their  legislature.;  not  their  enjoyment,  but  their
safety ;  not  their  present  burthens,  but  their  pros-
pects of  future  grievances ;  and  this  we  pronounce
a  change  from  the  condition  of  freemen  to  that
of  slaves.  In  like  manner,  in  our  own  country,  the
act  of  parliament,  in  the  reign  of  Henry'  the
Eighth,  which  gave  to  the  king'*  proclamation,
the  force  of  law,  has  properly  been  called  a  com-
plete and  formal  surrender  of  the  liberty  of  the
nation;  and  would  have  been  so,  although  no
proclamation  were  issued  in  pursuance  of  these
new  powers,  or  none  but  what  was  recommended
by. the  highest  wisdom  and  utility.  The  security
was  gone.  Were  it  probable  that  the  welfare
and  accommodation  of  the  people  would  beas  stu-
diously, and  as  providently,  consulted  in  the  edict*
of  a  despotic  pnnce,  as  by  the  resolutions  of  a
popular  assembly,  then  would  an  absolute  forn\of
government  be  no  toss  free  than  the  purest  demo-
cracy. Tip  different  degree  of  care  and  know-
ledge of  the  public  interest,  which  may  reasonably
be  expected  from  the  different  form  and  composi-
tion of  the  legislature,  constitutes  the  distinction,
in  respect  of  liberty,  as  well  between  these  two
extremes,  as  between  all  the  intermediate  modifi-
cations of  civil  government.

The  definitions  which  have  been  framed  of  civil
liberty,  and  which  have  become  the  subject  of
much  unnecessary  altercation,  are  most  of  them
adapted  to  this  idea.  Thus  one  political  writer
makes  the  very  essence  of  the  subject's  liberty  to
consist  in  his  being  governed  by  no  laws  but  those
to  which  he  hath  actually  consented ;  another  is
satisfied  with  an  indirect  and  virtual  consent;  an-
other, again,  places  civil  liberty  in  the  separation
of  the  legislativeand  executive  offices  of  govern-
ment ;  another,  in  the  being  governed  by  laip ;
that  is,  by  known,  jpreconstituted.  inflexible  rules,
of  action  and  adjudication;  a  fifth,  in  the  exclu-
sive bright  of  the  people  to  tax  themselves  by  their
own  representatives ;  a  sixth,  in  the  freedom  and
purity  of  ejections  of  representatives;  a  seventh,
in  the  control  which  the  democratic  party  of  the
constitution  .possesses  over  the  military  establish-
ment Concerning  which,  and  some  other  sunn
lar  accounts  of  civil  liberty,  it  may  be  observed,
that  they  all  labour  under  one  inaccuracy,  .vis.
that  they  describe  not  so  much  .liberty  itself,  as  the
safeguards  and  preservatives'  of  liberty:  for  exam-
ple, a  man's  being^  governed  by  no  laws  but  those
to  winch  he  has  given  his  consent,  were  it  practi-
cable, is  no  otherwise  necessary  to  the  enjoyment
of  civil  liberty,  than  as  it  affords  a  probable  eecu- '
rity  against  the  dictation  of  laws  imposing  super-
fluous restrictions  upon  his  private  wilt  This
remark  is  applicable  to  the  rest  The  diversity:
of  these  definitions  will  not  surprise  us,  when,  we
consider  that  there  is  no  contrariety  or  opposition
amongst  them  whatever :  for^  by  now  many  dif-
ferent provisions  and  precautions  civil  liberty  is
fenced  and  protected,  so  many  difTerentaccounts  of
liberty  itself,  all  sufficiently  consistent  with  truth
and  with  each  other,  may,  according  to  tins  mode
of  explaining  the  term,  be  framed  and  adopted.

Truth  cannot  be  offended  by  a  definition,  but
propriety  may.  In  which  view,  those  definitions
of  liberty  ought  to  be  rejected,  which{  by  making
that  essential  to  civil  freedom  which  is  unattain-
able in  experience,  inflame  expectations  that  can
never  be  gratified,  and  disturb  the  public  content
with  complaints,  which  no  wisdom  or  benevolence
of  government  can  remove.


OF  DIFFERENT  FORMS  OF  GOVERNMENT.


119


It  wtR  not  be  thought  extraordinary,  that  an
idea,  which  occurs  ao  much  oftener  as  the  subject
of  panegyric  and  careless  declamation,  than  of  just
reasoning  or  correct  knowledge,  should  be-ettend-s
ed  with  uncertainty  and  confusion ;  or  that  it
should  be  found  impossible  to  contrive  a  definition,
which  may  include  the'  numerous,  unsettled,  and
ever-varying  significations,  which  the  term  is  made
to  stand  for,  and  at  the  same  time  accord  with  the
condition  and  experience  of  social  life. •

Of  the  two  ideas  that  have  been  stated  of  civil
liberty,  whichever  we  assume,  and  whatever  rea-
soning we  found  upon  them,  concerning  its  extent,
nature,  value,  and  preservation,  this  is  the  conclu-
sion;— that' Mot  people,  government,  and  consti-
tution.'is  the  freest,  which  makes  the  best  provi-
sion mr  the  enacting  of  expedient  and  salutary
laws.


CHAPTER  VI.
Qf  different  Forma  of  Government.

As  a  series  of  appeals  must  be  finite,  there  ne-
cessarily exists  in  every  government  a  power  from
which  theconstitatioh has  provided  no  appeal ;  and
which  power,  for  that  reason,  may  be  termed  ab-
sointe,  omnipotent,  uncontrollable,  arbitrary,  des-
potic ;  and  is  alike  so  in  all  countries.

The  person,  or  assembly,  in  whom  this  power
resides,  is  called  the  sovereign,  or  the  supreme
power  of  the  state.

Since  to  the*  same  power  universally  appertains
the  office  of  establishing  public  laws,  it  is  called
also  the  legislature  of  the  state.

A  government  receives  its  agnomination  from
the  form  of  the  legislature ;  which  form  is  likewise
what  we  commonly  mean  by  the  constitution  of  a


Political  writers  enumerate  three  principal
forms  of  government,  which,  however,  are  to  be
regarded  rather  as  the  simple  forms,  by  some  com-
bination and  intermixture. of  which  all  actual  go-
vernments are  composed,  than  as  anywhere  Ex-
isting in  a  pure  and  elementary  state:  These  forms '

L  Despotism,  or  absolute  monarchy,  where  the
lemstatnre  is  in  a  single  person.

Tl.  An  aristocracy,  where  the  legislature  is
in  a  select  assembly,  the  members  of  which  either
fill  up  by  election  the  vacancies  in  their  own  body,
or  succeed  to  their  places  in  it  by  inheritance,  pro-
perty, tenure  of  certain  lands,  or  in  respect  of  some
personal  right,  or  qualification.  ' *

m.  A  republic,  or  democracy,  where  the  pec- '
pte  at  large,  either  collectively  or  by  representation, '
constitute  the  legislature.

The  separate  advantages  of  monarchy,  are,
unity  of  counsel,  activity,  decision,  secrecy,  de-
spatch; the  military  strength  and  energy  which
Result  from  these  qualities  of  government ;  the  ex-
clusion of  popular  and  aristrocratical  contentions;
the  preventing,  by  a  known  rule  of  succession,  of
all  competition  for  the  supreme  power ;  and  there-
by repressing  the  hopes,  intrigues,  and  dangerous
ambition  of  aspiring  citizens.

The  mischiefs,  or  rather  the  dangers,  of  mo-
Xarcbt  are,  tyranny,  expense,  exaction,  military
tarnation :  unnecessary  wars,  waged  to  gratify
the  passions  of  an  individual;  risk  of  the  charac-
ter of  tiMiejgnJDg  prince  j  ignorance,  in  the  go-


vernorsj  of  the  interests  and  aceamnedation  of  the
people,  and  a  consequent  deficiency  of  salutary
regulations ;  want  of  constancy  and  uniformity  in
the  rules  of  government,  and,  proceeding  from
thence,  insecurity  of  person  ana  property.

The  separate  advantage  of  an  aristocracy
consists  in  the  wisdom  which  may  be  expected  from
experience  and  education : — a  permanent  council
naturally  possesses  experience;  and  the  members
who  succeed  to  their  places  in  it.  by  inheritance,
will  probably,  be  trained  and  educated  with*,  view
to  the  stations  which  they  are  destined  by  then-
birth  to  occupy.  "

The  mischiefs  of  an  aristocracy  are,  dissen-
sions in  the  ruling  orders  of  the  state,  which,  from
the  want  of  a  common  superior,  are  liable  to  proceed
to  the  moat  desperate  extremities ;  oppression  of  the
lower  orders  by  the  privileges  of  the  higher,  and  by
laws  partial  to  the  separate  interest  of  the  law-
makers.

The  advantages  of  a  republic  are,  liberty,  or
exemption  from  needless  restrictions;  equal  laws;
regulations  adapted  to  the- wants  and  circumstances
of  the  people;  public  spirit,  frugality,  averseness
to  war;  the  opportunities  which  democratic  as-
semblies afford  to  men  of  every  description,  of  pro-
ducing their  abilities  and  counsels  to  public  obser-
vation, and  the  exciting  thereby,  and  calling  forth
to  the  service  of  the  commonwealth,  the  faculties
of  its' best  citizens.

The  evils  of  a  republic  are/dissension,  tumults,
faction;  the  attempts  of  powerful  citizens  to  pos-
sess themselves  of  the  empire ;  the  confusion,  rage,
and  clamour,  which  are  the  inevitable  consequences
of  assembling  multitudes,  and  of  propounding  ques-
tions of  state  to  the  discussion  of  the  people;  the
delay  and  disclosure  of  public  counsels  and  designs;
and  the  imbecility  of  measures  retarded  by  the  ne-
cessity of  obtaining  the  consent  of  numbers :  lastly,
the  oppression  of  the  provinces  which  are  not  ad-
mitted to  a  participation  in  the  legislative  power.

A  mixed  government  is  composed  by  the  com-
bination of  two  or  more  of  the  simple  forms  of  go-
vernment above  described: — and'  in  whatever  pro-
portion each  form  enters  into  the  constitution  of  a
government,  in  the  same  proportion  may  both  the
advantages  and  evils,  which  we  have  attributed  to
that  form,  be  expected :  that  is,  those  are  the  uses
to  be  maintained  and  cultivated  in  each  part  of  the
constitution,  and  these  are  the  dangers  to  be  pro-
vided against  In  each.  Thus,  if  secrecy,  and  de-
spatch be  truly  enumerated  amongst  the  separate
excellencies  of  regal  government,  then  a  mixed  go-
vernment, which  retains  monarchy  in  one  part  of
its  constitution,  should  be  careful  that  the  other
estates  of  the  empire  do  not,  by  an  officious  and
inquisitive  interference  with  the  executive  func-
tions, which  are,  or  ought  to-  be,  reserved  to  the
administration  of  the  prince,  interpose  delays,  or
divulge  what  it  is  expedient  to  conceal.  '  On  the
other  hand,  if  pTofussm,  exaction,  military  domi-
nation, and  needless  wars,  be  justly  accounted  natu-
ral properties  of  monarchy,  in  its  simple  Unqualified
form;  then  are  these  the  objects  to  which,  in  a
mixed  government,  the  aristrocratic  and  popular
part  of  the  constitution  ought  to  direct  their  vigi-
lance ;  the  dangers  against  which  they  should  raise
and  fortify  their  barriers ;  these  are  departments  of
sovereignty  v  over  which  a  power  ot  inspection
and  control  ought  to  be  deposited  with  the  people.

The  same  observation  may  be  repeated  or  all  the
other  advantages  and  inconveniences  which  have


190


MORAL  AND  POLITICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


b66n  ascribed  to  the  several  ample  tonus  of  gov-
ernment ;  and  affords  a rule  whereby  to  direct  the
coiistruction,  raproveinents,  and-  adntinistimtioh,
■  of  mixed^govenmients--subjected  however  to  this
remark,  ttt^aquatity  sometimes  results  from  the
conjunction  of  two  ample  forms  of  government,
winch  belongs  not  to  the  separate  existence  of
e&fher:  that  corruption,  which  has  no  place  in  an
absolute  monarchy,  and  little  in.  a  pure  republic,
is  tore  to  gain  adrniawon  into  a  constitution  which
divides  the^suBreme  power  between  an  executive
maffistrate  and  a  popular  council.

An  hereditary  Monarchy  is  universally  to  be
preferred  to  an  elective  monarchy.  The  confes-
sfcavof  every  writer  on  the  subject  of  .civil  govern-
ment, the  experience  of  ages,  the  example  of  Po-
knd,  and  of  the  pepal  dominions,  seem  to  place
this  amongst  the  few  indubitable  maxim*  which
the  science  of  politics  admits  of,  A  crown  is  too
splendid  a  prise  to  be  conferred  upon  merit :  the
passions  or  interests  of  the  electors  exclude  all
consideration  of  the  qualities  of  the  competitors.
The.  same  observation,  holds  concerning  the  ap-
pointments to  any  office  which  is  attended  with  a
gnat  share  of  power  or  emolument  Nothing  is
gained  by  a  popular  choice,  worth  the  dissensions,
tumults,  annnterruption  of  regular  industry,  with
which  it  is  inseparably  attended.  Add  to  this,
that  a  king,  who  owes  hie  elevation  to  the  event
of  a  contest,  of  to  any  other  cause  than'  a  fixed
rule  of  succession,  wnl  be  apt  to  regard  one  part
of  his  subjects  as  the  associates  of  iris  fbrtune{  and
the  other  as  conquered  foes.  JJor  should  it  be
ayrgotten,  amongst  the  advantages  of  an  heredi-
tary monarchy,  that,  as  plans  of  national  im-
provement ajid  reform  are  seldom  brought  to  ma-
turity by  the  exertions  of  a  single  reign,  &  nation
cannot  attain  to  the  degreeof  happiness  and  pros-
perity to  which  it  is  capable  of  being  carried,
unless  an  uniformity  of  counsels,  a  consistency
of  public  measures  and  designs,  be  continued
through  a  succession  of  ages.  This  benefit  may
be  expected  with  greater  probability  where  the
supreme  power  descends  m  the  same  race;  and
where  each  prince  succeeds,  in  some  sort;  to  the
aim,  pursuits,  and  disposition  of  his  ancestor,  than
if  the  crown,  at  every  change,  devolve-  upon  a
s^panffer, .  whose  first  care  wul  commonly  be  to
pull  down  what  his  predecessor  had  built  up;
and  to  substitute  systems  of  administration,  which
must,  in  their  turn,  give  way  to  the  more  favour-
ite novelties,  of  the  next  successor.

ABisTOCRACiEs  are  of  two  kinds— First,  where
the  power  of  the  nobility  belongs  to  them  in  their
collective  capacity  alone ;  that  ia,  where,  although
the  government  reside  in  an  assembly  of  the  or-
der, vet  the  members  of  that  assembly  separately
and  mdvidually  possess  no  authority  or  privilege
beyond  the  rest  of  the  community : — this  describes
the  constitution  of  Venice.  Secondly,  where  the
nobles  are  severally  invested  with  great  personal
power  and  immunities,  and  where  the  power  of
the  senate is  little  more  than  the  8ggregat


power  of  the  individuals  who  compose  it :— this  is
the  constitution  pi  Poland.  Of  these  two  forms
of  government,  the  first  is  more  tolerable  than
tile  last;  for,  although  the  members  of  a  senate
* *  *  or  even  all  of  them,  be  profligate

_  i  to  abuse  the  authority  of  their  stations  in
the  prosecution  of  private  designs,  yet,  not  being
all  under  a  temptation  to  the  same  injustice,  not
having  all  the  same  end  to  gain,  it  would  still  be


difficult  to  obtain  the  consent  of  a,  nujorjtY.  to  any
specific  act  of  oppression  which  the  iniquity  of  an
individual  might  prompt  him  to  propose :  or  if  the
will  were  the  sarne^  the  power  is  mere  confined;
one  tyrant,  whether  the  tyranny  reside  in  a  single
person,  or  1  senate,  cannot  exercise  oppression  at
so'  many  places,  at  the. same  time,  as  it  may  be
carried  on  by  the  dominion  of  a  numerous  nobttity
over  their  respective  vassals  and  dependant*.*  Of
all  species  of  domination,  this  is  the  most  odious:
the  freedom  and  satisfaction  of  private  life  are
more  constrained  and  harassed  by  it  than  by  the
most  vexatious  law,  or  even  by  the  lawless  wil
o/  an  arbitrary  monarch,  from  whose  knowledge,
and  from  whose  injustice,  the  greatest  part  of  his
subjects  are  removed  by  their  distance,  or  con-
cealed by  their  obscurity .

Europe  exhibits  more  than  one  modern  example,
where  the  people,  aggrieved  by  the  exactionst  or
provoked  by  the  enormities,  of  their  immediate
superiors,  have  joined  with  the  reigning  prince  in
the  overthrow  of  the  aristocracy,  deliberately  ex-
changing theircondition  for  the  miseries  of  despot-
ism. About  the  middle  oAhe  last  century,  the-
commons  of  Denmark,  weary  of  the  opprtssions
which  they  had  long  suffered  from  the  nofesML
and  exasperated  by  eome  recent  insults,  presented
themselves  at  the  foot  of  the  throne,  with  a  formal
offer  of  their  consent  to  establish  unlimited  do-
minion in  the  king.  The  revolution  in  Sweden,
still  more  lately  brought  about  with  the  acqui-
escence, not  to  say  the  assistance,  tif  the  people,
owed  its  success  to  the  same  cause,  namely,  to  the
prospect  of  deliverance  that  it  afforded  from  the
tyranny  which  their  nobles-  exercised  under  the
old  constitution.  In  England,  the  people  beheld
the  depression  of  the  barons,  under  the  house  of
Tudor,  with  satisfaction,  although  they  saw  the  -
crown  acquiring  thereby  a  power  which  no  hmt»
tations  that  the  constitution  had  then  provided
were  likely  to  confine.  # The  lesson  to  be  drawn
from  such  events,  is  4his :  that  a  mixed  govern*
ment,  which  admits  a  patrician  order  into  tfs  con-
stitution, ought  to  circumscribe  the  personal  pri-
vileges of  the  nobility,  especially  chums  of  here-
ditary jurisdiction  and  local  authority,  with  -a
jealousy  equal  to  the  solicitude  with  which  it
wishes  its  own  preservation :  jbr  nothing  so
alienates  the  minds  of  the  people  from  the  \
ment  under  which  they  live,  by  a  perpetua
of  annoyance  and  inconveniency,  or  so  prepares)
them  for  the  practices  of  an  enterprising  prince  or
a  factious  demagogue,  as  the  abuse  which  almost
always  accompanies  the  existence  of  separate)
immunities.

Amongst  the  inferior,  but  by  no  means  incon-
siderable advantages  of  a  democratic  oonstitur
tion,  or  of  a  constitution  in  which  the  people  par-
take of  the  power  of  legislation,  the  ibUowmg
should  net  be  neglected  :

I.  The  direction  which  At  gives  to  the  educa-


tion, studies,  and  pursuits,  of  the  superior  oitte
of  the  community.  The  share  which  this  has  in
forming  the  public  manners  and  national'charac-
ter,  is  very  unportant  In  countries,  in  which
the  gentry  are  excluded  from  all  concern  in  the
government,  scarcely  any  thing  is  left  which
leads  to  advancement,  but  the  profession  of  arms.
They  who  do  not  addict  themselves  to  this  pro-
fession (and  miserable  must  that  country  be,
which  constant**  employs  the  nulitary  service  of
agree!  propoitkttoianyofder  of  Us  subjechi !)  an*


" OF  DIFFERENT  FORMS  OF  GOVERNMENT.


m


commonly  lost  by  the  mere  want  of  object  and  des-
tination :  that  is,  they  either  fall,  without  reserve,
'  into  the  more  sottish  habits  of  animal  gratification,
or  entirely  devote  themselves  to  the  attainment  of
those  futile  arts  and  decorations  which  compose
.  the  business  and  recommendations  of  a  court :  on
the  other  hand,  where  the  whole,  or  any  effective
portion,  of  civil  power  is  possessed  by  a  popular  as-
sembly, more  serieus  pursuits  will  be  encouraged ;
purer  morals,  and  in  a  more  intellectual  character,
will  engage  the  publie  esteem;  those  faculties
which  qualify  men  for  deliberation  and  debate,
"tod  which  are  the  fruit  of  sober  habits,  of  early
and  Iong-eonftinue4  application  will  be  roused
and  animated  by  the  reward  which,  of  all  others,
-most  readily  awakens  the  ambition  of  the  human
mind — political  dignity  and  importance.

II.  Popular  elections  procure  to  the  common
people  courtesy  from  their  superiors.  That  con-
temptuous ana  overbearmg  insolence,  with  which
the  lower  orders  of  the  community,  are  wont  to  be
treated  by  the  higher,  is  greatly  mitigated  where
the  people  have  something  to  give,  The  assi-
duity with  which  their  favour  is  sought  upon
these  occasions,  serves  to  generate  settled  habits
<tf  condescension  and  respect;  and  as  human  life
is  more  embittered  by  affronts  than  injuries,  what-
ever contributes  to  procure  mildness. and  civi-
lity of  manners  towards  those  who  are  most'  liable
to  suffer  from  a  contrary  behaviour,  corrects,  with
the  pride,  in  a  great  measure,.'  the  evil  of  me-
qvanty,  and  deserves  to  be  accounted  among  the
moat  generous  institutions  of  social  life.

UL  The  satisfactions  which,  the  people  in  free
governments 'derive  from  the  knowledge  and
'agitation  of  political  subjects ;  such  as  the  proceed-
ings anoVdebate*  of  the  senate ;  the'  conduct  and
characters  of  ministers ;  the  revolutions,  intrigues,
and  contentions  of  parties;  and,  in  general,  from
the  discussion  of  public  measures,  questions,  and
occurrences.  "Subjects  of  this  sort  excite  just
enough  of  interest  and  emotion  to  afford  a-mode-
rate  engagement  to  the  thoughts,  without'  rising
to- airy  painful  degree  of  anxiety,  or  ever  leaving
a  fixed  operation  upon  the  spirits; — and  what  is
this,  bat  the  end  and  aim  of  all  those  amusements
which  compose  so  much  of  the  business  of  life,
and  of  the  -value  of  riches  1  For  my  part  fand  I
believe  it  to  be  the  case  with  most  men  who,  are
arrived  at  the  middle  age,  and  occupy  the  middle
classes  of  life,)  had  I  aU  the  money  "which  I  pay
in  taxes  to  government,  at  liberty  to  lay  out  upon
amusement  and  diversion,  I  know  not  whether  I
could  make  choke  of  any  in  which  I  could  find
greater  pleasure  than  what  J  receive  from  expect-
ing, hearing,  and  relating- 'public  news;  reading
parliamentary  debates  and  proceedings  ;'canvass-

S the  political  arguments,  projects'  predictions,
intelligence,  which  are  conveyed  by  Various
channels,  to  every  corner  of  the -kingdom.  These
topics,  exciting  universal  curiosity,  and*' being
such  as  almost  every  man  is  ready  to  form  and
prepared  ferSetiver  his  opinion  about,  greatly  pro-
mote, and,  I  thdnkj  improve  conversation. .  They
lender  it  more  rational  and  more  innocent ;  they
supply  a  substitute  for  defalking,  gaming,  scandalr.
and  obscenity.  Now  the  secrecy,  the  jealousy,
the  sohtude,  and  precipitation,  of  despotic  govern-
meats,  exclude  all  this.  .But the  loss,  you  say,  is
timing.  I  know  that  it  is  possible  to  render  even
Ihe  mention  of  it  ridiculous  by  representing  it  as
the  idle  enployntet  of  the  most  insignificant
Ct


part  of  the  nation,  the  folly  of  village-statesmen  and
coffee-house  politicians:  but  Fallow  nothing  to  be
a  trifle  which  ministers  to  the  harmless  gratifica-
tion, of  multitudes;  nor  any  order  of  men  to  be  in-
significant, whose  number  bears  a  respectable
proportion  to  the  sum  of  the  whole  community.  ~
We  have  been  accustomed  to  an  opinion,  that
a  republican  form  of  government  suits  only  with
the  affaire  of  a  small  state :  which  opinion  is  found-
ed in  the  consideration,  that  unless  the  people,
in  every  district  of  the  empire,  be  admitted  to  a
share  in  the  national  representation,  the  govern-
ment is  not,  as  to  them,  a  republic  j  that  elections,
where  the  constituents  are  numerous,  and  dis--

Seraed  through  a  wide  extent  of  country,  are  con-
ucted  with  difficulty  1  or  rather,  indeed,  managed
by  the  intrigues,  and  combinations  of  a  few,  who
are  situated  near  the  place  of  election  each  voter
considering  his  single  suffrage  as  too  minute  a
portion  of  the  general  interest  to  deserve  his  care
or  attendance,-  much-  less  to  be  worth  any  opposi-
tion to  influence  and  application:;  that  whilst  we
contract  the  representation  within  a  compass
small  enough  to  admit  of  orderly  debate,  the  'in-
terest of  the  constituent  becomes  too  small, -of  the
representative  too  great.  It  is  difficult  also  to.
maintain  any  connexion  between  theQi.  He
who  represents  two  hundred  thousand,  is  neces-
sarily a  stranger  to  the  greatest  part  of  those  who
elect  him:  and  when  his  interest  amongst  them
ceases  to  depend  upon  an  acquaintance  with
their  persons  and  character,  or  a  care  or  know-
ledge of  their  affairs ;  when  such  a  representative
finds  the  treasures- and  honours  of  a  great  empire
at  the  disposal  of  a  few,  and  himself  one'  of  the
few,  there  is  little  reason  to  hope  that  -  he  will
not  prefer  to  his  public  duty  those  temptations  of
personal  aggrandisement  -which  his  situation  of-
fers, and,  which  the  price  of  his  vote  will  always
purchase.-  All  appeal  to  the  people  is  precluded
by  the  impossibility  of  -collecting  a  sufficient  pro-
portion of  their  foice  and  numbers.  The  Actions
and  the  unanimity  of  the  senate  are  equally  danger-
ous. Add  to  these  considerations,  that  in  a  de-
mocratic eonstitutioiLthe  mechanism  is  too  compli-
cated, and  the  motions  too  slow,  for  the  operations
of  a  great  empire ;  whose  defence  and  govern-  '
ment  requite  execution  and  despatch,  in  propor-
tion to  the  magnitude,  extent,  and  variety,  of  its
concerns.  There  is  weight,  no  doubt,  m  these
reasons ;  but  much  of  the  objection  seems  to  be
done  away  by  the  contrivance  of  a  federal  republic/
which',  distributing  the  country  into  districts  of  a
conqpodioHs  extent,  and  leaving  to  each  district
its  internal  legislation,'  reserves  to  a  convention  of
the  states  the  adjustment  of  their  relative  claims ;
the  levying,  direction,  and  government,  of"  the
common  %rcc  of  the  confederacy;  the  requisition
of  subsidies  fo*  the  support  of  this  force ;  tne  mak-
ing of  peace  and  war ;  the  entering  into  treaties i ;
the  regulation  of  foreign  commerce ;  the  equali-
zation of  duties  upon  imports,  so  as  to  prevent
the  defrauding  the  revenue  of  one  province  by
smuggling  articles  of  taxation  from  the  borders  of.
another ;  and  likewise  so  as  to  guard  against  .un-
due partialities  in  the  encouragement  of  trade.
To  what  limits.such  a  republic  might,  without
inconveniency,  enlarge  its  dominions,  by  assuming-
neighbouring"  provinces  into  the  confederation  ;'or
how  far  it  is  capable,  of  uniting  tjie  .liberty  of  a
small  commonwealth  with  the  safety  of  a  power-
ful' empire;  or  whether,  amongst  co-ordinate
11


122


MORAL  AND  POLITICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


powers,  dissensions  and  jealousies- would  not  be
.likely  to  arise,  whkh^  for  want  of  a  common  su-
perior, ~  might  proceed  to  fatal  extremities ;  are
questions  upon  which,  the  record*  of  mankind  do
not  authorise  us  to  decide  with  tolerable  certainty.
The  experiment  is  about  to  be  tried,  in  America
upon  a  large  scale.


CHAPTER  TIL

Qf  the  British  Constitution.

By  the  constitution  of  a  "country,  is  meant
so  much  of  its  law,  as  relates., to  the  designation
•ad  form  of  the  legislature :  the  rights  .and  func-
tions of  the  sevenJparta*  or  the  legislative  body ;
the  construction,  office,  and  jutiadiction?  of  courts
of  justice.  The  constitution  is  one  principal  di-
tision,  section,  or  title,  of  the  code  of  public  laws;
dwriwigiii^imd  from  the  rest  only  by  the  superior
importance  of  the  subject  of  winch  it  treats.
Therefore  the  terms  constitutional  and  unconsti-
tutional, mean  lend  and  illegal  The  distinction
and  the  ideas  which  these  terms  denote,  are  found-
ed in  the  same  authority  with  the  law  of  the
land  upon  any  other,  subject;  and  to  be  ascer-
tained by  thesame  inquiries.  In  England,  the  sys-
tem of  public  jurisprudence  is  made  up  of  acts  of
parliament,  of  decisions  of  courts  of  law,  and  of  im-
memorial usages:  consequently,  these  are  the
principles  of  which  the  English  constitution  itself
eonajsts.  the  sources  from  which  all  our  know-
ledge or  its  nature  and  limitations  is  to  be  deduced,
and  the  authorities  to  which  all  appeal  ought  to
be  made,  and  by  which  every  constitutional  doubt
and  question  can  alone  be  decided.  This  plain
and  intelligible  definition  is  the  more  necessary  to
be  preserved  in  our  thoughts,  as  some  writers
upon  the  subject  absurdly  confound  what  is  con*
atitutional with what  is  expedient;  pronouncing
forthwith  a  measure  to  be  unconstitutional,  which
'  they  adjudge  in  any  respect  to  be  detrimental  or
dangerous :  whilst  others,  again,  ascribe  a  kind  of
transcendant  authority,  or  mysterious  sanctity,  to
the  constitution,  as  if  it  were  founded  in  some,
higher  original  than  that  winch  rives  force  and
obligation  to  the  ordinary  laws  anostatutes  of  the
realrn^  or  were  inviolable  on  any  other  account
than  its  intrinsie  utility.  An  act  of  parliament
in  England  can  never  be  unconstitutional,. in  the
strict  and  proper  acceptation  of  the  term ;  in  a


•»„«.  «~— 3  it  may.  viz.  when  it  militates  with  the
•pint,  contradicts  the  analogy,  or  defeats  the  pro-
vision, of  other  laws,  made  to  regulate  the  form  of
government.  Even  that -flagitious  abuse  of  their
trust,  by  which  a  parliament  of  Henry  the  Eighth
eonferred  upon  the  kings  proclamation  the  au-
thority of  law,  was  unconstitutional  only  in  this
latter  sense.

Most  of  those  who  treat  of  the  British  consti-
tution, consider  It  as  a  scheme  of  government
formally  planned  and  contrived  by  our  ancestors,
In  some  certain  era  of  our  national  history,  and  as
set  up  in  pursuance  of  such  regular  plan  and  de-
sign. Something  of  this  sort  is  secretly  sup-
posed, or  referred  to,  in  the  expressions  of  those
who  speak  of  the  "  principles  of  the  constitution,"
of  bringing  back  the  constitution  rto  its  "  first
principles,*^  of  restoring  it  to  its  "  original  pu-
rity,n  or  "  primitive  model."  Now  this  appears
to  me  an  erroneous  conception  ef  the  .subject


No  such  plan  was  ever  formed,  consequentlr  no
such  first  principles,  original  model,  or  standard,
exists  1  mean,  there  never  was  a  date  or  pojnt  m
tunc 'in,  our  history,  when  the  government  of
England  was  to  be  set  up  anew,  ana  when  it  was
referred  to  any  single  person,  or  assembly,  or
committee,- to  name  a  charter  kit  the' future  go-
vernment of  the  country ;  or  when  a  constitution
so  prepared  and  digested,  was  by  common  consent
received  and  established!  In  die  time  of  the  civil
wars,  or  xatfeer  between  the  death  of  Charles  the
First  and  the  restoratioh  of  his  son,  many  such
projects  were  pushed,  but  none  were'  carried
into  .execution.  The  Great  Charter,  and  the
Bill  of  Kights,  were  wise  and  strenuous  efforts  to
obtain  security'  against  certain  abuses  of  regal
power,  by  which  the  subject  had  been  formerly
aggrieved :  but  these  were,  either  of  them,  much
too  partial  modifications  of  the  constitution*  to
give  it  a  new  original  The  coastitution-of  Eng-
land, jike  that  of  most  countries  of  Europe,  hath
grown  out  of  occasion  and  emergency  y  from  the
fluctuating  policy  o£  different  ages*  fropi  the  coin
tentions,  successes,  interests,  and  opportunities,  of
different  orders  .and  parties  of  men  in  the  com-
munity *  It  .resembles  one  of  those  old  mansion^
which,  instead  of  being  built  all  at  once,  after
a  regular  plan,  and  according  to  the  rules  of
architecture  at  present",  established,  has  been
reared  in  different  ages  of  the  art,  has  been  altered
from  lime  to  time,  and  has  been-  continually  ie-
ceiving  additions  and  repairs  suited  to  the  taste,
fortune,  or  conveaiency,  .of  its  successive  pro-
prietors^ In  such  a  building,  we  look  in  vain  for
the  elegance  and  proportion,  for  the  just  order
and  correspondence  of  parts,  which  we  expect  in
a jnodern  edifice ;  and  which .external symmetry,
after  all,  contributes .  much  more  perhaps  to  the
amusement  of  the  behdder,.than  the  accommoda-
tion of  the  inhabitant.  %  -

In  the  British,  and  possibly  in  all  other  consti-
tutions, there  exists  a  wide  difference  between  the
actual  state  of  the  government  and  the  theory.
The  one  results  from  the  other :  but  still  they  are
different.  When  we  contemplate  the  theory  of
the  British  government,  we  see  the  king  invested
with  the  most  absolute  personal  impunity ;  with
a  power  of  rejecting  -laws,  which  have  been  re-
solved upon  by  both  houses  of  parliament;  of  con-
ferring 5v  his  charter,  upon  any  set  or  succession
of  men  he  pleases,  the  privilege  of  sending  re-
presentatives into  one  house  of  parliament,  as  by
.his  immediate  appointment  he  can  place  whom
he  will  in  the  other.  What  is  this,  a  foreigner
might  ask,  but  a  more  circuitous  despotism  1  Yet,
when  we  turn  our  attention  from  the  legal  extent,
to  the  «actuaL  exercise  of  royal  authority  in  Eng-
land, we  see  these  formidable  prerogatives  dwin-
dled into  mere  ceremonies ;  ana,  in  their  stead,  a
sure  and.  commanding  influence,  of  which  the
constitution,  it  seems, .is  totally  ignorant,  grow-
ing out  of  that  enormous  patronage  which  the
increased  territory  and  opulence  of  the  empire
have  placed  in.  the  disposal  of  the  executive  ma-
gistrate^

.  Upon  questions  of  reform,  the  habit  of  reflec-
tion to  be  encouraged,  is  a  sober  comparison  of
the  constitution  under  which  we  live, — not  with
models  of  speculative  perfection,  but  with  the  ac-
tual chance  of.  obtaining  a  better.  This  turn
of  thought  will  generate  a  political  disposition,
equally  removed  from  that  puerile  admiration  or


OF  THE  BRITISH  CONSTITUTION.


123


ytuaal  whflMimMito,  which  sees  no  fruit,  and
dan  endure  no  change;  and  that  distempered
sensibility,  which  is '  alive  only  to  perceptions  of
inconvenisncy,  and  is too  impatient  to' be  deliver-
ed from  the  uneasiness  which  it  feels,  to  compute
either  the  peril  or  expense  of  the  remedy.  Po-
litical innovations  commonly  produce  many  effects
beside  those  that  are  intended  The  direct  con-
sequence p4)ften  the  leant  important  Incidental,
remote,  and  unthought-of  evil  or  advantages,  fre-
quently exceed  the  good  that  is  designed,  or  the
mischief  that  is  foreseen-  It  klfirom  the  silent
and  unobserved  operation,  from  the  obscure  pro-
gress of  causes  set  a*  work  for  different  purposes,
that  the  greatest  revolutionstake  their  rise.  When
Elizabeth,  and  her  immediate  successor,  applied
themselves  to  the  encouragement  and  regulation  of
trade  by  many  wise  laws,  they  knew  not,  that,  to-
gether with  wealth  and  industry,  they  were  def-
ining a  consciousness  of  strength  and  independ-
ency, which  would  not  long  endure,  under  the
forms  of  a  mixed  government,  the  dominion  ^  of
arbitrary  princes,  When  it  was  debated  whether
the  mutiny  act,  the  law  by  which  the  army  is
governed  and  maintained,  should  be  .temporary  or
perpetuaL  little  else  probaUy  occurred  to  the  ad-
vocates of  an  annual  biH,  than,  the  expediency  of
retaining  a  control"  over  the  most  dangerous  pre-
rogative of  the  crowhj-^the  direction  and. com-
mand of  a  standing- army ;  whereas,  in  its  effect,
this  single  reservation  has  altered  the  whole  frame,
and  quality  of  the  British  constitution..  For  since,
in  consequence  of  the  military  system  which  pre-
vails in  neighbouring  and  rival  nations,  as  well  as
on  account  of  the  internal  exigencies  of  govern-
ment, a  standing  army  has  become  essential  to
the  safety  and  adnumstration  of  the  empire,  it
enables  parliament,  by  discontinuing  this  neces-
sary provision,  so  to  enforce  its  resolutions  upon
any^  other  subject,  as  to  render  the  king's  dissent
to  a  law -which  his  received,  the  approbation  of
both  houses,  too  dangerous  an  experiment  any
longer  to  be  advised.  A  contest  between  the  king
and  parliament,  cannot  now  be  persevered  in  with-
out  a  dissolution  of  the  government.  Lastly,  when
the  constitution  conferred  upon  the  crown  the
nomination  to  all  employments  in  the  public  ser-
vice, the  authors  of  this  arrangement  were  led  to
it,  by  the  obvious  propriety  of  leaving  to  a  master
the  choice  of  his  .servants;  and  by  the  manifest
incsAvemency  of  engaging  the  national  council,"
every  vacancy,  in  those  personal  contests
u  .attend  elections  to  places  of  honour  and
Our  ancestors  did  not  observe  that.
on  added  an  mfluence  to  the  regal
office,  which,  aa  the  number  and  value  of  public
eaipkiyments  increased,  would  supersede  in  a
great  measure  the  forms,  and  change  the  charac-
ter, of  the  ancient  constitution.  They  knew  not,
what  the  experience  and  reflection  of  modern  ages
have  discovered,  that  patronage,  universally,  is
power ;  that-he  who  possesses  in  a  sufficient  degree.
the  means  of  gratifying  the  desires  of  mankind
after  wealth  and  distinction,  by  whatever  checks
sod  forms  his  authority  may  be  limited  or  dis-
guteed.  wilT  direct  the  management  of  public  af-
fairs. Whatever  be  the  mechanism  of  the  political
engine,  he  will  guide  the  motion.  These  instances.
an  adduced  in  order  to  illustrate  the  proposition
which  we  laid  down,  that,,  in  pontics,  the  most
important  and  permanent  effects  have,  for  the
mo*  part,  been  incidental  and  unlbreseen;  and


this  proposition  we  inculcate,  for  the  sake^f  the
caution  which  teaches  that  changes  ought  not  to
be  adventured  upon  without  a  comprehensive  dis-
cernment of  the  conseqUences,— without  a.know-
ledge  as  well' of  the  remote  tendency,  as  of  the
immediate  design.  The  courage  of  a  statesman
should  resemble  that  of  a  commander,  v*Jio,  how-
ever regardless  of  personal  danger,  never  forgets,,
that,  with  his  own,  he  commits  the  lives  aneffor-
tunesuof  a  multitude  j  and  who  does  not  consider
it  as  any  proof  of  zeal  or  valour,  to,  stake  the  safety
of  other  men  upon  the  success  of  a  perilous  or  des-
perate enterprise/  - .

There  is  one  end  of  civil  government  peculiar
to  a  good  constitution,  namely,  the  happiness  of
its  subjects  ;  there  is  another  end  essential  to  a
good  government,  but  common  to-  it  with  many
bad  ones,— its  own  preservation.  Observing*  that
the  best  form  of  government  would  be  defective,
which  {fid  not  provide  for  its  own  permanency,  in
6ur*  political  reasonings  we  consider  all  such  pro-
visions as  expedient;  and  are  content  to  accept  as
a  sufficient  ground  for  a  measure,  or  law,  that  it
is  necessary  or  conducive  to  the  preservation  of
the  constitution.  Yet,  in  truth,  such  provisions
are  absolutely  expedient,  and  sucn  an  excuse  final,
only  whilst  the  constitution  is  worth  preserving:
that  is,  until  it  can  bo  exchanged  for  a  better.  I
premise  this  distinction,  because  many  things  in
the  English,  as  in  every  constitution,  are  to  be.
-vindicated  and  accounted  for  solely  rrant  their
tendency  to  maintain  the  government  in  its  pre-%
sent  state,  and  the' several  parts  of  it  in  possession
of  th&powcrs  which  the  constitution  has  assigned
to  them;  and  because  I  would  wish  it  to  be  re-
marked, that  such  a  consideration  is  always  sub-
ordinate to  another, — the  value  and  usefulness  of
the  constitution  itself.

The  Governmtatt  qf  England,  which  has  been
sometimes  called  a  mixed  government,  sometimes
a  limited  monarchy,  is  formed  by  a  combination
of  the  three  regular  species  of  government :  t}ie
monarchy  residing  in  .the  King ;  the  aristocracy,
in  the  House  of  Lords ;  and  the  republic,  being
represented  by  the  House  of  Commons.  The' '
perfection  intended  by  such  a  scheme  of  govern-  .
ment  is,  to  unite  the  advantages  of  the  several
simple  forms,  and  to  exclude  the  inconveniencies.
To  what  degree  this  purpose  is  attained  or  attain-
able in, the  British  constitution ;  wherein  it  is  lost
sigHt  of  or  neglected ;  and  by  what  means  it  may
in  any  part  be  promoted  with  fetter  success^  the
reader  will  be  enabled  to  judge,  by  a  separate
recollection  of  these  advantages  and  inconve-
niencies,  as  enumerated  in  the  preceding  chapter,
and  a  distinct  application  of  each  to.  the  political
condition  of  this  country.  We  will  present  our
remarks  .upon  the  subject  in  a  brief  account  of
the  expedients  by  Which  the  British  constitution
provides,

1st,  For  the  interest  of  its  subjects.

2dly,  For  its  own  preservation! • . .  ' r v

The  contrivances  for  the  first  of  their  purposes,
are  the  following :

In  order  to  promote  the  establishment  of  safu-  N
tary  public  laws,  every  citizen  of  the  state  is  ca-
pable of  becoming  a  member  of  the  senate :  and
every  senator  possesses  the  right  of  propounding
to  the  deliberation'  of  the  legislature  whatever  law

na  Tkla^ftilfifi

'  Every  district  of  the  empire  enjoys  the  privilege
of  fho™ff"g  representatives,  informed  or  the  in-


134


MORAL  AND  POLITICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


teresta,  am)  circumstances,  and  desires, of  their
constituents,  and  entitled  by  their  situation  to"
oommunineate  that  information  to  the  national
council.  The  meanest  *  (subject  has  some  one
whom  he  oan  call  upon  to  bring  forward  His  com-
plaints and  requests  to  public  attention.

By  annexing  the  right  of  voting  for  members  of
'tile  House  of  Commons  to  different  qualifications
in  different  places,  each  order  and  profession  of
men  in  the  community  become  virtually  repre-
sented ;  that  is,  men  of  all  orders  and  profusions,
statesmen,  courtiers,  country-gentlemen,  lawyers,
merchants,  manufacturers,  soldiers,  sailors,  in-
terested in  the  prosperity,  and  experienced  in  the
occupation,  of  their  respective  professions,  obtain
seats  in  parliament.

The  elections,  at  the  same  time,  are  so  con-
nected with  the  influence  of  landed  property,  as
to  afford  a  certainty  that  a  considerable  number
of  men  of  great  estates  will-  be  returned  to  par-
liament; and  are  also  so  modified,  that  men  the
most  eminent  and  successful  in  their  respective
professions,  are  the  most  likely,  by  their  riches,  or
the  weight  of  their  stations,  to  prevail  in  these
competitions.

Tne  number,  fortune,  and  quality,  of  the  mem-
Jbers;  the  variety  of  interests  and  characters
amongst  them;  above  all,  the  temporary  dura-
tion of  their  tower,  and  the  change  of  men  which
every  new  election  produces ;  are  so  many  secu-
rities to  the  public,  as  well  against  the  subjection
of  their  judgments  to  any  external  dictation,  as
against  tne  formation  of  a  junto  in  their  own
body,  sufficiently  powerful  to  govern  their  de-
cisions.

The  representatives  are  so  intermixed  with  the
constituent!!,  and  the  constituents  with  the  rest
of  the  people,  that  they  cannot,  without  a  par-
tiality too  flagrant  to  be  endured,  impose  any
burthen  upon  the  subject,  in  which  they  do
not  share  themselves;  nor  scarcely  can  they
adopt  an  advantageous  regulation,  .  in  which
their  own  interest!  win  not  participate  of  the
advantage.

*  The  proceedings  and  debates  of  parliament,  and
the.  parliamentary  conduct  of  each  representative,
are  known  by  the  people  at  large.

The  representative  is  so  for  dependent  upon
the  constituent,  and  political  importance  upon
public  favour,  that  a  member  of  parliament  cannot
more  effectually  recommend  himself  to  eminence
and  advancement  in  the  state,  than  by  contriving
alidjHtronizing  laws  of  public  utility.

When  intelligence  of  the  condition,  wants,  and
occasions,  of  the  people,  is  thus  -collected  from
every  quarter;  when  such  a  variety  of  invention,
and  so  many  understandings,  are  set  at  work  upon
the  Bubject ;  it  may  be  presumed,  that  the  most
eligible  expedient,  remedy,  or  improvement,  will
occur  to  some  one  or  other:  and  when  a  wise
counsel,  or  beneficial  regulation,  is  once  suggested,
it  may  be  expected,  from  the  disposition  of  an  ,
assembly-  so  constituted  as  the  British  House  of
Commons  is,  that  it  cannot  foil  of  receiving  the
approbation  of  a  majority.

To  prevent  those  destructive  contentions  for
the  supreme  power,  which  are  sure  to  take- place
where  the  members  of  the  state  do  not  live  under
an  acknowledged 'head,  and- a  known  rule  of  sue-"
cession;  to  preserve  the  people  in  tranquillity  at
home,  by  a  speedy  and  vigorous  execution  of  the
laws;  to  protect-their  interest  abroad,  by  strength


and  energy  in  military  operations,  by  those  advan-
tages of  decision,  secrecy,  and  despatch,  which
belong  to  the  resolutions  of  monarchical  coun-
cils;— for  these  purposes,  the  constitution  has
committed  the  executive  government  to  the  ad-
ministration and  limited  authofity-of  an  hereditary
king.

In  the  defence  of  the  empire;  in  the  main-
tenance of  its  power,  dignity,  arid  privileges  WUh
foreign  nations ;  in  the  advancement  of  its  'trade
by  treaties  and  conventions ;  and  in  the  providing  -
for  the  general  administration  of  municipal  jus-
tice, by  a  proper  choice  .and  appointment  of  ma-  -
gistrates ;  the  inclination  of  the  king  and  of  the
people  usually  coincides;  in  this  part,  therefore,
of  tne  regal  office,  the  constitution  entrusts  the
prerogative  with  ample  powers.
.  The  dangers  principally  to  be  apprehended
from  regal  government,  relate  to  the  two  artiolea
taxation  and  punishment.  In  every  form  of  go-
vernment, from  which  the  people  are  excluded,  it
is  the  interest  of  the  governors  to  get  as  much,
and  of-  the  governed  to  give  as  little,  as  they  can :
the  power  also  of  punishment,  in  the  hands  of  an
arbitrary  prince,  oftentimes  becomes  an  engine  of
extortion,  jealousy,  and  revenue.  Wisely,  there*
fore,  hatn  the.  British  constitution  guarded  the
safety  of  the  people,  in  these  two  points,  by  the
most  studious  precautions.

Upon  that  of  taxation,  every  law  which,
by  the  remotest  construction,  may  be  deemed
to  levy  money  upon  the  property  of  the  sub-
ject, must  originate,  that  is,  must  first  be  pro-
posed and  ^assented  to,  m  the  House  of  Com-
mons: by  which  regulation, .  accompanying  the
weight  which  '  that  assembly  possesses  in  all
its  functions,  the  levying  of -taxes  is  almost  ex-  .
clusivery  reserved  to  the  popular*  part  of  the  cen-
-stitution,  who,  it  is* presumed,  will  not  tax  them-
selves, nor  their  fellow-subjects,/ without  being
first  convinced  of  the  necessity  of  the  aids  which
they  grant.

The  application  also  of  the  public  supplies,  i*
watched  with' the  same  circumspection  as  the  as-
sessment. Many  taxes  are  annual';  the  produce
of  others  is  mortgaged,  or  appropriated  to  specific
services :  the  expenditure  or  all  of  them-  is  ac-
counted for  in  the  House  of  Commons ;  as  conv
putations  of  the  charge-of  the  purpose  for  which
they  are  wanted,  are  previously  submitted  to  the
same  tribunal

In  the  infliction  of  punishment^  the  power  of
the  crown,  and  of  the  magistrate  appoints*!  bv  the
crown,  is  confined  by  the  most  precise  limitations :
the  guilt  of  the  offender  must  be  pronounced  by
twelve  men  of  his 'own  order,  indifferently  chosen
out  of  the  county  where  the  offence  was  com-
mitted : '  the  punishment,  or  the  limits  to  which
the  punishment  maybe  extended,  are  ascertained,
and  affixed  to  the  crime,  by  laws  which  know  not
the  person  of  the  criminal.
"And  whereas  arbitrary  or  clandestine  confine-"
ment  is  the  injury  most  to  be^ dreaded  from  the
strong  hand  of  the  executive  government,  because
it  deprives  the  prisoner  at  once  of  protection  and
defence,  and  delivers  him  into  the  power,  and  to
the  malicious  or  interested  designs,  of  his  enemies ;
the' constitution  has  provided  against  this  danger
with  double  solicitude.  The  ancient  writ  of  ha*
beas  corpus,  the  last  habeaB-corpus  act  of  Charles'
the  Second,  and  the  practice  and  determinations'
of  our  sovereign  courts  of  justice  founded  upon


OP  THE  BRITISH  CONSTITUTION.


M5


these  Ikws,  afl^vd^ft  complete  nrnnedy  fog  every
conceivable  cade  of  Ulegaittnprisonmen£*  \

Treason  being."  that  charge,  under  colour  of
which  the  destruction  of  an  obnoxious  individual
is  often  sought;  and  government  being  at  all
times  more  immediately  a  party  in  the  prosecu-
tion; the  law,  beside  the  general  care  with  which
it  watches  over  the  safety  of  the  accused,  in  this
esse,  sensible  of  the  unequal  contest  in  which  the
subject  is  engaged,  has  assisted  b>"  defence  with
extraordinary  indulgences.  By  two  statutes,
enacted  since  the  jtevolutieii .*  every  person  in-
dicted for  high  treason:  shall  nave  a  copy  of  his
infictmem\sTlist  of  the  witnesses'  to  be  produced,
and  of  the  jury  impaiineUed,  delivered  to -him  ten
days  before  the  trial ;  he  is  also^permitted  to  make
Ins  defence  by  counsel : — privileges  which  are  not
allowed  .to  the  prisoner,  in  a  trial  for  any  other
crime;-  and,  what  is  of  more  importance  to  the
party  than  all  the  rest)  the  testimony  of  two  wit-
nesses, at  the  least,  is  required  to  convict  a  person
of  treason :  whereas,  one  positive  witness  is  suf<
fioent  in  almost  every  other  species  of  accusation.

We  proceed,  in  the  second  place,  to  inquire  in
what  manner  the  constitution' has  provided  for  its
own  preservation ;  that  is,  in  what  manner  each
part  t>f  the  legislature  is  secured  in  the  exercise
of  the  powers  assigned  to  U.  from  the  encroach-
ments of  the  other  parts.  This  security  is  some-
times called  the  balance  qf  "the  constitution :  and
tile  political  equilibrium,  which  this'  phrase  de-
notes, consists  in.  two  contrivances;— a  balance  of
power,  and  a  balance  of  interest  By  a  balance  of
power  is  meant,  that  there  is  no  power  possessed
or  one  part  of  the  legislature,  the  abuse  or  excess
of  whkn  is  not  checked  by  some  antagonist  power,'
residing  in  another  part  Tims  the  power  of  the
two  houses  of  parliament  to  frame  laws,  is  checked
by  the  kings  negative :  that,  if  laws  subversive  of
regal  government  should  obtain  the  consent  of
parTiament,  the  reigning  prince,  by  interposing  ms
prerogative,  may  save  the  necessary  rights  and
authority  of  his  station. .  On  the  other  hand,  the
arbitrary  application  of  this  negative  is  checked
by  the  privilege  which  parliament  possesses,  of  re-
rosing  supplies  of  money  ta  the  exigencies  of  the
kings  adnunistration.  The  constitutional  maxim,
"that  the  king  can  do  no  wrong,"  is  balanced  by


•  Upon  complaint  in  writing  by,  or  on  behalf  of,  any
person  in  confinement,  to'  any  of  the.  four  courts  of
wesrtninsief'Han,  in  term-time,  or  to  the  Lord  Chan-
cellor, or  one  of  the  Judges,  in,  the  vacation ;  and  upon
t  probable  reason  being  suggested  to  question  the  le-
gality of  the-  detention ;  a  writ  is  issued  to  the  person
rn  whose  custody  the  complainant  is  alleged  to"  be*,
crtmmanrifng  him,  within  a  certain  limited  and  short
time,  to  produce  the  body  of  the  prisoner/  and  the  au-
thority under  which  he  is  detained.  Upon  the  return  of
the  writ,  strict  and  instantaneous  obedience  to  which  is
enforced  by  very  severe  penalties,  if  no  lawful  cause  of
teprisonsseat  appear,  the  court  or  Judge,  before  Whom
the  prisoner  is  brought,  is  authorised  and  bound  to
enwharge  him ;  even  though  be  may  have  been  com-
■titled  by  a  secretary,  or  other  high  officer  of  state,  by
las  privy-council,  or  by  the  kins  in  person :  so  that  no
subject  of  this  realm  can  be  held  in  confinement  by  any
power,  or  under  any  pretence  whatever,  provided  he  can
Andm '" --.---—-


is  to  convey  his  complaint  to  one  of  the  four
of  Westmimter-Hall,  or,  during  their  recess,  to
aay  of  the  Judges  of  the  same,  unlets  all  these  several
tribunals  agree  in  determining  his  imprisonment  to  be
lsgaL  He  amy  make  application  to  them  in  succession ;
sad  if  one  out  of  the  number  be. found,  who  thinks  the
Prisoner  entitled  to  his  liberty,  that  one
wority  to  restore  it  to  mm.


another  maxim;  not  less  constitutional)  "that  the
illegal  commands  of  the  king  do  not  justify  those
who  assist,  or  concur,  in  carrying  them  into  exe-
cution;" and  by  a  second  rule,  subsidiary  .to  this.
"  that  the  acts  of  the  crown  acquire  not  a  legal
force,  until  authenticated  by  the  subscription  of
some  of  its  great  officers.'-  The  wisdom  of  this
contrivance  is  worthy  of  observation.  As  the
king  could  not  be  punished,  without  a  civil  wax,
the  constitution,  exempts  his  person  fronvtrial  or
account;  hut,  lest  this  impunity  should  encourage
a  licentious  exercise  of  dominion,  various  obsta-
cles are  opposed  to  the  private  will  of  the  sove-
reign, when  directed,  to  illegal  objects.  The
pleasure  of  the  crown  /must  be  aimounced  with
certain  solemnities,  and  attested  by  certain  officers
of  state-.  In  some  cases,  the  royal  order  must  be
signified  by  a  secretary  of  state :  in  others  it  must
pass  under  the  privy^seal:  and,  in  many/ under
the  greajt  seal.  And  when  the  king's  command
is  regularly  published,  no  mischief  can  be  achieved
by  it,  without  the  ministry  and  compliance  of
those'  to  whom  it  is  directed.  'Now  all  /who  either
concur  in*  an  illegal  order  by  authenticating'  its
publication  with  their  seal  or  subscription,  or  who
in  any  manner  assist  incarrying  it  into  execution,
subject  themselves  to  prosecution  and  punishment,
for  the  part  they  have' taken;  and  are  not  per-
mitted to  plead  or  produce  the  command  of  the
king  in  justification  of  their  obedience?*  But
farther:  the  power  of  the  crown  to  direct  the
military  force  of  the  kingdom,  is  balanced  by  the
annual  necessity  of  resorting  to  parliament  for  the
maintenance  and  government  or  that  force.  The
power  of  the  king  to  declare  war,  is  checked  by
the  privilege  of  the,  House  of  Commons,  to  •grant
or  withhold  the  supplies  by  which  the  war  must
be  carried  en;  *  The  king's  choice  of  bis  ministers
is  controlled  oy  the  obligation  he  is  under  of  ap-
pointing those  men  to  offices  in  the  state,  who  are
found  capable  of  managing  the  afifrirs  of  his  go-
vernment, witlT  the  two  -houses  of  parliament.
Which  consideration  imposes  such  a  necessity
upon  the  crown,  as  hathui  a  great  measure  sub-
dued the  influence  of  favouritism ;  insomuch  that
it  is  become  no  uncommon  spectacle  in  this  coun-
try, to  see  men  promoted  .by  the  king  to  the  high-
est offices  and  richest  preferments  which  he  has
in  his  power  to  bestow,  who  have  been  distftK.
guished  by  their  opposition  to  his  personal  in-
clinations. • -

By  the  balance  qf  interest,  which  accompanies
and  gives  efficacy  to  the  balance  of  power,  is
meant  this;— that  the  respective  interests  uf  the
three  estates  of  the  empire  are  so  disposed  and
adjusted,  that  whichever  of  the  three  shall  attempt
any  encroachment,  the  .other  two  will  unite  in  re-
sisting it.  If  the  king  should  endeavour  to  extend


*  Amongst  the  checks  which  Parliament  holds  over
the  administration  of  public  affairs,  I  forbear  to  men-
tion  the  practioe  of  addressing  the  king,,  to  know  by
whose  advice  he .  resolved  upon  a  particular  measure ;
and  of  punishing  the  authors  of  that  advice,  for  the
counsel  they  had  given.  Not  because  I  think  this  me-
thod either  unconstitutional  or  improper ;  but  for  this
reason,— that  it  does  not  so  much  subject  the  king  to
the  control  of  Parliament,.  «s  it  supposes  hinv  to*  be
already  in  subjection.  For  if  the  king  were  so  far  out
of  the  reach  of  the* resentment  of  the  House  of  Com-
mon!, as  to  be  able  with  safety  to  refuse  the  informa-
tion requested,  or  to  take  upon  himself  the  respon-
sibility inquired  after,  there  must  be  an  end  of  all  pro*
ceedings  founded  in  this  mode  of  application.


196


MORAL  AND  POLITICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


his  authority,  hy  contracting  the  power  and  pri-
vileges  of  the  Commons,  the  House  of  Lords
would  see.their  own  dignity  endangered  by;  every
advance  which  the  crown  made  to  independency
upon  the  resolutions  of  parliament  The  admis-
sion of  arbitrary  power  is  no  less  formidable  to  the
grandeur  of  the  aristocracy,  than  it  is  fatal  to  the
liberty  of  the  republic;  thatjs.il  would  reduce  the
nobihty  from  the  hereditary  snare  they  possess  in
the  national  councils,  in  which  their  real  great-
ness consists,  to  the  being  made  a  part  of  the
empty  pageantry  of  a  despotic^  court.  On  the
other  hand,  if  the  House  of  Commons  should  in-
trench upon  the  distinct  province,  or  usurp  the
established  prerogative  of  the  crown,  the  House
of  Lords  would  receive  ah  instant  alarm  from
every  new  stretch  of  popular  power.  In  every
contest  in  which  the  king  may  be.  engaged  with
the  representative  body)  in  defence  of  his  esta-
blished share  of  authority,  he  will  find  a  sure  ally
in  the  collective  power  of  the  nobility.  An  attach-
ment to,  the  monarchy,  from  which  they  derive
their  own  distinction ;  the  allurements  oia  court,
in  the  habits  and  with  the  sentiments  of  which
they  have  been  brought  up;  their  hatred  of  equa-
lity and  of  all  levelling  pretensions,  which  may
ultimately  affect  the  privileges,  or  even  the  ex-,
istence,  of  their  order ;  m  /mort,  every  principle
and  every  prejudice  which  are  wont  to  actuate
human  conduct,*  will  determine  their  choice  to  the
aide  and  support  of  the  crown.  Lastly,  if  the
nobles  themselves  should  attempt  to  revive  the
superiorities  which  their  ancestors  exercised  under
the  feudal  constitution,  the  king  and  the  people
would  alike  remember,  now  the  one  had  been  in-
tuited, and  the  other  enslaved,  by  thai  barbarous
tyranny.  They' would  forget  the  natural  opposi-
tion of  their  views  and  inclinations,  when  they
saw  themselves  threatened  with  the  return  of  a
domination  which  was  odious  and  intolerable  to
both.


The  reader  will  have  observed,  that  in  describing
the  British  constitution,  little  notice  has  been  taken
of  the  House  of  Lords.  The  proper  use  and  de-
sign of  this  part  of  the  constitution,  are  the  follow-
ing: First,  to  enable  the  king,  by  his  right  of  be-
stowing the  peerage,  to  reward  the  servants  of  the
public,  in  a  manner  most,  grateful  to  them,  at  a
small  expense  to  the  nation :  secondly,  to  fortify
thcpower  and  to  secure  the  stability  of  regal  go-
vernment, by  an  order  of  men  naturally  allied  to
its  interests:  and,  thirdly,  to  answer  a  purpose,
which,  though  of  superior  importance  to  tpe  other
two,  does  not  occur  so  readily  to  our  observation ;
namely,  to -stem  the  progress  of  popular  fury.
Large  bodies  of  men  are  subject  to  sadden  phren-
sjes.  Opinions  are  sometimes  circulated  amongst
a  multitude  without  proof  or  examination,  ac-
quiring confidence  and  reputation  merely  by  be-
ing repeated  from  one  to  another ;  and  passions
founded  upon  these  opinions,  diffusing  themselves
with  jt  rapidity  which  can  neither  be  accounted
for  nor  resisted,  may  agitate  a  country  with  the
moat  violent  commotions.  Now  the  only  .way  to
•top  the  fermentation,  is  tor  divide  the  mass ;  that
is,  to  erect  different  orders  in  "the  community,  with
separate  prejudices  and  interests.  And  this  may
•  occasionally  become  the  use  of  an  'hereditary  no-
bility, invested  with  a  share  of  legislation.  Averse
to  those  prejudwes  which  actuate  the  minds  of


the  vulgar;  accustomed  to  'condemn  thedamour
of  the  populace;  disdaining  to  receive  laws  and
opinions  from  their  inferiors  in  rank;  they  will
oppose  resolutions  which  are  founded  in  the  foil/
and  violence  of  the  lower  part  of  the  community.
Were  the  voice  of  the  people  always  dictated  by
reflection;  did  every  man,  or  even  one.  man,  in  a
hundred,  think  for  himself,  or  actually  consider
the  measure  he  was  about  to  approve  or  censure ;
or  even  were  the  common  people  tolerably  stead-'
fast  in  the  judgment  which  they  formed,  I  should
hold  the  interferences  of  a  superior  order  not  only
superfluous,  but  wrong:  for  when  every  thing
is  allowed  to  difference  of  rank  and  education,
which  the  actual'  state  of  these  advantages  de-
serves, that,  after  all,  is  most  likely  to  be  right  and
expedient,  which  appears  to  be  so  to  the  separate/
judgment  and  decision  of  a  great  majority  of  the
nation ;  at  least,  that,  in  general,  is  light  for  thtm,
which  is  agreeable  to  their  fixed  opinions  and  de-
sires. But  when  we  observe  what  is  urged  as  the
public  opinion,  to  be,  in  truth,  the  opinion  only,
or  perhaps  the  feigned  profession,  of  a  few  crafty
leaders ;  that  the  numbers  who  join  in  the  cry,
serve  only  to  swell  and  multiply  the  sound,  with-
out any  accession  of  judgment,  or  exercise  of  un-
derstanding; and  that  oftentimes  the  wisest  coun-
sels 4  have  heen  thus  overborne  by  tumult  and
uproar; — we  may  conceive  occasions  to  arise,  in
which  the  commonwealth  may  be  saved  by  tho
reluctance  of  the  nobility  to  adopt  the  caprices,  or
to  yield  to  the  vehemence^of  the  common  people.
In  expecting  this  advantage  from  an  order  of  no-
bles, we  do  not  suppose  the  nobility  to  be  more
unprejudiced  than  others  j  We  only  suppose  that
their  prejudices  will  be  different  from,  and  may
occasionally  counteract,  those  of  others.

If  the  personal  privileges  of  the  peerage,  which
an  usually  so  many  Injuries  to  the  rest  of  the
community,  be  restrained,  I  see  little  inconve?
niency  in  the  increase  of  its  number ;  for.  it  is  only .
dividing  the  same  quantity  of  power  amongst
more  hands,  which  is  rather  favourable  to  public
freedom  than  otherwise.

'  The  admission  of  a  small  number  of  ecclesias-
tics into  the  House  of  Lonjs.  is  but  an  equitable
compensation  to  the  clergy  for  the  exclusion'  of
their  order  from  the  House  of  Commons.  They
ate  a  set  of tnen  considerable  by  their  number  and
property;  as  well  as  by  their  influence,  and  the
duties  of  their  station;  yet,  whilst  every  other  pro-
fession has  those  amongst  the  national  represen- .
tatives,  who.  being  conversant  in  the  same  occu-
pation, are  able  to  "state,  and  naturally  disposed  to
-  support,  the  rights  and  interests  of  the  class  and
calling  to  which  they  belong,  the  clergy  alone  are
deprjved  of  this  advantage:  which  nar^ship  is
made'  up  to  them  by  introducing  the  prelacy  into
^parliament;  and  if  bishops,  from  gratitude  or  ex-
pectation, be  more  obsequious  to  the  will  of  the
crown  than  those  who  possess  jrreat  temporal  in-
heritances, they  are  properly  inserted  into'  that
part  of  the  constitution,  from  which  much  or  fre-
quent resistance  to  the  measures  of  government  is
not  expected.

-  I  acknowledge,  that  I  perceive  no  sufficient
reason  for  exempting  the  persons  of  members  of
either  house  of  parhament  from  arrest  for  debt.
The  counsels  or  suffrage  of  a  single  senator,
especially  of  one  who  in  the  management  of  me
own  affairs  may  justly,  be  susnectedof  a  want  of
prudence  or  honesty,  can  seldom  he  so  necessary


OF  THE  BRITISH  CONSTITUTION.


137


to  those  of  the  public,  as  to  justify  a  departure
from  that  whriesome'poticy,  by  which  the  laws  of
a.  commercial  state  punish  and  stigmata*  insol-
vency. But,  whatever  reason  may  be  pleaded  for
-  their  pergonal  'immunity',  when  this  privilege  of
parliament  is  extended  to  domestics  and  retainers;
or  when  it  is  permitted  to-  impede  or  delay  the
course  of  judicial  proceedings,  it. becomes  an  ab-
surd sacrifice  of  equal  justice  to  imaginary  dignity.

There  is  nothing  in  the  British  constitution  so
remarkable,  as  the  irregularity  of  the  popular  re-
presentation. The  House  or  Commons  consists
of  One  hundred,  and  fifty-eight  members,  of  whom
two,  hundred  are  elected  by  seven  thousand  eon-,
eftuuents ;  so  that  a  majority  .of  these  seven  thou-
sand, without  any*  reasonable  titje  to  superior
weight  or  influence' in  the  state,  nw£,  under  cer-
tam*  circumstances,  decide  a  question  against  the
opinion  of  as  many  millions.  Or,  to  place  the
same  object  in  another  point  of  view:  If  my  estate
be  situated  in  one  county  of  the  kingdom,  I  pos-
sess the  ten-thousandth  part  of  a  single,  represen-
tative-, if  in  another,  the  thousandth;  if  in  a  par-
ticular district,  I  may  be  one  in  twenty  who  choose
two  representatives;  if  in  a  still  more  favoured
•pot,  1  may  enjoy  the  right  of  appointing  two
myself.  If  I  have  been  horn,  or  dwell,  or  have
served  «n  apprenticeship,  in ,  one  town,  I  am  re-
presented in  the  national  assembly  by  two  depu-
ties, in  the  choice  of  whom  I -exercise  an  actual
and  sensible  share  of  power;  if  accident  has
thrown  my  birth,  or  habitation,  or  service,  into
another  town,  I  have  no  representative  at  all,  nor
more  power  or  concern  in  the  election  of  {hose
who  make  the  laws  by  which  I  am  governed,  than
if  I  was  a  subject  of  the  Grand  Signior :  and  tins
partiality-  subsists  without  any  pretence,  whatever
of  merit  or  of  propriety,  to  justify  the  preference
of  one  place  to  another.  Of,  thirdly,  to  describe
the  state  of  national  representation  as  it  exists  in
reality,  it  may  be  affirmed,  I  believe,  with  truth,
that  about  one  half  of  the  House  of  Commons
obtain  their  seats  in  that  assembly  by  the  election
of  the  people,  the  other  half  by  purchase,  or  by  the
nomination  of  single  proprietoraof  great  estates.

This  is  a  flagrant  incongruity  in  the  constitu-
tion ;  hot  it  is  one  of  those  objections  which  strike
most  forcibly  at  first  sight  The  effect  of  all  rea-
soning upon  the  subject  is,  to  diminish  the  first
impression;  on  which  account  it  deserves  the
more  attentive  examination,  that  we  may  be  as-
eured.  before  we  adventure  upon  a  reformation,
that  the  magnitude  of  the  evil  justifies  the  danger
of  the  experiment. In  a  few  remarks  that  follow,


be  understood,  in  the  first  place,  to
decline  afl  conference  witn  those  who  wish  to  al-
ter the  form  of  government  of  these  kingdoms.
The  reformers  with  whom  we  have  to  do,  are
thej  who,  whilst  they  change  this  part  of  the  sys-
tem, would  retain  the  rest.  If  <any  Englishman
expect  more  happiness  to  his  country  under  a  re-
public, he  may  very  consistently  recommend  a
new-modelling  of  elections  to  parliament;  because,
if  the  Ring  and  House  of  Lords  were  laid  aside,
the  present  disproportionate  representation  would
produce  nothing  out  a  confused,  and  Ill-digested
oligarchy.  In  lite  mariner  we  have  a  controversy
with  those  writers  who  insist  upon  representation
as  a  natural  right :*  we  consider  it  so  far  only  as


•  If  this  right,  be  natural,  no  doubt  it  mart  be  equal ;
•ad  the  ri*^  we  inay  add,  of  one  sue,  as  well  a*  '  '


of  the


a  right' at  all,  as  it  conduces  to  public  utility;  that
is,  as  it  contributes  .to  the  establishment  of  good
laws,  or  as.it  secures  vto  the  people  the  just  ad-
ministration of  these  laws.  Tnese  effects  depend
,  upon  the  disposition  and  abilities  of  the  national
counsellors.  Wherefore,  if  men  the  most  likely
by  their  qualifications  to  know  and  to  promote  the
pnbtiemtesess,  beactnatty  returned  to  parliament,  '
it  signifies  little  who  return  them.  Iftheproper-
est  persons  be  elected,  what  matters  it-fay  whom
they  are  elected?  At  least,  no  prudent  statesman
Would  subvert  lpng-eatabuahed  or  even  settled
rules  of  representation,  without  a  prospect  of  pro*
curing  wise*  or  better  representatives.  This  men
being  well  observed,  let  us,  before  we  seek  to  ob-
tain'any  thing  more,  consider  duly  what  we  al-
ready have.  We  have ,9.  House  of  tJommons
composed  of  five  hundred  and  fifty-eight  mem-
bers, in  which  number  are  found  the  most
considerable  landholders  and  merchants  of  the
kingdom;  the  heads  of  the  army,  the  navy,  and
the  law ;  the  occupiers  of  great  omtes  in  the  state ;
together  with  many  private  individuals,  eminent
by  their  knowledge,  eloquence,  or  activity.  Now
if  the  country  be  not  safe  in  such  hands,  in  whose
may  it  confide  its  interests'}  if  such  a  number  ef
such  men  be  liable  to  the  influence  of  corrupt  mo-
tives, what  assembly  of  men  will  be  secure  from
the  same  danger  1  Does  any  new  scheme  of  sa-
presentation  promise  to  collect  together-  mote
wisdom,. or  to  produce  firmer,  integrity %?  In  this
view  of  the  subject,  and  attending  not  to  ideas  of
order  and  proportion  (of  which  many  minds  are
much  enamoured,)  but  to  .effects  alone,  we  may
discover  just  excuses  for  those  parts  of  the.  present
representation  which  appear  to  a  hasty  observer
most  exceptionable  and  abeurj).  •  It  should  be  re-
membered, as  a  maxim  extremely  applicable  to
this  subject,  that  no  order  or  assembly  of  men
whatever  can  long  maintain  their  place  and  au-
thority in  a  mixed  government,  of  which  the  mem-
bers do  not  individually  possess  a  respectable  share
of  personal  importance.  Now  whatever  may  be
the  defects  of  toe  present  arrangement,  it  infalli-
bly .secures  a  great  weight  of  property  to  the
House  of  Commons,  by  rendering  many  seats  in
that  house  accessible  to  men  of  large  fortunes,  and
to  such  men  alone..  By  which  meatus*  those  cha-
racters are  engaged  in  the  defence  of  the  separate
rights  and  interests  ef  this  branch  of,  the  legisla-
ture, that  are  best  able  to  support  its  claims.  The
constitution  of  most  of  the  small  boroughs,  espe-
cially the  burgage  tenure,  contributes,  though  un-
designedly .\  to  the  same  effect :  for  the  appoint-
ment of  the  representatives  we  find  commonly
annexed  to  certain- great  inheritances,  flections
purely  popular  .are  in  this  respect  uncertain:  in
times  of  tranquillity,  the  natural  ascendancy  of
wealth  will  prevail;  but  when  the  minds  of  men
are  inflamed  by  political'  dissensions,  this  in-
fluence often  yields  to  more  impetuous  motives.Tr-
Tbe  variety  of  tenures  and  qualifications,  upon
which  the  right  of  voting  is  founded,  appears  to
me  a  recommendation  of  the  mode  which*  now
subsists,  as  it  tends  to  introduce  into  parliament  a


other.  Whereas  every  plan  of  representation  that  we
have  beard  of,  begins  by  excluding  the  votes  of  women ;
thus  cutting  off,  at  a  single  stroke,  one  half  of  the  pub-
lic from  a  right  which  is  asserted  to  be  inherent  in  all ;
a  right  too,  as  some  represent  it,  not  only  uiii venal,  but
unalienable,  and  indefeasible,  and  imprescriptible.


128


MORAL  AND  POLITICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


corresponding  mixture  of  characters  and  profes-
sion*. It  ha«b«n  long  observed  that  conspicuous
abilities  are  most  frequently  found  with  the  re-
presentatives of  small  boroughs.  'And  this  is  no-
thing more  than  what  the  laws* of  human  conduct
might  teach  us  to  expect :  when  such  boroughs
are  set  to  sale,  those  men  are  likely  to  become  pur-
chasers, who  are  enabled  by  their  talents  to  make
the  best  of  their  bargain :  when  a  seat  is  not  sold,  but

S' veri  by  the  opulent  proprietor  of  a  burgage  tenure,
0  patron  finds  his  own  interest  consulted,  by
the  reputation'  and  abilities  of  the  member  whom
he  nominates.  If  certain  of  the  nobility  hold  the
appointment  of  some  part  of  the  House  of  Com-
mons, it  serves  to  maintain  that  alliance  between
the  two  branches  of  the  legislature  which  no  good
citizen  would  wish  to  see  dissevered :  it  helps  to
keep  the  government  of  the  country  in  the  House
of  Commons,  in  which  it  would  not  perhaps  long
continue  to  reside,  if  so  powerful  and  wealthy  a
part  of  the  nation  as  the  peerage  compose,  were
excluded  from  'all  share  and  interest  m  its  con-
stitution. If  there  be  a  few  boroughs  so  circum-
.  starred  as  to  lie  at  the  disposal' of  the  crown,
whilst  the  number  of  such  is  known  and  small,
they  may  be  tolerated  'with  little  danger.  For
where  would  be  the  impropriety  or  the  inconve-
niency,  if  the  king  at  once  should  nominate  a.
limited  number  of  nis  servants  to  seats  in  parlia-
ment; or,  what  is  the  same  thing,  if  seats  in  par-
liament were  annexed  to  the  possession  of  certain
of  the  most  efficient  and  responsible  offices  in  the
state  1  The  present  representation,  after  all  these
deductions,  and  under  the  confusion  in  which  it
confessedly  lies,  is  still  in  such  a  degree  popular,
or  rather  the  representatives  are  w  connected
with  the  mass  of  the  community  by  a  society  of
interests  and  passions,  that  the  will  of  the  people,
when  it  is  determined,  permanent  and  general,
almost  always  at  length  prevails.

Upon  the  whole,  in  the  several  plans  which
have  been  suggested,  of  an  equal  or  a  reformed
representation,  it  will  be  difficult  to  discover  any
proposal  that  has  a  tendency  to  throw  more  of  the
business  of  the  nation  into  the  House  of  Com-
mons, or  to  collect  a  set  of  men  more  fit  to  trans-
act that  business,  or  in  genera!  more  interested  in
the  national  happiness  and  prosperity.  One  con-
sequence, however,  may  be  expected  from  these
projects,  namely,  "  less  flexibility  to  the  influ-
ence of  the  crown."  And  since  the  diminution
of  this  influence  is  the  declared  and  perhaps  the
sole  design  of  the  various  schemes  that  have  been
produced,  whether  for  regulating  the  elections,
contracting  the  duration,  or  for  purifying  the
constitution  of  parliament  by  the  exclusion  of
placemen  and  pensioners  \  k  is  obvious  to  remark,
that  the  more  apt  and  natural,  as  well  as  the  more
saw -and  quiet  way  of 'attaining  the 'same  end,
would  be  by  a  direct  reduction  of  the  patronage  of
the  crown,  which  might  be,  effected  to  a  certain
extent  without  hazarding  further  consequences.
Superfluous  and  exorbitant  emoluments  of  office
may  not  only  be  suppressed  for  the  .present ;  but
provisions  of  law  be  devised,  which  should  for  the
future  restrain  within  certain  limits  the  number
and  value  of  the  offices  in  the  donation  of  the  king.

But  whilst  we  dispute  concerning  different
schemes  of  reformation,  all  directed  to  the  same
end,  a  previous  doubt  occurs  in  the  debate,  whe-
ther the  end  itself  be  good  or  safe :  whether  the


ed,  or  even  much  diminished,  without  danger  to
the  state.  Whilst  the  zeal  of  some  men  beholds
this  influence  with  a  jealousy  which  nothing  but
its  entire  abolition  can  appease,  many  wise  and
virtuous  politicians  deem  a  considerable  portion  of
it  to  be  as  necessary  a  part  of  the  British  consti-
tution, as  any  other  ingredient  in  the  composition ;
to  be  that,  indeed,  which  gives  .cohesion  and  so-
lidity to  the  whole.  Were  the  measures  of  go-
vernment, say  they \  opposed  from  nothing  but
principle,  government  ought  to  have  nothing  but
the  rectitude  of  its  measures  to  support  them:
but  since  opposition  springs  from  other  motives,
government  must  possess  an  influence  to  counter-
act these  motives;  to  produce,  not  a  bias  of  the
passions,  but  a  neutrality ;— k  must,  have  some
weight  to  cast  into  -the  scale,  Jo  set  the  balance
even.  It  Is  the  nature  of  power,  always  to  press
upon  the  boundaries  which  confine  it.  Licen-
tiousness, faction,  envy,  impatience  of  control  or
inferiority :  the  secret  pleasure  of  mortifying  the
great,  or  the  hope  of  dispossessing  them,  a  con-
stant willingness  to  question  and  thwart  whatever
is  dictated  or  even  proposed  by  another;  a  dispo-
sition common  to  all  bodies  of  men,  to  extend  the
claims  and  authority  of  their  orders ;  above  all,
that  love  of  power,  and  of  showing  it,  which
resides  more  or  less  in  every  human  breast,  and
which,  in  popular  assemblies,  is  inflamed^  like
every  other  passion,  by  communication  and  en-
couragement :  these  '  motives,  added  to  private
designs  and'  resentments,  cherished  also  by  popu-
lar acclamation,  and  operating  upon  tile  great
share  of  power  already  possessed  by  the  House  of  .
Commons,  might  induce  a  majority,  or,  at  least  a
large  party  of  men  in  that  assembly,  to  unite  in
endeavouring  to  draw  to  themselves  die  whole  go-
vernment or  the  state :  or,  at  least,  so  to  obstruct
the  conduct  of  public  affairs,  by^a  wanton  and
perverse  opposition,  as  to  render  it  impossible  for
the  wisest  statesman  to  carry  forwards  the  business
of  the  nation  with  success  or  satisfaction.

Some  passages  of  ous  national  history  afford*
grounds  for  these  apprehensions. — Before  the  ac-
cession of  James  the  First,  or,  at  least,  during  the
reigns  of  his  three  immediate  predecessors,  the
government  of  England  was  a  government  by
force;  that  is,  the  king  carried  his  measures  in
parliament  by  intimidation.  A  sense  of  personal
danger  kept  the  members  of  the  House  of  Com-
mons in  subjection.  .  A  conjunction  of  fortunate
causes  delivered,  at  last,  the  parliament  and  nation
from  slavery.  That  overbearing  system  which
had  declined  in  the  hands  of  James,  expired  early
in  the  reign  of  his  Bon.  After  the  Restoration;
there  succeeded  in  its  place,  and,  since  the  Revo-
lution, has  been  methodically  pursued,  the  more
successful  expedient  of  infl uen re.  $ow  we.  re-
member what  passed  between  the  loss  of  terror,
and  the  establishment,  of  influence.  The  trans-
actions of  that  interval,  whatever  we  may  think  of
their  occasion  or  effect,  no  friend  of  regal  govern-
ment would  wish  to  see  revived.— But  the  affairs
of  this  kingdom  afford  a  more  recent  attestation
to  the  sanie  doctrine.  In  the  British  colonies  of
North .  America,  the  late  assemblies  possessed
much  of  the  power  and  constitution  of  our  House
of  Commons,  •  The  king  and  government  "of
Great  Britain  held  no  patronage  in  the  country,
which  could  create  attachment  and  influence  suf-
ficient to  counteract  that  restless  arrogating  spirit.


influence  so  loudly  complained  of,  can  be  destroy- 1  which,"  in  popular  assemblies,  when  left  to  itself,


OF  THE  ADMINISTRATION  OF  JUSTICE.


m


will  never  brook  an  authority  that  checks  and  in-
terferes with  its  own.  To  tni&cause,  excited  per-
haps hy  seme  unseasonable  provocations,  we  may
attribute,  as  to  their  true  ana  proper  original,  (we
will  not  say  the  mirfortunesybut)  the  changes  that
have  taken  place  in  the.  British  empire.  The  ad-
monition which  such  examples  suggest,  will  have
its  weight  with  those  who  are  content  with  the
general  frame  of  the  English  constitution;  and
who  consider  stability  amongst  the  first  perfections
of  any  government.

We  protest,  however,  against  any  construction
by  which  what  is  here  said  shall  be  attempted  to
be  applied  to  the  justification  of  bribery,  or  of  any
clandestine  reward  or  solicitation  whatever.  The
very  secrecy  of  such  negotiations  confesses  or  be-
gets a  consciousness  oi  guilt;  which  when  the
mind  is  once  taught  to  endure  without  uneasiness,
the  character  is  prepared  for  every  compliance:
and  there  is  the  greater  danger  in  these  corrupt
practices,  as  the  extent  of  their  operation  is  un»
limited  and  unknown.  Our  apology  relates  solely
to  that  influence,  which  results  from  the  accept-
ance^or  expectation  of  public  preferments.  Nor
does  the  influence,  which  we  defend,  require,  any
sacrifice  of  personal  probity.  .In  political,  above
all  other,  subjects,  the  arguments  or  rather  the
conjectures  on  each  side  of  the  question,  are
often  so  equally  poised,  that  the  wisest1  judgments
may  j>e  held  in  suspense :  these  I  call  subjects  of
indifference.  But  again;  when  the  subject  is
not  indifferent  in  itself)  it  will  appear  such  to  a
great  part  of  those  to  whom  it  is  proposed,  for  want
of  mlonnation,  or  reflection,  or  experience,  or  of
capacity  to  collect  and  weigh  the  reasons  by  which
either  side  is  supported.  •  These  are  subjects  of
apparent  indifference.  This  indifference  occurs
still  more  frequently  in  personal  contests;  in
which  we  do  not  often  discover  any  reason  of  public
utility  for  the  preference  of  one  competitor  to.
another.  These  cases  compose  the  province  of
influence :  that  is,  the  decision  in  these  cases  will
inevitably  be  determined  by  influence  of  some  sort
or  other.  The  only  doubt  is,  what  influence  shall
be  admitted.  If  you  remove  the  influence  of  the
crown,  it  is  only  to  make  way  for  influence  from
a  different  quarter.-  If  motives  of  expectation  and
gratitude  be  withdrawn,  other  motives  will  suc-
ceed in  their  place,  acting  probably  in  an  opposite
direction,  but  equally  irrelative  and  external  to
the  proper  merits  of  the  question.  There  exist,
as  we  have  seen,  passions  in  the  human  heart,
which  will  always  make  a  strong  party  against
the  executive  power  of  a  mixed  government.  Ac-
cording as  the  disposition  of  parliament  is  friendly
or  adverse  to  the  recommendation  of  the  crown  in
matters  which  are  really  or  apparently  indifferent,
as  indifference  hath  been  now  explained,  the  bu-
siness of  the  empire  will  be  transacted  with  ease
and  convenience  or  embarrassed  with  endless
contention  and  difficulty.  Nor  is  it  a  conclusion
founded  in  justice,  or  warranted  by  experience,
that  because  men  are  induced  by  views  of  interest
to  yield  their  consent  to  measures  concerning
which  their  judgment  decides  nothing,  they  may
be  brought  by  the  same  influence  to  act  in  deli-
berate opposition  to  knowledge  and  duty.  Who-
ever reviews  the  operations  of  government  in  this
country  since  the  Revolution,  will  find  few  even
of  the  most  questionable  measures  of  administra-
tion, about  which  the  best-instructed  judgment
night  not  have  doubted  at  the  time ;  but  of  which


we  may  affirm  with  certainty,  they  were  indiffer-
ent to 'the-v  greatest  part  o{  those  who  concurred
in  them. ,  From  the  success,  or  the  faculty,  with .
which  they  who  dealt  out  the  patronage  of  the
crown  carried  measures  like  these,  ought  we  to
conclude,  that  a  similar  application  of  honours
and  emoluments  would  procure  the  consent  of
parliaments  to  counsels  evidently  detrimental  to
the  common  welfare  1  Is  there  not,  on  the  con-
trary, more  reason  to  fear,  that  the  prerogative,  if
deprived  of  influence,  would  not  be  long  able  to  sup-
port itself]  For  when  we  reflect  upon  the  power
of  the  House  of  Commons  to  extort  a  compliance
with' its  resolution  from  the  other  parte  of  the  le-
gislature ;  or  to  put  to  death  the  constitution  by  a
refusal  of  the  annual  grants  of  money  to  the  sup?
port  of  the  necessary  functions  of  government  ;—
when  we  reflect  also  what  motives  there  are.
which,  in  the  vicissitudes  of  political  interests  ami
passions,  may  one  day  arm  and  point  this  power
against  the  executive  magistrate  ;  when  we  attend
to  these  .considerations,  we  shajl  be  led  perhaps  to
acknowledge,  that  there  is  not  more  of  paradox
than  of  truth  in  that  important,  but  much  decried
apothegm,  "that  an  independent  parliament  it
incompatible  with  the  existence  of  the  monarchy."


CHAPTER  VIII.
Of  the  Administration  qf  Justice.

The  first  maxim  of  a  free  state  is,  that  the  laws-
be  made  by  one  set  of  men,  and  administered  by
another-,  in  other  words,  that  the  legislative  and
judicial  characters  be  kept  separate.  When  these
offices  are  united  in  the  same  person  or  assembly,
particular  laws  are  made  for  particular  cases,
springing  oftentimes  from  partial  motives,  and  di-
rected to  private  ends :  whilst  they  are  kept  sepa-
rate, general  laws  are  made  by  one  body  of  men,
without  foreseeing  whom- they  may  affect;  and,-
when  made,  must  be  applied  by  the  other,  let  (hem
affect  whom  they  will.

For  the  sake  of  illustration,  let  it  be  supposed,
in  this  country,  either  that,  parliaments  being  laid
aside,  the  courts  of  Westminster-Hall  made  their
own  laws:  or  that  the  two  houses- of  parliament,
with  the  King  at  their  head,  tried  and  decided
causes  at  their  bar :  it  is  evident,  in  the  first  place,
that  the  decisions  of  such  a  judicature  would  be  so
many  laws;  and  in  the  second  place,  that,  when
the  parties  and  the  interests  to  be  affected  by  the
law  were  known,  the'  inclinations  of  the  law-ma-
kers would  -inevitably  attach  to  one  side  or  the
other ;  and  that  where  there  were  neither  any  fix-
ed rules  to  regulate  their  determinations,  nor  any
superior  power  to  control  their  proceedings,  these
inclinations  would  interfere  with- the  integrity  of

Eublic  justice.  The  consequence  of  which  must
d,  that  the  subjects  of  such  a  constitution  would
live  either  without  any  constant  laws,  that  is,  with-
out any. known  pre-established  rulss  of  adjudica-
tion whatever;  or  under  laws  made  for  particular
persons,  and  partaking  of  the  contradictions  and
iniquity  of  the  motives  to  which  tjiey  owed  their
origin.

Which  dangers,  by  the  division  of  the  legisla-
tive and  judicial  functions,  aro  in  this  country  ef-
fectually  provided  against.  Parliament  knows  not
the  individuals  upon  whom  its  acts  will  operate ;
it  has  no  cases  or  parties  before  it ;  no  private  de-


13©


MORAL  A1TO  POLITICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


„  ito  serve;  consequently,  its  resolutions  wiH
be"  suggested  by  the  consideration  of  universal  ef-
fects and  tendencies,  whfeh  always  produces  im-
partial, and  commonly  advantageous  regulations.
When  laws  are  made,  courts  of  justice,  whatever
be  the  disposition  of  the  judges,  must  abide  by
them :  for  the  legislative  being  necessarily  the  su-
preme power  of  the  state,  the  judicial  and  every
ether  power  is  accountable  to  that;  and  it  cannot
be  doubted  that  the  persons  who  possess  the  sove-
reign authority  of  government,  will  be  tenacious
of  The  laws  which  they  themselves  prescribe,  and
sufficiently  jealous  of  the  assumption  of  dispensing
and  legislative  power  by  any  others.

This  fundamental  rule  of  civil  jurisprudence  is
violated  in  the  case  of  acts  of  attainder  or  confis-
cation, in  bills  of  pains  and  penalties,  and  in  all
ex  poft  facto  laws  whatever,  in  which  parliament
exercises  the  double  office  of  legislature  and  judge.
And  whoever  either  understands  the  value  of  the
role  itself,  .or  collects  the  history  of  those  instances
in  which  it  has  been  invaded,  will  be  induced,  I
believe,  to  acknowledge,  that  it  had  been  wiser  and
safer  never  to  have  departed  from  it  He  will  con-
fess, at  least,  that  nothing  but  the  most  manifest
and  immediate  peril  of  the  commonwealth  will
justify  a  repetition  of  these  dangerous  examples.
If  the  laws  in  being  do  not  punish  an  offender,  let
him  go  unpunished ;  let  the  legislature,  admonish-
ed or  the  defect  of  the  laws,  provide  against  the
comnussionofiuture  crimes  of  the  same  sort  The
escape  of  one  delinquent  can  never  produce  so
much,  harm  to  the  community  as  may  arise  from
the  infraction  of  a  rule  upon  which  the  purity  of
public  justice,  and  the  existence  of  civil  liberty,
essentially  depend.

The  next  security  for  the  impartial  administra-
tion of  justice,  especially  in  decisions  to  which  go-
vernment is  a  party,  is  the  independency  of  the
judges. As  protection  against  every  illegal  attack

SK>n  the  rights  of  the  subject  by  the  servants  of
e  crownls  to  be  sought  for  from  these  tribunals,
the  judges  of  the  land  become  not  unfrequently
the  arbitrators  between  the  king  and  the  people,
on  which  account  they  ought  to  be  independent
of  either;  or,  what  is  the  same  thing,  equally  de-
pendent upon  both ;  that  is,  if  they  be  appointed
by  the  one,  they  should  be  removeable  only  by  the
Other.  This  was  the  policy  which  dictated  that
memorable  improvement  in  our  constitution .  by
which  the  judges,  who  before  the  Revolution  held
their  offices  during  the  pleasure  of  the  king,  can
now  be  deprived  of  them  only  by  an  address  from
both  houses  of  parliament ;  as  the  most  regular,
solemn,  and  authentic  way,  by  which  the  dissatis-
faction of  the  people  can  be  expressed.  To  mak  e
this  independency  of  the  judges  complete,  the
public  salaries  of  their  office  ought  not  only  to  be
certain  both  in  amount  and  continuance,  but  so
liberal  as  to  secure  their  integrity  from  the  tempta-
tion of  secret  bribes ;  which  liberality  will  answer
also  the  further  purpose  of  preserving  their  juris-
diction from  contempt,  arid  their  characters  from
suspicion :  as  well  as  of  rendering  the  office  worthy
of  the  ambition  of  men  of  eminence  in  their  pro-
fession.

A  third  precaution  to  be  observed  in  the  forma-
tion of  courts  of  justice  is,  that  the  number  of  the
judges  be  small.  For,  beside  that  the  violence  and
tumult  inseparable  from  large  assemblies  are  in-
consistent with  the  patience,  method,  and  atten-
tion  requisite  mjudic^mvestjgatioiis;  beside  that


all  passions  and  prejudices  act  with
force  upon  a  collected  multitude;  beside  t
jectkms,  judges,  when  they  are  numerous,  diswis
the  shame  of  an  unjust  determination ;  they  shel-
ter themselves  under  one  another's  example ;  each
man  thinks  his  own  character  hid  in  the  crowd :
for  which  reason,  the  judges  ought  always  to  be
so  few,  as  that  the  conduct  of  each  may  be  con-
spicuous to  public  observation :  that  eatn  may  her
responsible  in  his  separate  and  particular  reputa-
tion for  the  decisions  in  which  he  concurs.  The
truth  of  the  above  remark  has  been  exemplified  in
this  country,  in  the  effects  of  that  wise  regulation
which  transferred  the  trial  of  parliamentary  elec-
tions from  the  House  of  Commons  at  large  to  a
select  committee  of  that  House,  composed  of  thir-
teen members.  This  alteration,  simply  by  re*
during  the  number  of  the  judges,  and,  in  conse-
quence of  that  reduction,  exposing  the  judicial
conduct  of  each  to  public  animadversion,  has  given
to  a  judicature,  which  had  been  long  swayed  by
interest  and  solicitation,  the  solemnity  and  virtue
of  the  most  upright  tribunals. — 1  should  prefer  as
even  to  an  odd  number  of  judges{  and  four  to  al*
most  any  other  number:  for  in  this  number,  beside
that  it  sufficiently  consults  the  idea  of  separate  re-
sponsibility, nothing  can  be  decided  but^y  a  ma-
jority of  three  to  one:  and  when  we  consider  that
every  decision  establishes  a  perpetual  precedent,
we  shall  allow  that  it  ought  to  proceed  from  an  ad*
thority,  not  less  than  this.  If  the  court  be  equally
divided,  nothing  is  done;  things  remain  as  they
were ;  with  some  inconveniency,  indeed,  to  the  par*
ties,  but  without  the  danger  tothe  public  of  a  hasty
precedent

A  fourth  requisite  in  the  constitution  of  a  court
of  justice,  and  equivalent  to  many  checks  upon  the.
discretion  of  judges,  is,  that  its  proceedings  be  car*
ried  on  in  public,  apertis  foribus  ;  not  only  before
a  promiscuous  concourse  of  by-standen,  but  in  the
audience  of  the  whole  profession  of  the  law.  The
opinion  of  the  bar  concerning  what  passes,  will  he
impartial ;  and  will  commonly  guide  that  of  the

SubUc.  The  most  corrupt  judge  will  fear  to  in-
ulge  his  dishonest  wishes  in  the  presence  of  such
an  assembly :  he  must  encounter,  what  few  can
support,  the  censure  of  his  equals  and  companions,
together  with  the  indignation  and  reproaches  or
his  country.

Something  is  also  gained  to  the  pnbfic  by  ap-
pointing two  or  three  courts  of  concurrent  jurisdic-
tion, that  it  may  remain  in  the  option  of  the  suitor
to  which  he  will  resort.  By  this  means  a  tribu-
nal which  mav  happen  to  be  occupied  by  ignorant
or  suspected  judges,  will  be  deserted  for  others
that  possess  more  of  the  confidence  of  the  nation.
But,  lastly,  if  several  courts  co-ordinate  to  and
independent  of  each  other,  subsist  together  in  the
country,  it  seems  necessary  that  the  appeals  from
all  of  them  should  meet  and  terminate  in  the  same
judicature ;  in  order  that  one  supreme  tribunal,  by
whose  final  sentence  all  others  are  bound  and
concluded,  may.  superintend  and  preside  over  the
rest.  This  constitution  is  necessary  for  two  pur-
poses : — to  preserve  an  uniformity  in  the  decisions
of  inferior  courts,  and  to  maintain  to  each  the
proper  limits  of  its  jurisdiction.  Without  a  common
superior,  different  courts  might  establish  contra-
dictory rules  of  adjudication,  and  the  contradiction
be  final  and  without  remedy ;  the  same  question
might  receive  opposite  determinations,  according
as  ft  was  brought  before  one  court  or  another,  and


OP  THE  ADMINISTRATION  -OF  JUSTICE.


131


1hf  ilff"— «*|i^fSiMr%H»  each  be  nJtiinate  and  irreversi-
ble. A  common  appellant  jurisdiction,  prevents
or  put*  an  end  to  this  confusion.  For  when  the
judgments  upon  appeals  are  consistent  (which
may  be  expected,  whilst  it  is  the  same  court
which  is  at  last  resorted  to,)  the  different  courts,
from  which  the  appeals  are  brought,  will  be  re-
<roeed  to  a  like  consistency  with  one  another. —
Moreover,  if  questions  arise  between  courts  inde-
pendent of  each  other,  concerning  the  extent  and
Boundaries  of  their  respective  jurisdiction,  as  each
will  be  desirous  of  enlarging  its  own,  an  authority
which  both  acknowledge  can  alone  adjust  the
controversy.  Such  a  power,  therefore,  must  re-
side somewhere,  lest  the  rights  and  repose  of  the
country  be  distracted  by  the  endless  opposition
said  mutual  encroachments  of  its  courts  of  jus-
tice.

There  are  two  kinds  of  judicature ;  the  one
where  the  office  of  the  judge  is  permanent  in  the
same  person,  and  consequently  where  the  judge
m  appointed  and  known  long  before  the  trial;
the  ether,  where  the  judge  is  determined  by  lot  at
the  time  of  the  trial,  and  for  that  turn-only.  The
one  maybe  called  a feed,  the  other  a  casual  judica-
ture. From  the  former  may  be^expected  those
ooalincations  which  are  preferred  and  sought  for
in  the  choice  of  judges,  and  that  knowledge  and
readiness  which  result  from  experience  in  the  of-
nee.  But  then,  as  the  judge  is  known  beforehand,
he  is  accessible  to  the  parties ;  there  exists  a  pos-
sibility of  secret  management  and  undue  practices ;
«r,  in  contests  between  the  crown  and  the  subject,
the  judge  appointed  by  the  crown  may  be  sus-
pected of  partiality  to  his  patron,  or  of  entertaining
tnrRnationa  fevourahte  to  the  authority  from  which
he  derives  hie  own.  The  advantage  attending
the  second  kind  of  Judicature,  is  induTerency ;  the
defect,  the  want  of  that  legal  science  which  pro-
duces uniformity  and  Justice  in  legal  decisions.
The  mnstuMlkm  of  English  courts  of  law,  in
winch  canses  are  tried  by  a  jury,  with  the  assist-

of  a  judge,  combines  toe  two  species  with
"ex success. This admirable  contrivance

i  the  wisdom  of  a  fixed- with  the  integrity  of
•  ■■■aal  judicature  j  and  avoids,  in  a  great  mea-
sure, the  inconveniences  of  both.  The  judge
fcaiparts  to  the  jurj  the  benefit  of  his  erudition  and
experience;  the  jury,  by  their  disinterestedness,
check  any  corrupt  partialities  which  previous  ajp-
pticarion  may  have  produced  in  the  judge.  If  the
JMiiiiiaiisliiwi  were  left  to  the  judge,  the  party
night  sutler  under  the  superior  interest  of  his  ad-


fz  if  it  were  left  to  an  umnstructed  jury,  his
fsgnas  would  be  in  still  greater  danger,  from  the
ipotanceof  those  who  were  to  decide  upon  them.
The  present  wise  admixture  of  chance  and  choice
hi  the  constitution  of  the  court  in  which  his  cause
fa  triad,  guards  him  equally  against  the  fear  of  in-
jury from  either  of  these  canses.

En  proportion  to  the  acbiowledged  excellency
of  this  mode  of  trisi,  every  deviation  from  it  ought
to  be  watched  with  vigilance,  and  admitted  by  the
Irgjiihhirn  with  caution  and  reluctance.  Sum-
r  convicfions  before  justices  of  the  peace,  es-
nr  for  offences  against  the  game  laws;  courts
cjanee ;  Mending  the  jurisdiction  of  courts
of  equity;  urging  too  far  the  distinction  between
qsawftow  of  tew  and  matters  of  feet ;— are  ail  so
sssw  rairmgements  upon  this  great  charter  of

-  '" the  trial  by  jury  is  sometime*


found  inadequate  to  the  administration  of  equal
justice.  This  imperfection  takes  place  chiefly  in
disputes  in  which  some  popular  passion  or  preju-
dice intervenes;  as  where  a  particular  order  of
men  advance  claims  upon,  the  rest  of  the  commu-
nity, which  is  the  case  of  the  clergy  contending
for  tithes ;  or  where,  an  ordc:  of  men  are  obnox-
ious by  their  professions,  as  are  officers  of  the
revenue,  bailins,  battfiV  followers,  and  other  low
ministers  of  the  law ;  or  where  one  of  the  parties
has  an  interest  in  common  with  the  general
interest  of  the  jurors,  and  that  of  the  other  m
opposed  to  it,  as  in  contests  between  landlords
and  tenants,,  between  lords  of  manors  and  the
holders  of  estates  under  them;  or,  lastly,  where
the  minds  of  men  are  jnnamed  by  political  dis-
sensions or  religious  hatred.  -  These-  prejudices
act  most  powerfully  upon  the  common  people;
of  which  order  Junes  are  made  up.  The  force
and  danger  of  them  are  also  increased  by  the  very
circumstance  of  taking  juries  out  of  the  county
in  which  the  subject  of  dispute  arises.  In  the
neighbourhood  of  the  parties,  the  cause  is  often
prejudged :  and  these  secret  decisions  of  the  mind
proceed  commonly  more  upon  sentiments  of  fa-
vour or  hatred,-upon  some  opinion  concerning  the
sect,  family,  profession,  character,  connexions,  or
circumstances  of  the  parties, — than  upon  any
knowledge  or  discussion  of  the  proper  merits  of
the  question.  More  exact  justice,  would,  in  many
instances,  be  rendered  to  the  suitors,  if  the  deter-
mination were  left  entirely  to  the  judges;  provided
we  could  depend  upon  the  same  purity  of  conduct,
when  the  power  of  these  magistrates  was  enlarged,
which  they  have  long  manifested  in  the  exercise  of
a  mixed  and  restrained  authority.  But  this  is  an
experiment  too  big  with  public  danger  to  he  hai-
led. The  effects,  however,  of  some  local  preju-


dices, might  be  safely  obviated  bv  a  law  empow-
ering the  court  in  which  the  action  is  brought,  to
send  the  cause  to  trial  in  a  distant  county;  the  ex-
penses attending  the  change  of  place  always  fall-
lngupon  the  party  who  applied  for  it  -
There  is  a  second  division  of  courts  of  justice,


which  presents  a  new.  alternative  of  difficulties]
Either  one,  two,  or  a  few  sovereign  courts  may  be
erected- in  the  metropolis,  for  the  whole  kingdom
to  resort  to;  or  courts  of  local  jurisdiction  may  be
fixed  in  various  provinces  and  districts  of  the
empire.  Great,  though  opposite,  inconveniences
attend  each  arrangement.  If  the  court  be'  remote
and  solemn,-  it  becomes,  by  these  very  qualities,
expensive  and  dilatory :  the  expense  is  unavoid-
ably increased  when  witnesses,  parties,  and  agents,
must  be  brought  to  attend  from  distant  parts  0/
the  country :  and,  where  the  whole  judicial  busi-
ness of  a  large  nation  is  collected  into  a  few  supe-
rior tribunals,  it  win  be  found  impossible,  even  M
the  prolixity  of  forms  which  retards  the  progress
of  causes  were  removed,  to  give  a  prompt  Bearing
to  every  -complaint,  or  an  immediate  answer  to
any.  On  the  other  hand,  if,  to  remedy  these  evils,
and  to  render  the  administration  of  justice  cheap
and  speedy,  domestic  and  summary  tribunals  be
erected  in  each  neighbourhood,  the  advantage  of
such  courts  will  be  accompanied  with  all  the  dan-
gers of  ignorance  and  partiality,  and  with  the
certain  mischief  of  confusion  and  contrariety  in
their  decisions.  The  law  of  England,  by  its  cir-
cuit, or  itinerary  courts,  contains  a  provision  for
the  distribution  of  private  justice,  in  a  great
measure  relieved  from  both  these  objections. As


133


MORAL  AND  POLITICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


the  presiding  magistrate  comes  into  the  country  a
stranger  to  its  prejudices,  rivalsbips,  and  connex-
ions, ne  brings  with  him  none  of  those  attach-
ments and  regards  which  are  so  apt  to  pervert  the
course  of  justice  when  the  parties  and  the  judges
inhabit  the  same  neighbourhood.  Again :  as  this
magistrate  is  usually  one  of  the  judges  of  the  su-
preme tribunals  of  tho  kingdom,  and  lias  passed
nis  life  in  the  study  and  administration  of  the
laws,  he  possesses,  it  may  be  presumed,  those  pro-
fessional qualifications  which  befit  the  dignity  and
importance  of  his  station.  Lastly,  as  both  he,  and
the  advocates  who  accompany  him  in  his  .circuit,
are  employed  in  the  business  of  those  superior
courts  (to  which  also  their  proceedings  are  amena-
ble,) they  will  naturally  conduct  themselves  by  the
rules  of  adjudication  which  they  have  applied  or
learned  there ;  and  by  this  means  maintain,  what
constitutes  a  principal  perfection  of  civil  govern-,
ment,  one  law  of  the  land  in  every  part  and  dis-
trict of  the  empire.

Next  to  the  constitution  of  courts  of  justice,  we
are  naturally  led  to  consider  the  maxims  which
ought  to  guide  their  proceedings;  and,  upon  this
subject,  the  chief  inquiry  will  be,  how  far,  and
for  what  reasons,  it  is  expedient  to  adhere  to  for-
mer determinations;  or  whether  it  be  necessary
for  judges  to  attend  to  any  other  consideration
than  the  apparent  and  particular  equity  of  the
case  before  them.  Now,  although  to  assert  that
precedents  established  by  one  set  of  judges  ought
to  be  incontrovertible  by  their  successors  in  the
same  jurisdiction,  or  by  those  who  exercise  a  high-
er, would  be  to  attribute  to  the  sentence  of  those
judges  all  the  authority  we  ascribe  to  the  most
solemn  acts  of  the  legislature :  yet  the  general  se-
curity of  private  rights,  and  of  civil  lilc,  requires
that  such  precedents,  especially  if  they  have  been
confirmed  by  repeated  adjudications,  should  not
be  -overthrown,  without  a  detection  of  manifest
error,  or  without  some  imputation  of  dishonesty
upon  the  court  by  whose  judgment  the  question
we.^f^irst  decided.  And  this-  deference  to  prior
decisions  is  founded  upon  two  reasons:  first,  that
the  discretion  of  judges  may  lie  bound  down  by
positive  rules ;  and  secondly,  that  the  subject,  up-
on every  occasion  in  which  his  legal  interest  is
concerned,  may  know  beforehand  how  to  act,  and
what  to  expect.  To  set  judges  free  from  any  obli-
gation to  conform  themselves  to  the  decisions  of
weir  predecessors,  would  be  to  lay  open  a  latitude
of  Judging  with  which  no  description  of  men  can
sarely  be  intrusted ;  it  would  he  to  allow  space  for
the  exercise  of  those  concealed  partialities,  which,
since  they  cannot  by  any  human  policy  be  exclud-
ed, ought  to  be  confined  by  boundaries  and  land-
marks. It  is  in  vain  to  allege,  that  the  superin-
tendency  of  parliament  is  always  at  hand  to  con-
trol and  punish  abuses  of  judicial  discretion.  By
what  rules  can  parliament  proceed  1  How  shall
they  pronounce  a  decision  to  be  wrong,  where
there  exists  no  acknowledged  measure  or  stan-
dard of  what  is  right;  which,  in  a  multitude  of  in-
stances, would  be  the  case,  if  prior  determinations
were  no  longer  to  be  appealed  to  1

Diminishing  the  danger  of  partiality,  is  one
thing  gamed  by  adhering  to  precedents;  but  not
the  principal  thing.  The  subject  of  every  system
of  laws  must  expect  that  decision  in  his  own  case,
which  he  knows  that  others  have  received  in
eases  similar  to  his.  If  he  expect  not  this,  he
can  expect  nothing. There  exists  no  other  rule  or


principle  of  reasoning,  by  which  he  can  foretell,  or
even  conjecture,  the  event  tof  a  judicial  contest.
To  remove  therefore  the  grounds  of  this  expecta-
tion, by  rejecting  the  force  and  authority  of  pre-
cedents, is  to  entail  upon  the  subject  the  worst
property  of  slavery, — to  have  no  assurance  of -his
rights,  or  knowledge  of  his  duty.  The  quiet  also
of  the  country,  as  well  as  the  confidence  and  satis-
faction of  each  man's  mind,  requires  uniformity
in  j  udicial  proceedings.  Nothing  quells  a  spirit  of
litigation,  like  despair  of  success :  therefore  nothing
so  completely  puts  an  end  to  law-suits,  as  a  rim
adherence  to  known  rules  of  adjudication.  Whilst
the  event  is  uncertain,  which  it  eyer  must  be
whilst  it  is  uncertain  whether  former  determina-
tions upon  the  same  subject  will  be  followed  or
not,  law-suits  Will  be  endless  and  innumerable:
men  will  commonly  engage  in  them,  either  from
the  hope  of  prevailing  in  their  claims,  which  the
smallest  chance  is  sufficient  to  encourage ;  or  with
the  design  of  intimidating  their  adversary  by  the
terror  of  a  dubious  litigation.  -  When  justice  is
rendered  to  the  parties,  only  half  the.  business  ofa
court  of  justice  is  done :  the  more  important  part
of  its  office  remains ; — to  put  an  end,  for  the  future,
to  every  fear,  and  quarrel,  and  expense,  upon  the
same  point;  and  so  to  regulate  its  proceedings,
that  not  only  a  doubt  once  decided  may  be  stirred
no  more,  but  that  the  whole  train  of  law-suits,
which  issue  from  one  uncertainty,  may  die  with
the  parent-question.  Now  this  advantage  can  be
attained  only  by  considering  each  decision  as  a  di-
rection to  succeeding  judges.  And  it  should  be
observed,  that  every  departure  from  former  deter-
minations, especially  if  they  have  been  often  re-
peated or  long  submitted  to,  shakes  the  stability
of  all  legal  title.  It  is  not  fixing  a  point  anew ,
it  is  leaving  every  thing  unfixed.  For  by  the
same  stretch  of  power  by  which  the  present  race
of  judges  take  upon  them  to  contradict  the  judg-
ment of  their  predecessors,  those  who  try  the
question  next  may  set  aside  theirs.

From  an  adherence  however  to  precedents,  by
which  so  much  is  gained  to  the  public,  two  con-
sequences arise  which  are  often,  lamented;  the
hardship  of  particular  determinations,  and  the  in-
tricacy of  the  law  as  a  science.  To  the  first  of
these  complaints,  we  must  apply  this  reflection :— -
"  That  uniformity  is  of  more  importance  than
equity,  in  proportion  as  a  general  uncertainty
would  be  a  greater  evil  than  particular  injustice."
The  second  is  attended  with  no  greater  inconve-
niency  than  that  of  erecting  the  practice  of  the
law  into  a  separate  profession ;  which  this  reason,
we  allow,  makes  necessary :  for  if  we  attribute  so
much  authority  to  precedents,  it  is  expedient  that
they  be  known,  in  every  cause,  both  to  the  advo-
cates and  to  the  judge :  this  knowledge  cannot  be
general,  since  it  is  the  fruit  oftentimes  of  laborious
research,  or  demands  a  memory  stored  with  long-
collected  erudition.


To  a  mind  revolving  upon  the  subject  of  hu-
man jurisprudence,  there  frequently  occurs  this
question: — Why,  since  the  maxims  of  natural
justice  are  few  and  evident,  do  there  arise  so  many
doubts  and  controversies  in  their  application  1  Or,
in  other  words,  hpw  comes  it  to  pass,  that  although
the  principles  of  the  law  of  nature,  be  simple,  and
for  the  most  part  sufficiently  obvious,  there  should


OP  THE  ADMINISTRATION  OF  JUSTICE.


1*1


ooat,  nevertheless,  in  every  system  of  municipal
tors,  end  in  the  actual  administration  of  relative
justice,  numerous  uncertainties  and  acknowledged
difficulty  1  Whence,  it  may  be  asked,  so  much
room  for  litigation,  and  so  many  subsisting  dis-
putes, if  the  rules  of  human  duty  be  neither  ob-
scure nor  dubious  ?  If  a  system  of  morality  con-
taining both  the  precepts  of  revelation  and  the
deductions  of  reason,  may  be  comprised  within
the  compass  of  one  moderate  volume;  and  the
moralist  oe  able,  as  he  pretends,  to  describe  the
rights  and  obligations  of  mankind,  in  all  the  dif-
ferent relations  they  may  hold  to  one  another ;
what  need  of  those  codes  of  positive  and  particu-
lar institutions,  of  those  tomes  of  statutes  and  re-
ports, which  require  the  employment  of  a  long
life  even  to  peruse  ?  And  this  question  is  immedi-
ately connected  with  the  argument  which  has
been  discussed  in  the  preceding  paragraph :  for,
unless  there  be  found  some  greater  uncertainty  in
the  law  of  nature,  or  what  may  be  called  natural
equity,  when  it  comes  to  be  applied  to  real  cases
and  to  actual  adjudication,  then  what  appears  in
the  rules  and  principles  of  the  science,  as  delivered
in  the  writings  of  those  who  treat  of  the  subject,
it  were  better  that  the  determination  of  every  cause
should  be  left  to  the  conscience  of  the  judge,
unfettered  by  precedents  and  authorities ;  since
the  very  purpose  for  which  these  are  introduced,
is  to  give  a  certainty  to  judicial  proceedings,
which  such  proceedings  would  want  without
them.

Now  to  account  for  the  existence  of  so  many
sources  of  litigation,  notwithstanding  the  clearness
and  perfection  of  natural  justice,  it  should  be  ob-
served, in  the  first  place,  that  treatises  of  morality
always  suppose  facts  to  be  ascertained:  and  not
only  so,  but  the  intention  likewise  of  the  parties
to  oe  known  and  laid  bare.  For  example:  when
we  pronounce  that  promises  ought  to  be  fulfilled
in  that  sense  m  which  the  pronuser  apprehended,
at  the  time  of  making  the  promise,  the  other  party
received  and  understood  it :  the  apprehension  of
one  side,  and  the  expectation  of  the  other,  must
be  discovered,  before  this  rule  can  he  reduced  to
practice,  or  applied  to  the  determination •  of  any
actual  dispute.  Wherefore  the  discussion  of  facts
which  the  moralist  supposes  to  be  settled,  the
discovery  of  intentions  which  he  presumes  to  be
known,  suH  remain  to  exercise  the  inauiry  of
courts  of  justice.  And  as  these  facts  ana  inten-
tions are  often  to  be  inferred,  or  rather  conjectured,
flan  obscure  indications,  from  suspicious  testimo-
ny, or  from  a  comparison  of  opposite  and  contend-
ing probabilities,  they  afford  a  never-failing  supply
ofuoubt  and  litigation.  For  which  reason,  as  hath
been  observed  in  a  former  part  of  this  work,  the
science  of  morality  is  to  be  considered  rather  as  a
direction  to  the  parties,  who  are  conscious  of  their
own  thoughts  and  motives,  and  designs,  to  which
consciousness  the  teacher  of  morality  constantly
appeals;  than  as  a  guide  to  the  judge,  or  to  any
third  person,  whose  arbitration  must  proceed  upon
rules  of  evidence,  and  maxims  of  credibility,  with
which  the  moralist  has  no  concern.

Secondly ;  there  exists  a  multitude  of  cases,  in
which  the  law  of  nature,  that  is,  the  law  of  public
expediency,  prescribes  nothing,  except  that  some
certain  rufe  oe  adhered  to,  and  that  the  rule  ac-
tually established,  be  preserved-,  it  either  being
iadifiarent  what  rule  obtains,  or,  out  of  many
rules,  no  one  being  so  much  more  advantageous


than  the- rest,  as  (o  recompense  the  mconveniency
of  an  alteration.  In  all  such  cases,  the  law  of
nature  sends  us  to  the  law  of  the  land.  She  di-
rects that  either  some  fixed  rule  be  introduced  by
an  act  of  the  legislature,  or  that  the  rule  whicn
accident,  or  customer  common  consent,  hath  al-
ready established,  be  steadily  maintained.  Thus,
m  the  descent  of  lands,  or  the  inheritance  of  per-
sonals from  intestate  proprietors,  whether  the
kindred  of  the  grandmother,  or  of  the  great-grand-
mother, shall  he  preferred  in  the  succession;
whether  the  degrees  of  consanguinity  shall  be  com-
puted through  the  common  ancestor,  or  from  him ;
whether  the  widow  shall  take  a  third  or  a  moiety
of  her  husband's  fortune ;  whether  sons  shall  be,
preferred  to  daughters,  or  the,  elder  to  the  younger :
whether  the  distinction  of  age  shall  be  regarded
amongst  sisters,  as  well  as  between  brothers ;  in
these,  and  in  a  great  variety  of  questions  which
the  same  subject  supplies,  the  law  of  nature  deter-
mines nothing.  The  only  answer  she  returns  to
our  inquiries  is,  that  some  certain  and  gene-
ral rule  be  laid  down  by  public  authority ; '  be
obeyed  when  laid  down ;  and  that  the  quiet  of  the
country  be  not  disturbed,  nor  the  expectation. of
heirs  frustrated,  by  capricious  innovations..  This
silence  or  neutrality  of  the  law  of  nature,  which  we
have  exemplified  in  the  case  of  intestacy,  holdscon-
ceminga  great  part  of  the  questions  that  relate  to
the  right  or  acquisition  of  property.  Recourse  then
must  necessarily  be  had  to  statutes,  or  precedents,
or  usage,  to  fix  what  the  law  of  nature  has  left
loose.  The  interpretation  >of  these  statutes,  the
search  after  precedents,  the  investigation  of  cus-
toms, compose  therefore  an  unavoidable,  and  at
the  same  time  a  large  and  intricate,  portion  of  fo-
rensic business.  Positive  constitutions  or  judicial
authorities  are,  in  like  manner,  wanted  to  give
precision  to  many  things  which  are  in  their  nature
indeterminate.  The  age  of  legal  discretion;  at
what  time  of  life  a  person  shall  be  deemed  com-  ~
petent  to  the  performance  of  any  act  which  may
bind  his  property ;  whether  at  twenty,  or  twenty-
one,  or  earlier  or  later,  or  at  some  point  of  time
between  these  years ;  can  only  be  ascertained  by  a
positive  rule  of  the  society  to  which  the  party  be-
longs. The  line  has  not  been  drawn  by  nature ;
the  human  understanding  advancing  to  maturity
by  insensible  degrees,  and  its  progress  varying  in
different  individuals.  Yet  it  is  necessary,  for  the
sake  of  mutual  security,  that  a  precise  age  be  fixed,
and  that  what  is  fixed  be  known  to  all.  It  i»  on
these  occasions  that  the  intervention  of  law  sup-
plies the  inconstancy  of  nature.*  Again,  there
are  other  things  which  are  perfectly  arbitrary,
and  capable  of  no  certainty  but  what  is  given  to
them  by  positive  regulation.  It  is  fit  that  a  limited
time  should  be  assigned  to  defendants,  to  plead  to
the  complaints  alleged  against  them;  and  also
that  the  default  of  Reading  within  a  certain  time
should  be  taken  for  a  confession  of  the  charge :
but  to  how  many  days  or  months  that  term  should
be  extended,  though  necessary  to  be  known  with
certainty,  cannot  be  known  at  all  by  any  informa-
tion which  the  law  of  nature  affords.  And  the
same  remark  seems  applicable  to  almost  all  those
rules  of  proceeding;  which  constitute  what  is  call-
ed the  practice  of  the  court:  as  they  cannot  be
traced  out  by  reasoning,  (hey  must  be  settled  by
authority.

Thirdly :  in  contracts,  whether  express  or  im-
plied, which  involve  a  great  number  of  conditions ;


m


MOHAL  AND  POLITICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


ti  in  those  whkh  an  entered  into  between  mu-
tsrs  and  servants,  principals  and  agents;  many
also  of  merchandise,  or  for  works  of  art;  m  some
fikewise  which  relate  to  the  negotiation  of  money
or  bills,  or  to  the  acceptance  of  credit  or  security :
tfee  original  design  and  expectation  of  the  parties
was,  that  both  sides-should  be  guided  by  the  coarse
and  custom  of  the  country  in  transactions  of  the
same  sort  Consequently,  when  these  contracts
come  to  be  disputed,  natural  justice  can  only  refer
to  that  custom.  But  as  such  customs  are  not  al-
ways sufficiently  uniform  or  notorious,  but  often
to  be  collected  from  the  production  and  compa-
rison of  instancies  and  accounts  repugnant  to  one
another;  and  each  custom  being  only  that,  after
all,  which  amongst  a  variety  or  usages  seems  to
predominate;  we  hare  here  also  ample  room  for
doubt  and  contest

Fourthly;  as  the  law  of  nature,  founded  in  the
vefyoolistructionof  human  society,  which  is  form-
ed to  endure  through  a  series  of  perishing  gene-
rations, requires  that  the  just  engagements  a  man
enters  into  should  continue  in  force  beyond  his
own  life ;  it  follows,  that  the  private  rights  of  per-
sons frequently  depend  upon  what  has  been  trans-
acted, in  times  remote  from  the  present,  by  their
ancestors  or  predecessors,  by  those  under  whom
they  claim,  or  to  whose  obligations  they  have  suc-
ceeded. Thus  the  questions  which  usually  arise
between  lords  of  manors  and  their  tenants,  be-
t  the  king  and  those  who  claim  royal  fran-
i,  or  between  them  and  the  persons  affected
by  these  franchises,  depend  upon  the  terms  of  the
original  grant.  In  like  manner,  every  dispute
concerning  tithes,  in  which  an  exemption  or  com-
position is  pleaded,  depends  upon  the  agreement
which  took  place  between  the  predecessor  of  the
claimant  and  the  ancient  owner  of  the  land.  The
appeal  to  these  grants  and  agreements  is  dictated
by  natural  equity,  as  well  as  by  the  municipal
law ;  but  concerning  the  existence,  or  the  condi-
tions, of  such  old  covenants,  doubts  will  perpetu-
ally occur,  to  which  the  law  of  nature  affords  no
The  loss  or  decay  of  records,  the  pe-
■  of  firing  memory,  the  corruption  and
i  of  tradition,  all  conspire  to  multiply
uncertainties  upon  this  head;  what  cannot  be
produced  or  proved,  must  be  left  to  loose  and  fal-
lible presumption.  Under  the  same  head  may
be  included  another  topic  of  altercation ;— the
tracing  out  of  boundaries,  which  time,  or  neglect,
or  unity  of  possession,  or  mixture  of  occupation,  has
confounded  or  obliterated.  To  which  should  be
added,  a  difficulty  which  often  presents  itself  in
disputes  concerning  rights  of  way,  both  public
ana  private,  and  of  those  easements  which  one
man  claims  in  another  man's  property,  namely,
that  of  distins^nshing,  after  a  lapse  of  years,
the  use  of  an  indulgence  from  the  exercise  of  a


•fly  occur
•oration.


ily;  the  quantity  or  extent  of  an  injury,
even  when  the  cause  and  author  of  it  are  known,
is  often  dubious  and  undefined.  If  the  injury,
consists  in  the  loss  of  some  -specific  right,,  the  va-
lue of  the  right  measures  the  amount  of  the  in-
jury :  but  what  a  man  -may  have  suffered  in
his  person,  from  an  assault;  in  his  reputation,  by
slander;  or  in  the  comfort  of  his  life,  by  the
seduction  of  a  wife  or  daughter;  or  what  sum  of
money  shall  be  deemed  a  reparation  for  damages
such  as  these ;  cannot  be  ascertained  by  any  rules
which  the  law  of  nature  supplies. The  law  of


nature  commands,  that  reparation  be  made;  and
adds  to  her  command,  that,  when  the  aggressor
and  the  sufferer  disagree,  the  damage  be  assessed
by  authorised  and  indifferent  arbitrators.  Here
then  recourse  must  be  had  to  courts  of  law,  not
only  with  the  pennissioi^  but  in  some  measure  by
the  direction,  of  natural  justice.

Sixthly;  when  controversies  arise  in  the  inter-
pretation of  written  laws,  they  for  the  most  part
arise  upon  some  contingency  which  the  composer
of  the  law  did  not  foresee  or  think  of  In  the  ad-
judication of  such  cases,  this  dilemma  presents
itself;  if  the  laws  be  permitted  to  operate  only
upon  the  cases  which  actually  were  contemplated
by  the  law-makers,  they  will  always  be  found  de-
fective.: if  they  be  extended  to  every  case  to  which
the  reasoning,  and  spirit,  and  expediency,  of  the
provision  seem  to  belong,  without  any  farther  evi-
dence of  the  intention  of  the  legislature,  we  shall
allow  to  the  judges  a  liberty  of  applying  the  law.
which  will  fell  very  little  short  of  the  power  of
making  it  If  a  literal  construction  be  adhered  to.
the  law  will  often  fail  of  its  end;  if  a  loose  ana
vague  exposition  be  admitted,  the  law  .might  as
well  have  never  been  enacted ;  for  this  ncenso
will  bring  back  into  the  subject  all  the  discretion
and  uncertainty  which  it  was  the  design  of  the  le-
gislature to  take  away.  Courts  of  justice  are,  and
always  must  be,  embarrassed  by  these  opposite
difficulties;  and,  as  it  never  can  be  known  before-
hand, in  what  degree  either  consideration  may
prevail  in  the  mind  of  the  judge,  there  remains  an
unavoidable  cause  of  doubt,  and  a  place  for  con-
tention.

Seventhly;  the  deliberations  of  courts  of  jus-
tice upon  every  new  question,  are  encumbered
with  additional  difficulties,  in  consequence  of  the
authority  which  the  judgment  of  the  court  pos-
sesses, as  a  precedent  to  future  judicatures;  which
authority  appertains  not  only  to  the  conclusions  the
court  delivers,  but  to  the  principles  and  arguments
upon  which  they  are  built.  The  view  of  thiB  ef-
fect makes  it  necessary  for  a  judge  to  look  beyond
the  case  before  him ;  and,  beside  the  attention  he
owes  to  the  truth  and  justice  of  the  cause  between
the  parties,  to  reflect  whether  the  principles,  and
maxims,  and  reasoning,  which  he  adopts  and  au-
thorises, can  be  applied  with  safety  to  all  cases
which  admHofacomparison  with  the  present.  The
decision  of  the  cause,  were  the  effects  of  the  de-
cision to  stop  there,  might  be  easy :  but  the  con-
sequence of  establishing  the  principle  which
such  a  decision  assumes,  may  be  difficult,  though
of  the  utmost  imports  nee,  to  be  foreseen  and  regu-
lated.

Finally ;  after  all  the  certainty  and  rest  that  can
be  given  to  points  of  law,  either  by  the  interposi-
tion of  the  legislature  or  the  authority  of  prece-
dents, one  principal  source  of  disputation,  and  into
which  indeed  the  greater  part  of  kcal  controversies
may  be  resolved,  will  remain  stiu,  namely,  "  the
competition  of  opposite  analogies."  When  m
point  of  law  has  been  once  adjudged,  neither  that
question,  nor  any  which  completely,  and  in  all  its
circumstances,  corresponds  with  that,  can  be
brought  a  second  time  into  dispute:  but  questions
arise  which  resemble  this  only  indirectly  and  in
part,  in  certain  views  and  circumstances,  and  which
may  seem  to  bear  an  equal  or  a  greater  affinity  to
other  adjudged  cases;  questions  winch-can  be
brought  within  any  fixed  rule  only  by  analogy,
and  which  hold  a  relation  by  analogy  to  different


OP  THE  ADMINISTRATION  OF  JUSTICE.


m


rate*. It  is  by  the  urging  of  the  Afferent  analo-
gies that  the  contention  of  the  bar  is  carried  on:
and  it  is  in  the  comparison,  adjustment,  and  re-
conciliation of  them  with  one  another:  in  the
discerning  of  such  distinctions ;  and  in  the  fram-
ing of  such  a  determination,  as  may  either  save,
the  Various  roles  alleged  in  the  cause,  or  if  that
be  impossible,  may  give  up  the  weaker  analogy  to
the  stronger ;  that  the  sagacity  and  wisdom  ofthe
court  am  seen  and  exercised. Amongst  a  thou-
sand instances  of  this,  we  may  cite  one  of  general
notoriety,  in  the  contest  that  has  lately  been  agi-
tated concerning  literary  property. — The  personal
industry  which  an  author  expends  upon  the  com-
position of  his  work,  bears  so  near  a  resemblance
to  that  by  which  every  other  kind  of  property  is
earned,  or  deserved,  or  acquired :  or  rather  there
exists  such  a  correspondency  between  what  is
created  by  the  study  of  man's  mind,  and  the  pro-
duction of  his  labour  in  any  other  way  of  applying
it,  that  he  seems  entitled  to  the  same  exclusive,
assignable,  and  perpetual,  right  in  both ;  and  that
light  to  the  same  protection  of  law. This  was
Ins  analogr  contended  lor  on  one  side. On  the
other  hand,  a  book,  as  to  the  author's  right  in  it,

m  similar  to  an  invention  of  art,  as  a  ma-

,  an  engine,  a  medicine:  and  since  the  law
its  these  to  be  copied,  or  imitated,  except
where  en  exclusive  use  or  sale  is  reserved  to  the
inventor  br  patent,  the  same  liberty  should  be  al-
Iswed  in  the  publication  and  sale  of  books.  This
was  the  analogy  maintained  by  the  advocates  of  an
open  trade. And  the  competition  of  these  oppo-


open  trade.  And  tne  competition  or  tnese  oppo-
ses analogies  constituted  the  difficulty  of  the  case,
as  aw  as the  same  was  argued,  or  adjudged,  upon
principles  of  common  law.— -One  example  may
serve  to  illustrate  our  meaning :  but  whoever  takes
op  a  volume  of  Reports,  will  find  most  of  the  ar-
guments it  contains,  capable  of  the  same  analysis:
although  the  analogies,  it  must  be  confessed,  are

i  so  entangled  as  not  to  be  easily  unra-

even  perceived.
Doubtful  and  obscure  points  of  law  are  not
however  nearly  so  numerous  as  they  are  appre-
hended to  be.  Out  of  the  multitude  of  causes
which,  in  the  course  of  each  year,  are  brought  to
trial  in  the  metropolis,  or  upon  the  circuits,  there
are  few  in  which  any  point  is  reserved  for  the

t  of  superior  courts.  Yet  these  few  con-
i  all  the  doubts  with  which  the  law  is  charge-
able: for  as  to  the  rest,  the  uncertainty,  as  hath
been  shown  above,  is  not  in  the  law,  but  in  the
— - —  -r  v i  information. .


There  are  two  peculiarities  in  the  judicial  con-
stitution of  this  country,  which  do  not  carry  with
them  that  evidence  of  their  propriety  which  recom-
lnends  almost  every  other  part  of  the  system.  The
fin*  of  these  is  the  rule  which  requires  that  juries
he  unanimous  in  their  verdicts.  To  expect  that
twelve  men,  taken  by  lot  out  of  a  promiscuous
multitude,  should  agree  in  their  opinion  upon
points  confessedly  dubious,  and  upon  which  of-
tentimes the  wisest  judgments  might  be  holden
in  suspense;  or  to  suppose  that  any  real  una-
nimity  or  change  of  opinion,  in  the  dissenting
jurors,  could  be  procured  by  confining'them  untu
they  all  consented  to  the  same  verdict,  bespeaks
b  of  the  conceit  of  a  barbarous  age,  than  of  the


rule  are  hot  so  detrimental,  as  the  rule  itself  is  un-
reasonable ; — in  criminal  prosecutions,  it  operates
considerably  in  favour  of  the  prisoner:  for  if  a
juror  find  it  necessary  to  surrender  to  the  obsti-
nacy of  others,  he  will  much  more  readily  resign
his  opinion  on  the  side  of  mercy  than  of  condem-
nation :.  in  civil  suits,  it  adds  weight  to  the  direc-
tion of  the  judge ;  lor  when  a  conference  with
one  another  does  not  seem  likely  to  produce,  in
the  jury,  the  agreement  that  is  necessary,  they
will  naturally  close  their  disputes  by  a  ^""^n
submission  to  the  opinion  delivered  from  the
bench.  However,  there  seems  to  be  less  of  the
concurrence  of  separate  judgments  in  the  same
conclusion,  consequently  less  assurance  that  the
conclusion  is  founded  in  reasons  of  apparent  truth
and  justice,  than  if  the  decision  were  left  to  a
plurality,  or  to  some  certain  majority  of  voices.

The  second  circumstance  in  our  constitution
which,  however  it  may  succeed  in  practice,  does
not  seem  to  have  been  suggested  by  any  intelli-
gible fitneev in  the  nature  ofthe  thing,  is  the
choice  that  is  made  of  the  House  of  Lords  as  a
court  of  appeal  from  every  civil  court  of  judicature
in  the  kingdom ;  and  the  last  also  and  highest  ap-
peal to  which  the  subject  can  resort  There  ap-
pears to  be  nothing  in  the  constitution  of  that
assembly ;  in  the  education,  habits,  character,  or
professions,  of  the  members  who  compose  it;  in
the  mode  of  their  appointment,  or  the  right  by
which  they  succeed  to  their  places  in  it;  that
should  qualify  them  for  this  arduous  office  j  ex-
cept perhaps,  that  the  elevation  of  their  rank  and
fortune  affords  a  security  against  the  ofler  and


influence  of  small  bribes. Officers  of  the  armjr
and  navy,  courtiers,  ecclesiastics; young  men
who  have  just  attained  the  age  of  twenty-one,
and  who  have  passed  their  youth  in  the  dissipation
and  pursuits  which  commonly  accompany  the
possession  or  inheritance  of  great  fortunes ;  coun-
try-gentlemen, occupied  in  the  management  of
their  estates,  or  in  the  care  of  their  domestic  con-
cerns and  family  interests  j  the  greater  part  ofthe
assembly  born  to  their  station,  that  is,  placed  in  it
by  chance ;  most  ofthe  rest  advanced  to  the  peer-
age for  services,  and  from  motives,  utterly  uncon-
nected with  legal  erudition : — these  men  compose
the  tribunal  to  which  the  constitution  entrusts
the  interpretation  of  her  laws,  and  the  ultimate
decision  of  every  dispute  between  her  subjects.
These  are  the  men  assigned  to  review  judgments
of  law,  pronounced  by  sages  of  the  profession,
who  have  spent  their  lives  in  the  study  and  prac-
tice of  the  jurisprudence  of  their  country. Such
is  the  order  which  our  ancestors  have  established.
The  effect  only  proves  the  truth  of  this  maxim: —
"  That  when  Lsingie  institution  is  extremely  dis-
sonant from  other  parts  of  the  system  to  which  it
belongs,  it  will  always  find  some  way  of  recon-  .
citing  itself  to  the  analogy  which  governs  and  per-
vades  the  rest" By  constantly  placing  in  the
House  of  Lords  some  of  the  most  eminent  and
experienced  lawyers  in  the  kingdom;  by  calling  to
their  aid  the  advice  of  the  judges,  when  any  ab-
stract question  of  law  awaits  their  determina-
tion ;  by  the  almost  implicit  and  undisputed  de-
ference, which  the  uninformed  part  of  the  house
find  it  necessary  to  pay  to  the  learning  of  their
colleagues ;  the  appeal  to  the  House  of  Lords  be-
comes in  fact  an  appeal  to.  the  collected  wisdom


poficy  which  could  dictate  such  an  institution  as  I  of  our  supreme  courts  of  justice ;  receiving  indeed
that  of  juries. Nevertheless,  the  ejects  of  this  |  soleoudty,  but  fittfe  p«^


13*


MORAL  AND  POLITICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


the  presence  of  the  assembly  in  which  it  is  heard
fend  determined.

These,  however,  even  if  red.  are  minute  imper-
fections. .  A  politician  who  should  ait  down  to
delineate  a  plan  for  the  dispensation  of  public  jus-
tice, guarded  against  all  access  to  influence  and
corruption,  and  bringing  together  the  separate  ad-
vantages of  knowledge  and  impartiality,  would
find,  when  he  had  done,  that  he  had  been  trans-
cribing the  judicial  constitution  of  England.  And
k  may  teach  the  most  discontented  amongst  us
to  acquiesce  in  the  government  of  his  country,
to  reflect,  that  the  pure,  and  wise,  and  equal  ad-
ministration of  the  laws,  forms  the  first  end  and
blessing  of  social  union ;  and  that  this  blessing  is
enjoyed  by  him  in  a  perfection,  which  he  will  seek
in  vain  in  any  other  nation  of  the  world.


CHAPTER  IX.

Of  Crimes  and  Punishments.

Toe  proper  end  of  human  punishment  is  not
satisfaction  of  justice,  but  the  prevention  of
les.  By  the  satisfaction  of  justice,  I  mean  the
retribution  of  so  much  pain  for  so  much  guilt:
which  is  the  dispensation  we  expect  at  the  nana
of  God,  and  which  we  are  accustomed  to  consider
.  as  the  order  of  things  that  perfect  justice  dictates
,j  and  requires.  In  what  sense,  or  whether  with  truth
'.  in  any  sense,  justice  may  be  said  to  demand  the
j  punishment  of  offenders,  I  do  not  now  inquire:
but  I  assert,  that  this  demand  is  not  the  motive  or
occasion  of  human  punishment.  What  would  it
be  to  the  magistrate,  that  offences  went  altogether
unpunished,  if  the  impunity  of  the  offenders  were
followed  by  no  danger  or  prejudice  to  the  common-
wealth'? The  fear  lest  the  escape  of  the  criminal
should  encourage  him,  or  others  by  his  example,
to  repeat  the  same  crime,  or  to  commit  different
crimes,  is  the  sole  consideration  which  authorises
-  the  infliction  of  punishment  by  human  laws.  Now
that,  whatever  it  be,  which  is  the  cause  and  end
of  the  punishment,  ought  undoubtedly  to  regulate
the  measure  of  its  severity.  But  this  cause  ap-
pears to  be  founded,  not  in  the  guilt  of  the  offender,
but  in  the  necessity  of  preventing  the  repetition
of  the  offence :  ana  hence  results  the  reason,  that
crimes  are  not  by  any  government  punished  in  pro-
portion to  their  guilt,  nor  in  all  cases  ought  to  bo
so,  but  in  'proportion  to  the  difficulty  and  the  ne-
cessity of  preventing  them.  Thus  the  stealing  of
goods  privately  out  of  a  shop  may  not,  in  its  moral
quality,  be  more  criminal  than  the  stealing  of  them
out  of  a  house ;  vet  being  equally  necessary  and
more  difficult  to  he  prevented,  the  law,  in  certain
circumstances,  denounces  against  it  a  severer  pun-
ishment The  crime  must  be  prevented  by  some
means'  or  other;  and  consequently,  whatever
means  appear  necessary  to  this  end,  whether  they
be  proportionable  to  the  guilt  of  the  criminal  or  not,
are  adopted  rightly,  because  they  are  adopted  upon
the  principle  which  alone  justifies  the  infliction  of
punishment  at  all.  From  the  same  consideration  it
also  follows,  that  punishment  ought  not  to  be  em-
ployed, much  less  rendered  severe,  when  the  crime
can  be  prevented  by  any  other  means.  Punishment
is  an  evil  to  which  the  magistrate  resorts  only  from
its  being  necessary  to  the  prevention  of  a  greater.
This  necessity  does  not  exist,  when  the  end  may
be  attained,  that  is,  when  the  public  may  be  de-


fended from  the  effects  of  the  crime,  by  any  other
expedient.  The  sanguinary  laws  which  have  been
made  against  counterfeiting  or  diminishing  the
gold  coin  of  the  kingdom  might  be  just  until  the
method  of  detecting  the  fraud,  by  weighing  the
money,  was  introduced  into  general  usage.  Since
that  precaution  was  practised,  these  laws  have
slept;  and  an  execution  under  them  at  this  day
would  be  deemed  a  measure  of  unjustifiable  se-
verity. The  same  principle  accounts  for  a  circum-
stance which  has  been  often  censured  as  an  ab-
surdity in  the  penal  laws  of  this,  and  of  moat
modern  nations,  namely,  that  breaches  of  trust  are
either  not  punished  at  all,  or  punished  with  lest
rigour  than  other  frauds. — Wherefore  is  it,  some
have  asked,  that  a  violation  of  confidence,  which
increases  the  guilt,  should  mitigate  the  penalty  1—
This  lenity,  or  rather  forbearance,  of  the  laws,  is
founded  in  the  most  reasonable  distinction.  A
due  circumspection  in  the  choice  of  the  persons
whom  they  trust ;  caution  in  limiting  the  extent
of  that  trust;  or  the  requiring  of  sufficient  secu-
rity for  the  faithful  discharge  of  it,  will  commonly
guard  men  from  injuries  of  this  description;  and
the  law  will  not  interpose  its  sanctions  to  protect
negligence  and  credulity,  or  to  supply  the  place  o*
domestic  care  and  prudence.  To  be  convinces!
that  the  law  proceeds  entirely  upon  this  considers*
tion,  we  have  only  to  observe,  that  where  the  con-
fidence is  unavoidable, — where  no  practicable  vigi-
lance could  watch  the  offender,  as  in  the  case  of
theft  committed  by  a  servant  in  the  shop  or  dwell-
ing house  of  his  master,  or  upon  property  to  which
he  must  necessarily  have  access, — the  sentence  of
the  law  is  not  less  severe,  and  its  execution  com-
monly more  certain  and  rigorous,  than  if  no  trust
at  all  had  intervened.

It  is  in  pursuance  of  the  same  principle,  which
pervades  indeed  the  whole  system  of  penal  juris-
prudence, that  the  facility  with  which  any  species
of  crimes  is  perpetrated,  has  been  generally  deen>
ed  a  reason  for  aggravating  the  punishment  Thus,
sheep-stealing,  horse-stealing,  the  stealing  of  cloth
from  tenters  or  bleaching  grounds,  by  our  laws,
subject  the  offenders  to  sentence  of  death;  not  that
these  crimes  are  in  their  nature  more  heinous  than
many  simple  felonies  which  are  punished  by  im-
prisonment or  transportation,  but  Because  the  pro-
perty, being  more  exposed,  requires  the  terror  of
capital  punishment  to  protect  it. This  severity
would  be  absurd  and  unjust,  if  the  guilt  of  the  of-
fender were  the  immediate  cause  and  measure  of
the  punishment ;  but  is  a  consistent  and  regular
consequence  of  the  supposition,  that  the  right  of
punishment  results  from  the  necessity  of  prevent-
ing the  crime ;  for  if  this  be  the  end  proposed,  the
severity  of  the  punishment  must  be  increased  in
proportion  to  the  expediency  and  the  difficulty  of
attaining  this  end ;  that  is,  m  a  proportion  com-
pounded of  the  mischief  of  the  crime,  and  of  the
case  with  which  it  is  executed. — The  difficulty  of
discovery  is  a  circumstance  to  be  included  in  the
same  consideration. It  constitutes  indeed,  with.
respect  to  the  crime,  the  facility  of  which  wb
speak. By  how  much  therefore  the  detection  of
an  offender  is  more  rare  and  uncertain,  by  somxich
the  more  severe  must  be  the  punishment  when  he
is  detected.  Thus  the  writing  of  incendiary  letters,
though  in  itself  a  pernicious  and  alarming  injury ,
calls  for  a  more  condign  and  exemplary  purrisn'
pent,  by  the  very  obscurity  with  which  thecxima
is  committed.


OF'CBIMES  AFD  FtTNISHH^fENTS.r-


4_W


' Firim  the  j  wtice  of  .God,- we  ^iie  taught  to  look
for  a  gradation  of  punishment  exactly  proportioned
to  the  guilt  of  the  offender:  when  therefore,  In  as-
signing the  degrees  of  human-punishment,  we  in-
troduce considerations  distinct  from  that  guilt,  and
*■  proportion  so'varied  by  external  circumstances,
that  equal  crimes  frequently  undergo  .unequal
punishments,  or  the  leas  crime  the  greater:  rids
natural  to  demand  the  reason  Why  a  (afferent  mee>
sure  of  punishment  should  be  expected  from  God,
and  observed  by-man ;  why  that  rule,  which  befits
the  absolute  and  perfect  justicetf  the  Deity,  should
not  be  the  rule  which  oughtfarfee  pursued  and  imr*
tated  by  human  laws.— -The  solution  .of  this  diffi-
culty must  be  sought  lor.  in  those  peculiar  ^attri-
bute* ef  the  Divine  nature.,  which-  distinguish  the
dispensations  of  Supreme  Wisdom  from  the  pro-
ceedings of  humanjudirnture. A  being  whose
knowledge  penetrate*  every  concealment,  from  the
operation  of  whose  will-no  art  or  flight  can'  escape,
and  m  whose  hands  punishment  is  sure  *.  such
a  Being  may  conduct  the  moral  government  of
his  creation,  in  the  best  and' wisest  mariner,  by
pronouncing  a  law  that  every  crime  shall  finally
receive  a  punishment  proportioned  to  the  guiffr
Y*hicb  it  cont94Dsrsbstracted  frsm  any  foreign  cen-
iideratiop  whatever;  and  may  testify  his  veracity
to  the  specjatorsof  his  judgments,  by  carrying
this  kw  jnto  strict  execution/  But  when  the  care
of  the  public  safety  is  intrusted  to  men>  whose  au-
thority over  their  fellow-creatures  is  limited  by  de-,
fects  of  power  and*knowledge ;  from  whose  utmost
vigilance  and  sagacity  the  greatest  offenders  often
He  hid;  whose  wisest -precautions  and  speediest
pursuit  may  be  eluded  by  artifice  or  concealment^
a  duterant  necessity,  -a  new  Tule  of  proceeding,  rs-~
suits  from  the  very  Imperfeciion  of  their  faculties.
In  their  hands,  4he  uncertainty  pf  punishment
must  be  compensated  by  the  severity. .  The  ease
wtfh  which  crimes-  are  committed  or  concealed,
must  be  counteracted  by  additions/  penalties  and
T  terrors.  The  very  end  for  which  human
ent  is  established,  requires  that  its  regu-
•beadaptedtothesuppressionof crimes.  This
end,  whatever  it  may  do  in  the  plans  of  Infinite
WisoVrnvooesnot,  in  the  designation  of  temporal
penalties,  always  coincide  with  the  proportionate
jnnishment  tor  guilt

The**  are  two  methods  of  administering  penal
justice. ...

The  first  method  assigns  capita]  punishment  to
fewofiences^  and  inflicts  it  invariably.

The  second  method  assigns  capital  rtmishraent
to  many  kmds  of  offences,  but  inflicts  it  only  upon  •
a  few  examples  of  eaeh  kind.
^  The  latter  of  which  two  methods  naff  beert  long
adopted  in  this  country,  where,  of  those  who  re-
ceive sentence  of  deatlr,  scarcely  one  in  ten  is  exe--
cuted.  -  And  -  the  preference  of-this  to  (he  former
method  seems  to  be  founded  in  the  consideration,
that  the  selection  of  proper  objects  for  capital  pun-
ishment principally  depends  upon  tircuihsiarices,
which,  however  easy  to  perceive  in  each  particular
ease  after  the  crime  is  committed,  it  ur  impossible  .
to  enumerate  or  define  beforehand;  or  to  ascertain
however  with  that  exactness- which  is  reqnisite-in
legal  descriptions.  Hence,  although  it  be  necessary
to  fix  by  .precise  rules  of  law  the  boundary  on  one.
side,  that  is,  the* limit  to  which  the  punishment
may  be  extended  ^and  also  that  nothing  less  than
the  authority  of  the  whole  legislature  be  suhered
to  determine  that  boundary,  aid  assign  these  rules;
S


vet  the'mitjgatidn  of  punishment,  the  exerehle  of

lenity  maywithoutdan^rbe intrusted tb-the exe-
cutive _magistrat^,. -whose  discretion  will  operate
upon  those  numerous,' unforeseen,  mutable,  en<J
indefinite  circumstances,  both  oT  the  crime/ and
the  criminal,  which  constitute  or  qualify  the  ma*
lignify  of  each  offence. Without  the  power  of  so-
iaxation  lodged  in  a  living  authority,  either  some-
offenders  would- escape  capital  minishment ■,  whom
the  public  safety  required  to  suffer;  or  some  would
undergo  this  punishoient,  where  it  was  neither  de-
served nor  necessary. For  if  judgment  of  death
were,  reserved  for,  one  or-  two  .species  ofxrimes  ohrjr-
(which  would  probably  be  the  case  if  that  judg-
ment was  intended  to  be  executed  without  excep-
tion.,) crimes  might  occur  of  the  most  dangerous
example,  and  accompanied. with  circumstances  of
heinous  aggravation,  whichdid  net  iatfwithin.afcy
description*  of-  offences  that  4he  laws  had,  ma/j£
capital,  and  which  consequently  could  not  receive*
the  .punishment  their  own  malignity  and  t(ie  pub-
lic safety  required.— What  is  worse,  it  would  bo
known  ,before-hand^  thai  such  .crimes  might  be
committed  without  danger  to  tjie  offenders-  fife.
On  the  other  hand,  if  to  reach  these  possible  cases,
the  whole  class  of  offences  to  which  they  belong
be  ^objected  to  pains,  of  death,  and  no-  power  of
remitting  this  severity  remain  any  Where,  the  ex-
ecution of  the  laws  will  become  more  BSLnguinary  %
than  the  public  osmpasskm  would  endure,  prthan
is  necessary  to  the  ^n'end  security. \' .

T^e.  law  of  England  is  constructed,  upon  a
different  and  a  better  policy.  By  the  number  of
statutes  creating  capital. offences,. it  sweeps,  into  '
the  net  every  crime  which,  iin\)er  *ny  ^possible
circumstances,  may -merit  the  punishment  of  death':
but  when  the  execution  of  this  sentence  conies  to
be.  deliberated  uporir  a  small,  proportion  of  each
class  are  singled  out)  tfye  general  cuaiacter,  or  the
peculiar  aggravations  or  whose  Grimes,  render
them  fit  examples  of  public  justice.  .  By  this  ex-
pedient, few  actually  suffer  death,  whilst  the  dread
and  danger  of  it  hangover,  the  crimes  of  many*
The"  tenderness  of  the  law  cannot  be/ taken  ad-
vantage o£  The  life  of  the  subject  is>  spared  as
far  as  the  necessity  of  restraint  and  intimidation  >
permits ;  yet  no  one  wifl  jadventure  upon  the  com-
mksion  of  any  enormous  crime,  frdm  a  know-
ledge-that  the  laws -have  not  provided  for  its
punishment  The  wisdom  and  humanity  of  this
design  furnish  a  just  excuse  for  the  multiplicity
of  capital  offences,  which  the  laws  of  England  are
accused  of  creating  beyond  those  of  other  coun-A
tries.  The  charge  of  cruelty  is  answered  by  ob-
serving, that  these  laws  v^ere  never  meant  to  be
carried  .into  indispryiimate  execution  ±  that  the
legislature,  When  it  establishes  its  last  and  highest
sanctions,  .trusts  to  the"benignity  of  .the  crown,  to
relax,  their  severity,  as  often. as  circumstances
appear  to-palliate  the  offence,  oreven  as -often  as
those  circumstances  of  aggravation  are.  wanting-
which  rendered  this"  rjgorous  interposition,  neces-
sary. tJpon  this. plan,  it  is  enough  to  vindicate
the  lenity  of  the  laws,  that  some  instances  are  to
be  found  in  each  qlass  of  capital  crimes,  which  re-
quire tjie  restraint  of  capital  punishment,  and  that
this  restraint  could  not  Ue  applied  without  suBject-
injrthe  whofc  class  to  the  same  condemnation.
"  There  is  hpwpver  one  species  of  crimes,  the'
making  of  which  capital,  can  .hardly,  I  think,  be
defended  even  upon  the  comprehensive  principle
just  now  stated  ;— I  mean  that  of  privately  steal-


BJOftAL  AND  POLITICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


l*£(rom  the  person.  lUetery.  degree  offeree  is
excluded  by -the  description  of  the  crime,,  it  will
(]•  difficult  to  assign  an-  example,  where  either  the
amount  or  circumstances  of  the  theft  place  it  upon

"a  brat  with  those  dangerous  attempts  to, which
iha  punishment  of  death  should  be  confined,  it
will  be  still  snore  difficult  to  *howrthatr  without
gross  and  culpable  negfigenee  on  the  part  of  the
enflerejr,  such:  examples  can  ever  become  so  fre-
quent, as  to  make  it  necessary  to  constitute  a  class
of  capital  offences,  of  very  wide  and  large  extent. .
■  The  prerogative  of  pardon  is  properly  reserved
to  the  chief  magistrate.  The  power  of  suspend-
ing the  laws  is  a  privilege  of  too  high  a  nature  to
be  committed  to  many  hands,  or  to  those  of  any
inferior  officer  in  the  state.  The  king  also  can
beat  collect  the  advice  by  which  his  resolutions

'  should  be  governed :  and  is  at  the  same  time- re-
moved at  t&>  greatest  distarfoe  from  the  influence
of  private  motives.  But  let  this  power  be  de-
posited where  it  will,  the  exercise  of  it  ought  to
be  regarded,  not  as  a  fevour  to  be  yielded  to  sq-
uatatum,  granted  to  friendship,  or,  (east  of  all.  io
be  made  enheervient  to  the  concmaUn^  o^  gratify-
ing of  political  attachments,  but  as  a  judicial  act;
as  a  deliberation  to  be  conducted  with  the  same'
eharacter  of  impartiality,  with  the  same  exact  and
diligent  attention  to  the  proper  merits  and  eu>
rnrnstances  of  the  case,  as  that  which  the  judge
«pon  the  bench  was  expected  to.  maintain  and
show  in  tbe  trial  of  tj*  prisoner's  guift.  The
questions:  whether  the  prisoner  be  guilty,  and
whether,  .being  guilty,  he  ought  to  be  executed,,
ire  equally  questions  of  public  justice.  The
adjudication  of  the  latter  question  is  as  much  a
function  of  magistracy,  as  the  trial  of  the  former.
The  public  webhre  is  interested  in  both;  The
conviction  of  art  offender  should  depend  upon
nothing  but  the  proof  of  his  guilt  t  nor  the  execu-
tion of  the  sentence  upon  any  tning  beside  the
quarky  and  circumstances  of  his  crime. "


It
j  to  the  good  order  of  society,  and  to  the
reputation  and  authority  of  government,  that  this
be  kaown-and  behoved  to  be  the  casein  each  part
of  the  proceeding.  -Which  reflections  show,  that
the  admission  of  extrfnsicor  oblique  considerations,
in  dispensing  the  power  of  pardon,  is  a  crime,  in
the  authors  and  advisers  of  such  Unmerited  par-
tiality, of  the  sum)  nature  with  that  of  corruption
»  a  judge.
a  Aggravations,  which  ought,  to  guide  the  ma-
gistrate in '  the  selection  of  objects  of  condign
"aliment,  are  principally  these  three, — repeti-
cruelty,  combination.  The  first  tworit  is
,  add  to  every  reason  upon  which  the
justice  or  the  neoessity  of  rigorous  measures  can
Be  founded;  and  with  respect  to  the  last  circum-
stance, it  may  be  observed,  that  when  thieve*  add
robbers  are  once  collected  into  gangs,  their  violence
become*  more  formidable,  the  confederates  more
desperata^uid  the  difficulty  x>f  defending  the  pub-
-  He  against  their  depredations  much  greater,  than
.In  the  case  of  solitary  adventurers.  Which  ss*-
▼eral  considerations  compose  a  distinction  that  ia
properly  adverted  to,  in  deciding  upon  the  fate  of
convicted  malefactors.- ,

In  crimes,  however,  which  are  perpetrated  by  a
multitude,  or  by  In  gan&  H  w  proper  to  separate,
»  the  punishment  the  rirarieqder  from  his  fol-
lowers, the  principal  from  his  accomplices,  and
otqb  the  person  who  struckNthe  btow>  broke  the
lock,  Of  mat  entered  the  house,  from  those  who


joined  him  in  thejfelony;  not  *o  much  oil  account
of  any  distinction  In-  the  guilt  of  the  offenders,  aav
for  the  sake  of  casting  an  obstacle  in  the  way  of
such  confederacies,  by  rendering  it  difficult  forth*
confederatee  to  settle  who-  shall  begin  the*  attack*
or  to  find  a  man  amongst  their  number  willing  to
expose  himself  to  greater  danger  than  his  as-
sociates. This. is  another  .instance  in- which  the
punishment  which  expediency  directs,  does  not
pursue  the  exact  proportion,  of  the  crime. . .

Inj  uries  effected  by  terror  and  violence,  are  those
which  it  is  the  first  and  chief  .concern  of  legal  go-
vernment to  repress;  because^their  extent  is  un-
limited ;  because  no  private,  precaution  can  protect
the  subject  against  thorn ;  because  they  endanger
life  and  safety  <os  well  as  property ;  end  lastly,  oe-
cause  they  render  the  condition  of  society  wretcned,


bv  a  sense  of  personal  insecurity.  ■  These  1
do  not  apply  to  frauds  which  circumspection  may
prevent ;  which  must  wait  for  opportunity ;  which
can  proceed  only  to  certain  limits;  and  by  the
apprehension  of  which,  although  the  business  of
life  be  inoonunockd,  life  itself  is  not  made;  misera-
ble: _.  The  appearance  of  this  ffistinction  has  led
some,  humane  writers  to  -expiess  a  wish,  that
capital  punishments  might  be  ^n^y^  to  crimes
of  violence.

'  In  estimating  the  comparative  maligns ncy  of
crimes  of  violence,  regard  ia,to  fcehsjd,  hot  only  to
the  proper  and  intended  niischiefof  the  crime,  but
to  the  fnght  occasioned  by  the  attack,  to  the  general
alarm  excited  by  it  in  others,  and  to  the  conse-
quences which  may  attend  future  attempts  of  the
same  kind.  Thus,  in  anifiag-tne  jsutushment  of
burglary,  or  of  breaking  into  dwelling-houses  by
night,  we  are  to  consider  not  only  ♦the  peril  to
which  the  most  valuable  property  is  exposed  fay
this  crime,  and  which  may  be  called  the  direct
mischief  of  it,  but  the  danger  also  of  murder  hi
case  of  resistance;  or  fox  the  sake  of  preventing
discovery^  and  the  universal  dread  with  which  the
silent  and  defenceless  hours  of  rest  and  sleepmust
be  disturbed,  were  attempts  of  this  sort  to  become
frequent ;'  and  which  dread  alone,  even  without
the  mischief  which  is  the  object  of  it,  is  not  only
a -public  evil,  but  almost  of  all  evils  the  most  in-
supportable. These  circumstances  place  a  dif-
ference between  the  breaking  into  a  dwelling-1
house  by  day,  and  by  night,-  whieh  coherence
obtains  in  the  punishment  of  the  offence  by  the „
law  of  Moses,  and  is  probably  to  be  found  in  the
judicial  codes  of  most  countries,  from  the  earliest
ages  to  the  present.

Of -frauds,  or  of  injuries  which 'are  effected
without  force,  the  most  noxious  kinds  are, —
forgeries,  counterfeiting,  or  diminishing  'of  the
coin,  and  the  -stealing  of  letters  in  the  course  of
their  conveyance;  inasmuch,  as  these  practice*
tend  to  deprive  the  public  of  accommodations,
which  not  on(y  improve  the  conveniences  of  so-
cial life,  but  are  essential  to  the  •prosperity,  and
even  the  existence,  of  commerce.  Or  these  crimes
it  may  be  said,  that  although  they  seem  to  affect
property  alone,  the  mischief  of  their  operation
-does  not  terminate  there.'  For  let  it.be  supposed,
that  the  remissness  or  lenity  of  the  laws  should,
in  any-country,  suffer  offences  of  thirsort  to  grow
into  such .  a  frequency,  as  to  render  the  use  of
money,  the  circulation  of  bills,  or  the  public  'con-
veyance of  letters,  no  longer  safe  or  practicable;
what  would  follow,  but  that  every  species  of  trade;
and  of  activity  must  decline  unoW  these  die-


OP  CRIMES  AND  PUNlfiHM$NT&


139


^unw,  the  soorceaof  snhsistence  foil,  by.
^he.lnhabiftana  of  4he  country,  are  sup-'
1  ported  r  the  ceantry  itself,  where  the  intercourse
Of  civil  life  was  so  endangered  and  defective,,  be
deserted •  and  that,  beside  the  distress  and  poverty
'Which  the  loss  of  employment  would  produce  to
the  iiidiHtrioua  and  valuable  part  of  the  'existing
community,  a  rantf  depopulation*  must  take  place,
each  generation  becoming  less  numerous  than  the
last]  talf  solitude  and  barrenness  overspread  the
land;  until  a  desolation  similar  to  what  obtains
in  many  countries  of  Asia,  which  were  once  the
meet  civilized  and  frequented  parts*  of  the  world,
succeed  in  the  place  of  crowded  cities,  Of  cultivated
fields,  of  nappy  and  well  peopled  region*  3-*- When
therefore  we  carry  forward*  our  views  to  the  more
distant,  but  not  leas  certain  oonsequencee-of  these
crimes,  we  perceive  that,  though-  ne*  living  crea-
ture, be  destroyed  by  them,  yet  human  life  is  di-
minished: that  «n  offence,  the  particular  conte-
fuence  of  which  deprives  only  an  individual  of  a'
■mall  portion  of  his  property,  and  which  £ven  in
its-  general  tendency-  seems  to  do  nothing  tnore
than  obstruct  the  enjoyment  of  certain  public
convenienrifta,  may  nevertheless,  by 'its  ultimate
•efforts,  conrlnde  in. the  laying  waste  of -human
existence.  This  observation'  will  enable  those
who  regard  the  divine  rule  of  "life  for  life,  and.
blood  for  blood,"  as  the  only  authorized  and  jus-
tifiable measure  of  capital  punishaenlt,  to  perceive,
with  respect  to  the  enacts  and  quality  or  the  ac-
tions, a  greater  resemblance  than  they  suppose  to
exist  between  certain  atrocious  frauds,  ana  those
crimes  which  attack  personal  safety.

In  the  ease  of  forgeries,  there  appears  a  sub-
stantial difference  between  the 'forging  of  bills  of
exchange,  or  of  securities  which  are  circulated,
and  of  which-  the  circulation'  and -currency  are
fopnjtf  to  serve  and  facilitate  valuable  purposes  of.
;  and  the  forging  of.  bonds,  leases,
,  ofspf  instruments  which  are  not  com*
r  transferred  from  one  hand  to  another;  be-
in  the  former  case,  credit,  is  necessarily
given  to  the  signature;  and  .without  that  credit  the
negotiation  of  such  property  could  not  be  carried
en,  not  the  public  ntihty,  sought  from  it,  be  at-
tained: in  the  other  case,  all  possibility  of  deceit
might  be  preduded,  by  a  direct,  communication
between  the  parties. -or  hv  due-care  in  the  choice
of  their  agents,  with  fittw  interruption  tcf  busi-
ness, and  without  destroying,  or  much  encumber-
ing, the  uses  for' which  these  instruments  artfjcak
existed  This  distinction  I  apprehend  to  be  not
onJv  real,  tut  precise  enough  to  afford  a  line  of
division  between,  forgeries,  wbich-as  the  law  now
stands,  are  almost  umversaUy^capital,  and  punished
with  iindifltinguighing.  severity.
~  '  ris  another  ;crime,ef  the  -same  class  and
pi  And,  when  we  consider  what  re-
is  necessarily  placed  upon. oaths;  that  all
judicial  decisions  jptuceed  upon  testimony;  that

luenilv  there  is  not  a  right  that  a  man  pos-

,  of  which  false  witnesses  may  not  deprive


,  that  reputation,  property,  and  hie  itself,  Ue
open  to  the  attempts  or  perjury ;  that  it  may  often:
be  committed  without  a  possibility  of  contradic-
tion or  discovery;  that  the  success  and  pre  valency
of  this  vice  tend  to  introduce  the  most  grievous
and  fatal  injustice  into  the  administration  of  hu-


we  shpH  be  brought,  probably,  to  agree  with  the
opinion  of  those,  who  oontend  that  perjury,  in  its
punishment,  especially  that  which  is  attempted  in
solemn  evidence,  and  £n  the  face,  of  a  court  of  jus-
tice, should  be  placed  upon  a  level  with  the  most
flagitious  frauds. -.  . .

.  The  obtaining  of  money  by  secret  thnal%
whether  we.regard  the  difficulty  with  whkh  the
crime  is  traced  out,  the  odious"  imputations  to .
which  it  may  lead,  or  the  profligate  conspiracies  ~
that  are  sometimes  formed  to  carry  it  into  execu-
tion, deserves  to  be  reckoned  amongst  the  worst
species  of  robbery. ^ -

The  frequency  of  capital  executions  in  this
country  owes  it  necessity  to  three  causes  ^moch
liberty,  great  cities,  and  the  want  of  *  punishment ,
short  of  death,  possessing  a  sufficient  degree  of
terror.  And  if  the  taking  away  of  the  life  tf  mete*
factors  be  more  rare  in  other  countries  than  ill'
ounK  the  reason  will  be  found' in  some  difference
in  these  articles.  The  nberoWbf  a  free"  people^
4nd  still  more  the  jealousy  with  which  these  liber-
ties are  watched,  and  by  which  they  are  piessrved,-
permit  not  those,  precaudons  and  restraints,  thai
inspectiony  scrutiny,  and  control,'  which  are  ^ex-
ercised with  success  in  arbitrary  Governments.  N
For  example,  neither  the  spirit  of  the  laws;  nor
of  the  .people,  will'  suffer  the  detention  or  oonfine-
ment  of  suspected  persons,  without  proofs  of  their
guilt,  which  it  is  often  impossible  to  obtain:  nor  will
they  allow  that  masters  of  families  be  obliged  to
record  and  render  up  a  description  of  the  stsangers
or  inmates  whom  they  entertain-;  nor  that  an  ac-
count be  demanded,  at  the  pleaiureof  the  magis-
trate, of  each  man's  time,  employment,  and  means
-of  subsistence ;  nor  securities  to  be  required  when
these  accounts  appear  unsatisfactory  or  dubious  ;v
norjnen  to  be  apprehended  upon  the  mere  sug-
gestion of  idleness  or  vagrancy ;  nor  to  be  eon-
fined  to  certain  districts;  nor  the  Inhabitants  of
each  district  to  be.  -made  responsible  for  one
another's  behaviour;  nor  passports  to  be^exaeted
from  all  persons  entering  or  leaving  the  kingdom :
least  of  ail  will  they  tolerate'  the  appearance  of  an
armed  force,  or  of  military  law;  orsunerthe  Areefs
and  public  roads-  to  be  guarded  aho^  patrolled  by
soldiers ;  or  lastly,  intrust  the  police  With  such  dis-
cretionary powers,  as  inay  make-sure  of  the  guilty,
however  they  involve  the  innocent  These  ox-
pedierits,  although  arbitrary  and' rigorous,  am
many  of  them  effectual :  and  in  proportion  as  they
render,  the  commission  or  concealment  of  crimes
more  difficult;;  they  subtract  from  the  necessity  of .
severe  punishment — Qrtat  cities  multiply  crimes,
by  presenting  easier  opportunities,  an>)  more  In-
centives to  libertinism,  which  in  low  life  is  com-
monly the  mtroductoryatage  td  other  enormities;
by  collecting  thieves  and  robbers  into  toe  same
neighbourhood,  which  enables  them  to  form  com*
munications  and  confederacies,  that  increase  their
art  and  courage,  as  well  as  strength  and  wicked-
ness ;  but  principally  by  the  refoge  ihey  afford  to
villany,  in  the.  means  of  coneealment,  and  of  sub-
sisting in  secrecy,  w^uch  crowded  towns  'supply  to
men  of  every  description.  These  temptations  and
facilities  can  only.be  counteracted  by  adding  to
the  number  of  capital  punishments.— But  a  third
cause,  which  increases  the  frequency  of  capital
executions,  in  England,  is,  a  defoct.of  the  jaws,  in


Ban  anabsfor  such  a  distrust  of  testimony  as not  being  provided  with  any  other  punishment
most  create  universal  'embarrassment  and  con- than  that  of  death,  sufficiently  terrible  to  keep
we  reflect  «pon  ihesT  mischiefs, oflendcre  in  awe. Transportation  whkhb  the


140


MORAL  AND  POLITICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


sentence  secontTin  the  order  of  severity,  appears
to  me  to  answer  the  purpose  of  example  very  im-.
perfectiy:  not  onlyADecaose  exile  is  in  reality  a
slight  punishment  to  those  who  haye  neither
property,  nor  friends,  nor-  reputation,  nor  regular
means  of  subsistence,  at  home;  and  because  their
situation  becomes  little  worse  by  then*  crime,  than
it  was  before  they  committed  it;  but  because  the
punishment,  whatever  it  be,  is  unobserved  slid
unknown.  .  A  transported  convict  may  sufler
under  bis  sentence,  but  nis  Bufferings  are  re-
moved from  the  view  of  his  countrymen:  his
-jmseryistinseen;  his  condition  strikes  no  terror
into  me  jninds  of  those  for  whose  warning  and
admonition  it  was  intended.  This  chasm  tn  the
■cale  of  punishment  produces  also  two  farther
imperfections  in  the  Administration  of  penal  jus-
tice;— the  first  is,  that  the  same  punishment  is
extended  to  crimes  of  very  different  character
artd  malignancy:  the  second,  that  punishments
separate^  of  &  great  interval,  are  assigned  to
crimes  hardly  distinguishable  in  their  guilt  and
mischief.  " •

The  end  of  punishment  is  two-fold ;— amend-
ment, and  ^xam^le.  In  the  first  of  these,  the  re-
formation of  Criminals,  little  has.  .ever  been  ef-
fected, and  little,  I  fear,  is  practicable.  Prom  every
species  of  punishment  that  has  hitherto  been  de-
vised, from  imprisonment  and  exile,  from  pain  and
infamy,  malefactors  return  more  hardened  in  their
Climes, and  more  instructed,  ff  there  bean y  thing
that  shakes  the  soul  of  a  confirmed  villain,  it  is  the
expectation-  of  approaching  death.  The  horrors
of  this  situation  may  cause  such  a  wrench  in  the
mental  organs,  as  to  five  them  a  holding  turn  :
and  I  think  it  probable,  that  many  of  those  who
art  executed,  would,  if  they  were  delivered  at  the
point  of  death,  retain  such  a  remembrance  of  their
sensations,  as  might  preserve  them,  unless  urged
by  extreme  want,  from  relapsing  into  their  former
crimes:  But  this  is  an  experiment  that,  from  its
nature,  cannot  be  repeated  often.

Of  ihc  reforming  punishments  which  have  not
yet  been  tried/ none  promises  so  much  success  as
that  of  solitary  imprisonment,  or  thelconfinement
of  minimus  In  separate  apartments.  .This  im-
provement augments  the-  terror  of -the  punish-
ment :  secludes  the  criminal  from  the  society  of
his  fellow-prisoners,  in  which-  society  the  worse
are  sure  to  corrupt  the  better;  weans  him  from
'  the  knowledge  of  his  companions,  and -from  the
lose  of  that  turbulent,  precarious  life'  in  which  his
'vices  had  engaged  him:  is  calculated  to  raise  up
in  him:  -reflections  on  the  folly  of  his  choice,  and
to  dispose  his  miry!  to  such  bitter  and  continued
penitence,  as  may  produce  a  lasting  alteration  in
the  principles  of  nis  conduct:

As  aversion- to  labour  is  the  cause  from  which*
half  of  the,  vices  of  low  Ufe  deduce  .their  origin  and
continuance,,  punishments  ought  Jo  be -contrived
with  a  view,  to  the  conquering  of  -this  disposition.
Two  opposite  expedients  have  been  recommended
for  this  purpose;  the  one,  solitary  confinement
with  hard  labour;  the  other,  solitary  confinement
with  nothing  to  do.  Both  expedients-seek- the
flame  endf—to  reconcile  -the  idle  to  a  life  of  in-
dustry. .  Toe-former  hopes  toeflect  this  by  making
labour  habitual ;  the  latter,  by  making  idleness  in-
supportable :•  and  the  preference  of  one  method  to
the  other  depends  upon  the  question,  whether  a
man  is  more  likely  to  betake  himself,  of  his  own
i  to  work,  who  has  been,  accustomed- to  em-


ployment, or  who  has  been -distressed  by  tfca  want
of  it  When  jfeils  are  once  provided  for  the  t«jN*>
rate  confinement  of  prisoners,  which  both  propo-
sals require,  the  choice  bet  ween-  -them  may  soon
be  determined  by  experience.  If  labour  her  exacted,
I  would  leave  the  whole,  or  a  portidn,  of  the  earn-
ings to  the  prisoner's  use,  aha  I  would  debar  hind
Irom  any  other  provision  or,  supply ;  that  his  sub-
sistence, however  coarse  and  penurious,  may  be
proportioned  to  his,  diligence,  and  that  he  may
taste  the.  advantage  of  industry  4ofcether  with  the
toiL  - 1  would  go-  Anther ;  I  would  measure  the
confinement,  not  by  the  duration  of  time,  bat  by
quantity-of  work,  in  order  both  to  excite  industry,
and  to  rendejr  it  more  voluntary.  But  the  prin-
cipal difficulty  remains  stul ;  namely,  how  to.  dis-
pose -of  criminals  after  their  enlargement.  Bj  a
rule  of  life,  which,  is  perhaps  too  invariably  and
indiscriminately  adhered  to,  no  one  will  receive  a
man  or  woman  out  of  a  jail,  into  any  service  or
employment  whatever.  This  is  the  common
misfortune  of  public  punishment,  that  they  pre*
dude  the  offender  from  all  honest  meamtof  future
support.*'  It  seems  incumbent  upon* the  state  to
secure  a  maintenance  to  those  who  are  willing  to
work  for  it  p  and  yet  it  is  absolutely  necessary  to
divide  criminals  as  far  asunder  from'  one  another,
as  possible.  Whether  male  prisoners' might  not,  -
after  the  term  of  their  confinement  was-  expired,
be  distributed  in  the  country,  detained  within
certain  limits,  and  employed  upon  the  public
roads;  and  females  be  remitted  id  the  overseers
of  country  parishes,  to  be  there  furnished  with
dwellings,  and  with  the  materials  and  implements
of  occupation  ;*-wh*ether~  by,  these,  or  by  what
other  methods,  it  may  be  possible  to  effect  the
two  purposes  of  -employment  and  dispersi*nt  '
well  merits  the  attention  of  all  who'  are  anxious  .
to  perfect  the  internal  regulation  of-  their  country.

Torture  is  applied  either  to  obtain  confessions
of  guilt,  or  to  exasperate  or  prolong  the  pains  of
death.  No  bodily  punishment,  however  excru-
ciating or  long-continued^receives  the  name  of
torture,  unless  it  be  designed  to  kill  the  criminal
-by  a  more  lingering  death ;  or  to  extort  from  him
the  discovery  of  some  secret,  which  is  supposed  to
lie  concealed  m  his  breast.  The  queHion  by  tor-
ture appeals' to  be  equivocal  in  its  effects  i  for
since  extremity  of  pain,  end  iro£>  any  conscious-'
ness  of  remorse  in  the  mind,  produces  those  ef-
fects: an  innocent  man  may  sink  under  the  tor-
ment, as  well  as -he  who  is  guilty.  The  latter  has
-as,  much  to  fear  from  yielding,*s  the  former.  The
instant  and  almost  irresistible  deeireof  relief  may
draw  from  one  sufferer  false  accusations'  of-  him-
self or  others,  as  .it  may -sometimes  extract  the
truth  out  of  another.  This  ambiguity  renders  the
use  of  torture;  as' a  means  of  procuring  mformation.
in  criminal  proceedings,  liable  to  the  risk  of  griev-
ous and  irreparable  injustice,  For  which  reason,
though  recommended  by  ancient  and  general-
example:  it  has  been  properly  exploded  from  the
mild  and  cautious  system  of  penal  jurispcudence.
established  in  mis  country.

Barbarous  spectacles  of  human  agony  are  justly
foond  fault  withr  as  tending  to  harden  and  deprave
the  publicr  feelings,  and  to  destroy  that  sympathy


1  Until  this  inconvenience  be  remedied,  small  offiuices
had  perhaps  better  go  unpunished :  I  do  not  mean  that
the  law  should  exempt  them  from  punishment,  tut  that
private  persons  should  be  tender  in  prosecuting  them.


OF  CRIMES  AND  PUKISHMENTa


141


wUhwfckbfhemrlerihgs  of  onrffeflow-creatures
eugbjt  always  to  be  searr.  -or,  if  no  effect  of  this
kind  follow  from  them,  they  counteract  in  some
measure  their  own  design,  by  sinking  men's  ab-
horrence  of  the  crime  in  their  commiseration  of
the  criminal  But  if  a  mode  of  execution  could  be
devised,  which  would  augment  the  horror  of  the
ponishment,  without  offending  or  impairing  the.

-  pools;  sensibility  by  cruel  er  unssemly^exhibitions
of  death,  it  mightr  add*  something  to  the  efficacy
of  the  example:  and,  hy  being  reserved  tigr  a  lew
atrocious  crimes,  mfe mValso  enlarge  the  scale  of
punishment  ;  an  -addition  to  which  seems  want-
ing] for,  si- {he  matter  remains  at  present;  you

.  hang  a  malefactor  far  a  simple  robbery,  and  can
do  no  more  to  the  villain-  who  has  poisoned  his
nther.  Somewhat  of  the  sort  we  have  been
describing,  was  the  proposal,  not  long  since  sug-
gested, of  casting  murderers  into  a  den  of  wild
Beasts,  where  they  would  perish  in  a  manner
dreadful  to.  the  imagitmtini^  yet  concealed  from
the  view.

1  hrfamam -  punishments  are  mismanaged  in
this  country,  with  respect  both  to  thetnrimes  and
4he  criminals.  In  the  first  place,  they  ought  to
be  confined  to  offences  which  are  holden  in  un-
disputed and  universal  detestation.  To  condemn
to  the  pillory  the  author  Or  editor  of  a  libel  against
the  state,  who  has  rendered  himself  the  favourite
of  a  party,  if  not  of  the  people,  by  the' very  act  for
winch  he  stands  there,  is  to  gratify  the  offender,
and  to  expose  the  law  to  mockery  and  insult  In
die  second  place;  the  delinquents  who  receive
tins  sentence,  are  for  the  most  part  such  si  have
.long  ceased  either  to  value  reputation,  or  to  fear
shame;  of  whose  happiness,  and  of  whose  en-
joyments, character  makes  no  part.  Thus  the
few  ministers  of  libertinism,  the  keepers  of  bawdy
or  disorderly  houses,  are  threatened  in  vain  with
a  puniahment  that  affects  a  sense  which  they  have
not;  that  applies  solely  to  the  imagination,  to  the
virtue  and  the  pride  of  human  nature.  -  The  pit-
lory,  or  any  other  infamous  distinction,  might  be
employed  rightly,  and  With  effect,  in  the  punish-
ment of  some  offences  of  higher  life;  as  of  frauds
and  peculation  in  office;  of  collusions  and  eon-
aivanoeS)  by  which  the  public  treasury  is  de-
frauded; of  breaches  of  trust;  of  perjury,  and
subornation  of  perjury;  of  the  clandestine  <and
forbidden  sale  of  places;  of  flagrant  abuses  of
authority,  or  neglect  of  duty;  and  lastly,  of  cor-'
xnjpfjon  m  the  exercise  of  confidential  or  judicial
offices.  In  all  which,  the  more  elevated  was  the
station  of  the  criminal,  the  more  signal  and  con-,
spicuou*  would  be  the  triumph  of  justice.

The  certainty  of  punishment  is  of  more  con-
sequence than  the  severity.  Criminals  do  not  so
much  flatter  themselves  with  the  lenity  of  the
sentence,  as  with  the  hope" of  escaping.  .They
are  not  so  apt  to' compare  wjiat  they  gain  by  tbte
crime  with  what  they  may  suffer  from  the  punish-
ment, as  to  encourage  themselves  with  the  chance
of  aonceahnent  ox  night.  For  which  mason.,  a
vigilant  magistracy,  an  accurate  police,,  a  proper
distribution  of  force  tfnd  intelligence,  together  with
dW  rewards  Sat  the  discovery  and  apprehension
of  malefactors,  and  an  undeviating  impartiality  in
carrying  the  laws  into  execution,  contribute  more
to  the  restraint  arid  suppression  of  crimes  than
any  violent  exacerbations  of  puniahment.  And.
fer  the  same  reason,  of  all  contrivances  directed
to  this  end,  (base  perhaps  are  most  effectual  which


facilitate  the  opnvictkm  of  criminajs.  {The  offence
of  counterfeiting  the  eotir  could  not  be  checked
by  all  the  terrors  and  the  utmost  severity  of  law,
whilst  the  act  of  coining  was  necessary  to  be  es-
tablished -by  specific  proof.  The  statute  which
made  possession^of  *ne  Implements  -of  coinrng
capita),  that -is,  which  constituted  that  possession
complete  evidence  of  the  offender's  guilt,  wae^the
f&st  thing  that- gave  force  and  efficacy  to  the  de-
nunciations of  law  upon  this,  subject.  The  statute
of  James  the  First,  relative  to  the  murder  of  bas-
tard children,  which  ordains  that  the  concealment
ofthe  birth  shofild  be  deemed  incontestable  proof
-of  the  charge,  though  a  harsh  law,  was,  in  like
manner  with  the  former,  Welt  calculated  to  put  a
stop  to  the^rime.

It  is  upon  the  principle  of  4hw  observation,  that
I  apprehend  ranch,  harm  to  have  been  done  to  the
community,  by  the  over-strained  scrupulousness,
or  weak  timidity,  of  juries,  which  demands  often
such  proof  of  a  prisoner's  guilt,  as  the  nature  and
secrecy  of  his  crime  scarce,  possibly  admit  of;  and .
which  holds  i{  the  part  of  a  sq/e  conscience  not
to  condemn  any  man,  whilst  there  exists  the
minutest  possibility  of  his  innocence.;  Any  story
they  may  happen  to  have  heard  or  read,  whether
real  or  feigned,  in  which  courts  of  justice  have
been  misled  by  presumptions  of  guilt,  is  enough,
in  their  minds,  to  founp  an  acquittal  upon,  where
positive  proof  is-  wanting.  •  I  do/  not  'mean,  that
juries  shpuld  indulge  conjectures,  should  msgnify
suspicions  into  proofs,  or5 even  that  they  should'
weigh  probabilities'  in  gold  scales:  but  when  the.
prepondera^ion  of  evidence  is  bo  manifest  as  to
persuadeevery  private  understanding  of the  prison-
er'^ guilt;  when  it  furnishes  the  degree  of  credi-
bility upon,  which  men  decide  and  act  in  all  other
doubts,  and  which  -experience  hath  shown  that
they  may  decide  and  act  upon  with  sufficient
safety ;  to  reject* such  proof,  from  an  insinuation  of '
uncertainty  that  belongs  to  all -human  affairs;  and
from,  a  general  dread  lest  the  charge  of  innocent
blood  should  lie  at  their  doors,  is  a  conduct,  which,
however  natural  to  a  mind  studious  of  its  own
quiet,  is  authorised  by  no  considerations  of  recti-
tude or  utility .  It  counteracts  the  care  and  damps
the  activity  of  government ;  it  holds  out  public
encouragement  to  viljany-,  by  confessing  the  im-
possibility of  bringing  villains  to  justice;  and  that
species  of  encouragement  which,  as  hath  been  just
now  observed,  the  minds  of  such  men  are  mast
apt  to  entertain  and  dwell  upon.

There  are  two,  popular  maxims,  which  seem  to
have  a  considerable  Influence  in  producing  the
mjudicious  acquittals  qX  which  we  complain.  One
is :— '*  Thai  circumstantial  evidence' falls  short  of
positive  proof."  This  assertion,  in  the  unqualified
sense  in  which  it  is  applied,  is  not  true.  A  con-
currence of  well-authenticated  circumstanoes  com-
pose a  stronger  ground  of  assurance  than  positive
testimony,  undonnnned  by  circumstance*,  usually
affords.  .  Circumstances  cannot  lie.  The  conclu-
sion-also  which  results  from  them,  though  deduced"
by  only  probable  inference,  is  commonly  more  to
be  relied  upon  than  the  veracity  of  an  unsupported
solitary  witness.  The  danger  of  being  deceived
is-  less,  the  actual  instances  of  deception  are  fewer,
in  the  one  case  than  the  other.  What  is  called
positive  proof  in  criminal  matters,  as  where  a  man
swears  to  Che  person  of  the  prisoner,  and  that  he
actually  saw  him  eommit  the  crime  with  which  he
is  charged,  may  be  founded  in  ton  BJOstahe  or  per-


Ma


MORAL,  AND  POLITICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


jwv  of  a  single  wh>eae.-~Such  mistakes,  and
wca  perjuries,  are  Apt  without  many  example*
Whereas,  to  impose  upon  a -court  of  justice  a
chain  of  dreumttantial  evidence  in  support  of  a
fohricntad  accusation,  requires  suct^a  numter  of
false  witnesses  aa  seldom  meet  together ;  an  union
a)aa  pf  skill  and  wickedness  which  is  still  more
rare ;  and,  after  all,  this-  species  of  proof  lies  much
mora  open  to  discussion,  and  is  more  likely,  if
raise,  to  be  contradicted,  or  to  betray  Itself  by  some
on&reaeen  inconsistency,  than  that  direct  proof,,
which,  being  confined  within  the  knowledge  of  a
single  person,  jrjiich,  appealing  to,  or  standing
connected  with,  no  external  or  collateral  circum-
atancea»  is  incapable,  by  ita  very  simplicity,  of
being  confronted  with  opposite  probabilities.

The  other  maxim,  which  deserves  a  similar
examination,  is  this;—"  That  it  is  better  that  ten
guilty  persons  escape,  than  that  one  innocent
man  should  suffer."  If  by  saying  it  is  better,  be
meant  that  it  is  more  for  the  public  advantage,the
proposition,  1  think,  cannot  be  maintained.  The
security  of  civil  life,  which  isessential  to  the  value
and  the  enjoyment  of  every  Messing  it  contains,
and  the  interruption  of  which  is  followed  by  uni-
versal misery  apd  confusion,  is  protected  chiefly
by  the  dread  of  punishment  Toe  misfortune  ef
an  indifidiiai  (for  such  jnay  the  sufferings,  or  even
the  death,  of  an  innocent  person  be  called  when
they  axe  occasioned  by  no  evil  intention,)  cannot
be  placed  in  competition  with  tfu*  object  J  do  not
contend  that  the  life  or.  safetaof  the  meanest  suhs
ject  ought*  in  any  case,  to  be  knowingly  sacrificed :
no  principle  of  judicature,  no  end  to£ punishment,
can  ever  require  Ma*.

JSutwhen  certain  rules  of  adjudication  most
be  pursued,  when  certain  degrees  of  credibility
must  be  accepted,  in  order  to  reach  the  crimes
with  which  the  public  are  infested ;  courts  of  jus-
tice should  not  be  deterred  from  the  application
of  these  rales  by  every  auspicion  of  danger,  or  by
the  men  possibility  of  confounding  the  innocent
with  the  guilty. — They  ought  rather  to  reflect,
that  he'who  fella  by  a  mistaken  sentence,  may  be
considered  as  falling  for  his  country^  whilst  .he.
suffers  under  the  operation  of  those  rules,  by  the
general  effect  and  tendency  of  which  the  welfare
of  the  commnnity  is  maintained  and  upholden.


, CHAPTER  X.

QflUligiou*  Establishment*  and  of  Toleration.

"A  nEMOioca  establishment  is  no  part  of
Christianity :  it  is  only  the  means  of  inculcating
it"  AmoiigBt'jhe  Jews,  the  rights  and  offices,  the
order,  faintly,  .and  succession  of  the  priesthood,
were  marked  out  by  the  authority  winch  declared
the  law  itself.  These,  therefore,  were  ports  of
the  Jewish  religion,  aa  well  aa  the  means  of  trans-'
mitting  at  Not  so'with  the  new  institution.  It
cannot  be  proved  that  any  form  of  church-govern-
ment was  Jai4  down  in  the  Christian,  as  it  had
been  in  the  Jewish  Scriptures,  with  a  view  of
fixing  a  consthulkm  for, succeeding  age*;  and
which  constitution,  consequently,  the  disciples  of
Christianity  would  every  where,  and  at  all  times,
by  the  very  law  of  their  religion,  be  obliged  to
adopt  '  Certainly,  no  command  for  this  purpose
was  delivered  by  Christ  himself;  and  if  it  be
shown  that  the  apostles  ordained  bishops  and


their  first  can*
remembered  that  deacons  also  and
were  appealed  by  them,  with  functions  very;
dissimilar  to  any  which  obtain  ha  the  church  at
present.  The  truth  seems  to.  have  been;  that
such  offices  were  at  first  erected  in  the  Chris-
tian church,  aa  the  good  order,  the  instruction,,
and  the  exigencies '.of  the  society  at  that  time,  re-
quired, without  any  intention,  at  least  without
any  declared  design,  of  regulating  the,-. appoint-
ment,  authority,  or  the  distinction,  of  Christian
ministers  under  future  circumstances. ,  This  re-
serve, if  We  may  so  call  it,  in  the  Christian  (legis-
lator, is  sufficiently  accounted  for  by  two  consider-
ations : — First^  that  no  precise  constitution  could
be  framed^  which  would  suit  with  the  condition  of
Christianity  in  its  primitive  state,  and  with  that,
which  it  was  to  assume  when  it  should  be  advanced
into  a  national  religion :,  Secondly,  that  a  par-
ticular designation  of  office  er  authority  amongst
the  ministers  of  the  new  religion,  might  have  so
interfered  with  the  arrangements  of  civil  pohcy,  as
to  have  formed,  in  some  countries,  a  consideiahle
obstacle  to  the  progreaaand  reception  of-  the  reli-
gion itself  .
*  The  authority  therefore  of  a  drarch-estahtia**'  |  -
ment  is  ^founded  in  its  utility :  and  whenever,  '  -
upon  this  principle,  we  deliberate  concerning  the  '  '
form,  proprietor,  or  comparative'  excellency  of  diff-
erent establishments,  the  single  view  under  which  -
we  ought  te  consider  any  of  them  is,  that  of"*
scheme  of  instruction  j"  the  single  end  we  ought
to  propose  by  them  j»,  "tie  preservation  and.
communication  of  religious  knowledge."  Every
other  idea,  and  every  other  end,  that  have  been
mixed' with  this,  as  the  making  of  the  church  an.
engine,  or  even  an  ally,  of  the  stale ;  converting
it  into  the  means  of  strengthening  or  diffusing  u>
"fluence;  or  regarding  it  aa  a  support  of  legal,  in
opposition  to  popular  forms  of  government;  have
served  only  to  debase  the  institution,  and  to  inJro-
duce  into  it  numerous  corruptions  and  abuses.

The  notion  of  a  religions-  establishment  com-
prehends three  things :— e  clergy,  or  an  order  of
men  secluded  from  other  professions  to  attend  .
upon  the  offices  of  religion ;  a  legal  provision  for
the  maintenance  of  the  clergy ;  and  the  confining
of  that  provision  to  the  teacher*,  of  a  particular
sect  of  Christianity.  If  any  one  of  these  three
things  be  wanting,  if  there  be  no  clergy  sa  amongst
the  Gtnakers ;  or  it  the  clergy  have  no  other  pro*
vision  than  what  "  *
contribution  of  th

which  the  laws  assign  _

be  extended  to  various  sects  and  denominations  o£
Christiana ;  there  exists  Bo^natipnaJ.  religion  or
established  church,  according  to  the  sense  which
these  terms  are  usually  made  to  convey.  He,  there-
fore, who  would  defend  eceleeiaatjoal  establish-
ments, must  show  the  ^separate  utility 'of  these
three  essential  parts  of  their  constitution  >—

L  The  question  first  in  order  upon  the  subject,
as  well  aa  the  most  fundamental  in  its  importance,
is,  whether  the  knowledge  and  profosaion  of  Chris-
tianity can  be  maintained  in  a  country  without, a
class,  of  men  set  apart  by  public  authority  to.  the
study  and  teaching  of  religion,  and  to  the  conduct-
ing of  public  worship ;  and  for  these  purposes  se-
cluded from  other  employments.  I  add  this  last
circumstance,  because  in  it  consists,  aa  J  take  it,
the  substance  of  the  controversy*  Now  it  muse
be. remembered,  that  Christianity  is  an  historical


bat  they  derive  from  the  voluntary
:  their  hearers;  or  if  Che  provision
a  assign  to  the  support  or  religion


07  RELIGIOUS  ESTABUSHMENTS,  AN1T  OF  TOLERATION. MS


Itfiglon,  founded  n>ficts  wfcieh  are  Mated  to  have
passed,  won  dbeourses  which  were  holden,  and
letter  Which  were  written,  in  a  remote  age,  and
rnatant  country  of  tfato  world,,  as  weli  M  "fitter  »
state  of  hie  and  manners,  and  during  the  preva-
laocr  of  opinions  customs,  and  institutions;  very
unfile  any-wbien  are  found  amongst  mankind  at
present  Moreover,  this  religion,  having  been
ant  published  in  the  country  of  J  odea,  ana  being
built  upon  the  mom  ancient  religion  of  the  Jews,
is  necessarily  and  intimately  connected  with  the
sacred  writings,  with  the  history  and  polity  of
that  smguto  people:  to  which  must  be.  "added,
that  the  records  of  both  revelations  are  preserved
in  language*  which  have  long*  ceased  to  be  spo-
ken in  any  part  of  the  worlds  Books  which  come
down  to  us  from  times  so  remote,  and  under  so
many  caueesof  unavoidable  obscurity,  cannot,  it  is
evident,  be  tmderstpod  without  study  and  prepa-
ration.  The  languages  must  be  learned.  The
various  writings  which  these  volumes  contain,
must  be  carefully  compared  with  one  another,  and
with  themselves.  What-remain*  of  contemporary
authors,  or  of  authors  connected  with  the  age?  the
country,  or  the  subject  of  our  scriptorest  must  be
perused  and  consulted,  in  order  to  interpret  doubt-
ful forms  of  speech,  and  to  explain"  aUusx>iia  which
refer  to  objects  or  usages  that  no  longer  exist.
Above  all,  the  modes  of  expression,  the  habits  of
ffnasnning  and  anrunymtetioo,  which  were  then
in  use,  and  to  "which  the  discourses  even  of  in-
spired teachers  were  necessarily  adapted,  must  be
sufficiently  known;  and  can  only  be  known  at
ait  by  «  doe  acquaintance  with  ancient  liter*- ,
ture.  And  lastly,  to  establish  the  genuineness  and*
integrity  of  the' canonical  scriptures  themselves,  a
aeries  of  testimony,  recognising  the  notoriety  and
deception  of  these  books,  must  be  deduced  from
times  near  to  those  of  their  first  publication,  down
4he  soccpasion  of  apes  through  which  they  have
been  tremunfcted  to  us.  The  qualifications  ne-
cessary for  such  researches  demand,  it  is  confessed,
tt  decree  of  leisure,  and  a  kind  or  education,  in-
consistent with  the  exercise  of  any  other  profes-
sion.— But  how  few  are  there  amongst  the  clergy,
from  whom  any  thing  of  this  sort  can  be  expected !
how  small  a  proportion  of  their  number,  who
seem  likely  either  to  augment  the  fund  of  sacred
literature,  or  even  to  collect  what  is  already  known!
—To  this  objection  it  may  be  replied,  that  we
aow  manyiseede  to  raise  one  flower.  In  order  to
jsjuduce  a  few  capable  of  improving  and  continu-
ing the  stock  of  Christian  erudition,  leisure  and.
opportunity  must  be  afforded  to  great-  numbers.
Original  knowledge  of  this  kinef  can  never  be
uxuverse/;  but  k  |s  of  the  utmost  impttt&nce,  and-
it  is  enough  that  there  be,  at  afi  times,  found
tcme  o^uaned  for  such  inquiries,  and  in  whose
concurring  and  independent  conclusions  upon
each  subject,  the  rest  of  the  .Christian  conVnunity
may  safely  confide:  whereas,  without  an  order  of
clergy  educated  for  the.  purpose,  and  led , to  the
tffon  of  these  studies  by  the  habits,  the
and  the  object,  of  their  vocation,  it  ma*
be  questioned  whether  the  learning  itself
:  have  been  lost,  by  which  the  records
of  our  faith  ate  interpreted  and  defended.  '  We
contend,  therefore,  that  an  order  of  clergy  is  ne-
cessary to  perpetuate  the  evidences  of  Revelation,
•not  to  interpret  the  obscurity  of  those  ancient
—*"  * '  *>  the  religion  k  contained. But

» no  doubt,  one  design  of


their' institution,  the  more  ordinary  offices  of  pub-
lic teaching,  aid  of  conducting  pubtic  warship,
call  for  tjuaJ^cations-net  usually  to  be  met  wkh
,  amidst  the  employment^  of  civil  life.  It  has  been
acknowledged  by  some,  Who  cannot  be  suspected
of  making  unnecessary  concessions  in  favour  ef
establishments,  "  to.  be  barely  poasibU.  that  a
person  who  was  never  educated  for  the  office
should  acquit  himself  with  deoency  as  a  public
teacher  of.  religion.'*  And  that  surely  mast  he
a~very  defective  policy  which  trustato  potetbUitie*
for  success,  when  provision  is  to  be  mage  for  regu-
las  and  general  instruction.  Little  objection*  to
this  argument  can  be  drawn  from  the  example  of
the  Quakers,  who,  it  may  be  said,  furnish  an  ex-
perimental proof  that  the  worship  and  profession
of  Christianity,  may  be  upholden  without  a  sepa-
rate clergy.  These  sectaries  every  where  subsist
in  conjunction  with  a  regular  establishment,  'they
"have  access  to -the  writings,  they  profit  by.  the
labours,  of  the  clergy,  in  common  with  other  Chris-
tians. They  participate  in  that  genera)  diffinshm
of  religious  knowledge,  which  the  constant  teach-
ing'era  more  regular  ministry  keeps  up  in  the
country :  with  such  auk,  and;  under  such  circum-
stances, the  defects  or  a  plan  may  not  be'  much
felt,  although  the  plan  itself  be  altogether  unfit  fox
general  imitation.

2.  Jf  then  an  order  of  clergy  be  necessary,  if  it
be  necessary  also  to  seclude  them  .from  the  em-
ployment* and  profits,  of  other  professions,  it  is
evident  they  ought  to  be  enabled  to  derive  a  main-
tenance from  thei*-  owa,  Now  tins  maintenance
must  etther  depi  id  uppn  the-veluntary  contribu-
tions of  then*  hearers,  or  arise  from  revenues  as-
signed -by  authority  of  law.  To  the  scheme  of
voluntary  contribution  there  exists  this  insur-
mountable objection,  that  few,w,ould  ultimately
contribute  any  thing  at  all.  However  the  zeal  of
a  sect,  or  the  novelty  of  a  change,  might  support
such  an  experiment  for  a  while,  no  reliance  coujjd
be  placed  upon  it  as  a  general  and  permanent  pre-
vision. It  is  at  all  times  a  bad  constitution,  which
presents  temptations  of  interest  in  opposition  to
the  duties  of  religion, ;  or  which  makes  the  offices
of  religion  expensive  to  those  who  attend  upon
them ;  or  which  allows  pretences  of  conscience  to
be  an  excuse  for  net  sharing  in  a  public  burthen.
If,  by  declining  to  ^frequent  religious  assemblies,
men  could  save  their  money,  at  the  same  time  that
they  indulged  their  indolence,  and  their  disinclina-
tion to  exercises  ef  seriousness  and  reflection  j  or,
if  by  dissenting  from  the  national  religion,  they
could  be.e*cused  from  contributing  to  the  support
of  the  ministers  of  feugiofi ;  it 'la  to  be  feared  that
many  would  take  advantage  of  ihe  option  which
was  thus  imprudently  left  open  to  them,  and  that^
this  liberty  might  finally  operate  to  the  decay  of
virtue,  and  aa  irrecoverable  forgetfulnea*  of  afl  re-
ligiofi  in  the  country.  Is  there,  not  too  touch
reason  to  fear,  that,  if  it  were  referred  to  the  dis-
cretion of  each  neighbourhood,  whether  they  would
maintain  amongst  them  a  teacher  of  religion  or  .
not,  many  districts  would  remain  unprovided  with
any ;  that,  with  the  difficulties  which  encumber
every  measure  requiring  the  co-operation  of  num-
bers, and  where  each  individual  of  the  number  has
an  interest  secretly  pleading  against  the  success  of
the  measure  itself,  associations  for  the  support  of
Christian  worship  and  instruction  would  .neither
be  numerous,  not  long  continued?  The  devout
and  pious  might  lament  in  vain  the  want  at  the


■144


Moral  and  pouhcal  philosophy.


distance  of  a  rengfous  assembly;  they  could  not

form  or  maintain  one,  without  the  concurrence

,  of  neighbour*  who  felt  neither  (heir  xeal  nor  their

'  liberality.

From  the  difficulty  with  which  congregations
Would  he  established  and  upheld  upon  the  volun-
tary plan,  let  us  carry  our  thoughts  to  the  condi-
tion of  those  who  are  to  officiate  in  them.  Preach-
ing, in  time,  would  become  a  mode  of  begging.'
With  what  sincerity,  or  with  what  dignity,  can  a
meacheraispense  the  truths  of  Christianity,  whose

.  'thoughts  axe  perpetually  solicited  to  the  reflection

x  how  he  mar  increase  his  subscription'?  His  eJoi
quenqe?  tf  he  possesses  any,  resembles  rather  the
exhibition  of  a  player  who  is  computing  the  profits.
6f  his  theatre,  than  the  simplicity  of  a  man  who,
feeling  himself  the-awful  expectations  of  .religion,
Is  seeking  to  bring  others  to  such  a  sense  and  un-
derstanding of  their  duty  as  may  save  their  souls.
'Moreover,  a  little  experience  of  the  .disposition
of  the  common  people  will  in  every  country  inform
us,  that  it  is  one  thing  to  edify  them  in  Christian
knowledge,  and  another  to  gratify  their  taste  for
vehement,  impassioned  oratory ;  that  he,  not  only
'whose  success.,  but  whose  subsistence,  depends
upon  collecting  arid  pleasing*.  Crowd,  must  resort
to  other  arts  than  the  acquirement  and  communi-
cation of  sober  and  profitable  instruction.  For  a
preacher  to  be  thus  at  the  mercy  of  his  audience ;
to  be'  obliged  to  adapt  his  doctrines  to  the  pleasure
of  a 'capricious  multitude;  to  be  continually  affect-
ing  a  style  and -manner  neither  natural  to  him,
nor  agreeable  to  his  judgment ;  to  five  in  constant
bondage  to  tyrannical  and  insolent  directors |  are
eire\unstances  so  mortifying,  not  only  to  the  pride
of  the  human  heart,  but  to  the  virtuous  love  of  in-
dependency, that  they  are.  rarely  .submitted  to
without  a  sacrifice  of  principle,  and  a  deprivation
of  character ;— at  least  it  may  be^  pronounced,  that-
a  ministry  so  degraded  would  fen  into  the  lowest
hands :  for  it  would  be  found-  impossible  to  engage
men  of  worth  and.  ability-  in  so  precarious  and
humiliating  a  profession.

If{  in  deference  then  to  these  reasons,  it  be
admitted,  that -a  legal  provision  for  the  clergy,  com-
pulsory* upon  those  who  contribute  to  ft,  is  expe-
dient y  the  next  question  will  be,  whether  this  pro-

.  vision  should  be  confined  to  one  sect  of  C  hristianity ,
or  extended  mdi&arently  td  all?  Now  it  should  be
observed,  that  this  question  never  can  offer  itself
where  the  people  are  agreed  in  their  religious
opinions ;  and  that  it  never  vugkt.Xo  arise,  wnere

■  a  system  inlay  be  framed  of  doctrines  and  worship
wiae  enough  to  comprehend  their  disagreement;
and  which  might 'satisfy  all,  .by  uniting  all  in  the
articles1  of  their  common  faith,  and  in  ^  mode  of
divine  worship  that  omits  every  subject  of  contro-
versy or  offence.  Where  such  a  comprehension
is  practicable,  the  .comprehending  religion  ought

.  is  be  made  that  of  the  state.  Rut  if  this  „be  de-
spaired of  \  if  religious  opinions  exist,  not  only  so
various,  but  so  contradictory,  as  to  render  it ,  im-
possible to  reconcile  them  to  each  other,  or  to  any
one  confession- of  faith,  rule  of  discipline,  or  form
of  worship :J£  consequently,  separate  congrega-
tions and  different  sects  must  unavoidably  con;

i  tinue  in  the  country :  under  such  circumstances,
whether  the  laws  ought  to  establish  one  sect  in
preference  to  the  rest,  thatis{  whether*  they  *>ught,
to  confer  the  provision  assigned- to  the  mainte-
nance of  religion  iipogr  the  tcacliers  of  one  system.
of  doctrines  alone,  becomes  a  question  of  neces-


sary discussion  and  of  great  importance. Add
whatever  we  may  determine  concerning  specula-
tive rights  and  abstract,  proprieties,  when  we-stt
about  the  framing'*/  an  bccleeiastical  constitution
adapted  to  real  life,  and  to  the'  actual  state  of  reli-
gion in  the  country,  we  shall  find  this  question
very  nearly  related  to  and  principally  indeed  .'de-
pendent Upon  another ;  fiamely,  (tin  what  way,  or
by  ytfhoni,  ought  the  ministers  of  religion  to-  bo
appointed?" If  the  species^of  patronage  be  retain-
ed to  which  we  are  accustomed'  in  this  country,
and  w<hioh  allows  private  individua4s^to  nominate
teachers  of  religion  far  districts  and  congregations
to  which  they  are  absolute  strangers;  without
some  test  proposed  to  the  persons  nominated,  the
utmost  f  discordancy  of  religious  opinions  might
arise  between  the  several  teachers  and  their  re-
spective congregations. A  popish  patron  might
appoint  a  priest  to  say  mass  to  a-  congregation  of
protcstants ;  an  episcopal  clergyman  be  sent  to  of-
ficiate in  a  parish  of  presbytenkna;  Or  a  pxesbyte-
rian  divine  to  inveigh  against  the*  errors  of  popery
before  an  audience  of  papists: -The  requisition
then  of  sUbscripjSon,  or  any  other  test  -by  which
the  national  religion  is  guarded,  may  be  consider-  ,
ed  merely  as  a  restriction  upon  the  exercise  of
private  patronage. The  laws  speak  to  the  private
patron  thus  i-^Of  those  whom  we  have  previously ,
pronounced  to  be  fitly  qualified  to  teach  religion,
we  allow  you  to-  select  one  9  but  we  do  not  allow
you  to  decide  what  "religion  -shall  be4  established
in  a  particular  district  -or the  .country;  for  which
decision  .you  are  no  wise  fitted -by  any  quali-
fications which,  as  a  private,  patroit,  you  may
happen  to  possess. If  H  be  necessary  that -the
point  be  determined  for  the 'inhabitants  by  any
other  will  than  their  own,  it  is  surely  better  that
it  should  be  determined,  by  a  deliberate,  resolu-
tion of  the  legislature,  than  by  the  casual  inclina-
tion of  an  individual,  by  whom  the  right  is  pur-
chased, or  to  whom  it  devolves  cur  a  mere  secular
inheritance."  .Wheresoever,  therefore,  this  consti-
tution of  patronage  is  adopted,  a  national  religion,
or  the  legal  preference  of  one  particular  rehgian.
to  all  others,  must  almost  necessarily  accompany  H.
But,  'secondly ?  let  it  be  supposed,  that  the  appoint-
ment of  die  minister  of  religion  was  in  every  parish .
left  to  the  choice  of  the  parishioners ;  might  not
this' 'choice,  we  ask)  be  safely  exercised  Without
its  being  limited  to  the  teachers  of  any  particular
sect? The  efiect  of  such  a  liberty  must  be,  that  a
papist,  or  a  presbyterian,  a  methodist,  a  Moravian,
or  an  anabaptist,  would  successively  gain  -posses-
sion-of  the  pulpit,  according  as  a*  majority  of  the
party  happened  at  each  election  to  prevail.— Now,
with  what  violence  the  conflict  woui<|  upon  every
vacancy  harenewed ;  what  bitter  animosities- would
be  revived,  or  rather  be  constantly  fed  and  kept
alive,  in  the  neighbourhood^  witt  what  uncon-
querable aversion  the  teacher  anil  Ms  religion
would  be  received  by  the,  defeated  party,  .may  be
foreseenrby  those  who  "reflect  with  how  much  pas-
sion every  dispute,  is  carried  "0^  in  which  the
name  of  religion  can  be  made  to  mix  itself;  much
more  wfcere  the  cause  itself  is  concerned  so  imme-
diately as'  it  would  be  in  this. Or,  thirdly,  if  the
state  appoint  the  ministers' of  religion;  this  consti-
tution will  differ  little  from  the  establishment  of  a
national  religion-.;  for  the  state  will,  undoubtedly,
ftppomt  those,  and  those  alone,  whose  religious
opinions,  or  rather  whose  religious  denominations,
agree  with  its  own;  Unless  it  be  thought  that  any


OP  RELIGIOUS  ESTABLISHMENTS,  AND  OP,  TOLERATION.


1«


tttng  would  be  gained  to  religious  liberty  by  trans-
ferring the  choice  of  the  national  religion  from  the
legislature  of  the  country,  to  the  magistrate  who
administers  the  executive  government. — The  only
plan  which  seems  to  render  the  legal  maintenance
of  a  clergy  practicable,  without  the  legal  prefer-
ence of  one  sect  of  Christians  to  others,  is  that  of
an  experiment  which  is  said  to  be  attempted  or
designed  in  some  of  the  new  states  of  North
Ab^™"  The  nature  of  the  plan  is  thus  describ-
ed >— A  tax  is  levied  upon  the  inhabitants  for
the  general  support  of  religion;  the  collector  of
the  taxes  goes  round  with  a  register  in  his  hand,
in  which  are  inserted,  at  the  head  of  so  many  dis-
tinct columns,  the  names  of.  the  several  religious
sects  that  are  professed  in  the  country.  The  per-
son who  is  called  upon  for  the  assessment,  as  soon
as  he  has  paid  his  quota,  subscribes  his  name  and
the  sum  in  which  of  the  columns  he  pleases;  and
the  amount  of  what  is  collected  in  each  column  is
paid  over  to  the  minister  of  that  denomination.
la  this  scheme  it  is  not  left  to  the  option  of  the
subject,  whether  he  will  contribute,  or  how  much
he  shall  contribute,  to  the  maintenance  of  a  chris-
tian ministry j  it  is  only  referred  to  his  choice  to
determine  by  what  sect  his  contribution  shall
be  received  The  above  arrangement  is  undoubt-
edly the  best  that  has  been  proposed  upon  this
principle;  it  bears  the  appearance  of  liberality
and  justice;  it  may  contain  some  solid  advan-
tages; nevertheless,  it  labours  under  inconveni-
ences which  will  be  found,  1  think,  upon  trial,  to
overbalance  all  its  recommendations.  It  is  scarcely
compatible  with  that  which  is  the  first  requisite  in
an  ecclesiastical  establishment, — the  division  of
the  country  into  parishes  of  a  commodious  extent.
If  the  parishes  be  small,  and  ministers  of  every  de-
nomination be  stationed  in  each,  (which  the  plan
aeems  to  suppose,)  the  expense  of  their  mainte-
nance wul  become  too  burthensome  a  charge  for
the  country  to  support.  If,  to  reduce  the  expense,
the  districts  be  enlarged,  the  place  of  assembling
will  oftentimes  be  too  far  removed  from  the- resi-
dence of  the  persons  who  ought  to  resort  to  it.
Again:  the  making  the  pecuniary  success  of  the
different  teachers  of  religion  to  depend  on  the
number  and  wealth  of  their  respective  followers,
would  naturally  generate  strifes  and  indecent
jealousies  amongst  them ;  as  well  as  produce  a
polemical  and  proselyting  spirit,  founded'  in  or
mixed  with  view*  of  private  gain,  which  would
both  deprave  the  principles  of  the  clergy,  and
distract  the  country  with  endless  contention*.

The  argument,  then,  by  which  ecclesiastical
estahuahmeflts  are  defended,  proceeds  by  these
steps  >— The  knowledge  and  profession  of  Chris-
tianity, cannot  be  uphoklen  without  a  clergy :  a
clergy  cannot  be  supported  without  a  legal  provi-
sion; a  legal  provision  for  the  clergy,  cannot  be
constkttted  without  the  preference  of  one  sect  of
Christians  to  the  rest:  and  the  conclusion  will  be
conveniently  satisfactory  in  the  degree  in  which  the
truth  of  these  several  propositions  can  be  made  out.

If  it  be  deemed  expedient  to  establish  a  national
religion,  that  is  to  say,  one  sect  in  preference  to  all
others;  some  teat;  by  which  the  teachers  of  that
sect  may  be  distinguished  from  the  teachers  of  dif-
ferent sects,  appears  to  be  an  indispensable  conse-
The  existence  of  such  an  establishment
i  it:  the  very  notion  of  a  national  religion
■  thai  of  a  test. -

Bat  tms  necessity,  wtoh  is  real,  hath,  awarding


to  the  fashion  of  human  affidra,  furnished  to  almost
every  church  a  pretence  for  extending,  multiplying,
and  continuing,  such  tests  beyond  what  the  occa-
sion justified.  For  though  some  purposes  of  order
and  tranquillity  maybe  answered  by  the  establish-
ment of  creeds  and  confessions,  yet  they  are  at  all
times  attended  with  serious  inconvenieneies :  they
check  inquiry;  they  violate  liberty ;  they  ensnare
the  consciences  of  the  clergy,  by  holding  out  temp-
tations to  prevarication ;  however  they  may  express*
the  persuasion,  or  be  accommodated  to  the  contro>
vermes  or  to  the  fears  of  the  age  in  which  they  ase
composed,  in  process  of  time,  and  by  reason  of4he
changes  which  are  Wont  to  take  place  in  the  judg-
ment of  mankind  upon  religious  subjects,  they
come  at  length  to  contradict  the  actual  opinions  of
ifte  church,  whose  doctrines  they  profess  to  con-
tain ;  and  they  often  perpetuate  the  proscription  of
sects,  and  tenets,  fmm  which  ant  danger  has  lonir
ceased  to  be  apprehended.  -  ."*'*""■■

It  may  not  follow  from  these  objections,  that  tests
and  subscriptions  ought  to  be  abolished :  but  it  fol-
lows, that  they  ought  to  be  made  as  simple  and
easy  as  possible ;  that  they  should  be  adapted,  from
time  to  time,  to  the  varying  sentiments  and  cir-
cumstances of  the  church  in  which  they  are  re-
ceived; and  that  they  should  at  no  time  advance
one  step  farther  than  some  subsisting  necessity  re-
quires.  If,  for  instance,  promises  of  conformity  to
the  rites,  liturgy,  and  offices  of  the  church,  besuf-
ficient  to  prevent  confusion  and  disorder  in  the
celebration  of  divine  worship,  then  such  promises
ought  to  be  accepted  in  the  place  of  stricter  sub-
scriptions. If  articles  of  peace,  as  they  are  called,
that  is,  engagements  not  to  preach  certain  doctrines;
nor  to  revive  certain  controversies,  weald  exclude
indecent  altercation*  amongst  the  national  clergy,
as  well  as  secure  to  the  public  teaching  of  religion,
as  much  of  uniformity  and  quiet  as -is  necessary
to  edification;  then  confessions  of  faith  ought  to
be  converted  into  articles  of  peace.  In  a  word,  it
ought  to  be  holden  a  sufficient  reason  for  relaxing
the  terms  of  subscription,  or  for  dropping  any  or  '
all  of  the  articles  to  be  subscribed,  that  no  present
necessity  requires  the  strictness  which  is  com-
plained of,  or  that  it  should  be  extended  to  so  many
points  of  doctrine.

The  division  of  the  country  uuVdistrictSj  and
the  stationing  in  each  district  a  teacher  of  religion,
forms  tho  substantial  part  of  «very  church  estab-
lishment The  varieties  that  have  been  introduced
into  the  government  and  discipline  of  dinerent
churches,  are  of  inferior  importance  when  com-
pared with  this,  in  which  they  all  agree.  Of  these
economical  questions,  none  seems  more  material
than  that  which  has  been  long  agitated  in  the  re-
formed churches  of  Christendom,  whether  a  parity
amongst  the  clergy,  or  a  distinction  of  orders  m
the- ministry,  be  more  conducive  to  the  general'
ends  of  the  institution.  In  favour  of  that  system
which  the  laws  of  this  country  have  preferred,  we
may  allege  the  following  reasons : — tnat  it  secures
tranquillity  and  subordination  amongst  the  clergy
themselves ;  that  it  corresponds  with  the  gradations
of  rank  in  civil  life,  and  provides  for  the  edifica-
tion of  each  rank,  by  stationing  in  each  an  order
of  clergy  of  their  own  class  and  q  uality ;  and,  lastly,  .
that  the  same  fund  produces  more  enect,  both  as
an  allurement  to  men  of  talents  to  enter  into  the
church,  and  as  a  stimulus  to  the  industry  of  those
who  are  ahead  v  in  it,  when  distributed  into  prises  of  .
different  value,' than  when  divided  into  equal  shares.
13


M6


MORAL  AND  POLITICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


After  the  state  has  once  cotebhshed  a  particular
system  of  frith  as  a  national  religion,  a  question
will  toon  occur,'  concerning  the  treatment  and
toleration  of  these  who  diamnt  from  it.  This
question  is  properly  preceded  by  another,  concern-
ing the  right  which  the  civil  magistrate  possesses
to  interfere  in  matters  of  religion  at.  all :  for,  al-
though this  right  be  acknowledged  whilst-  he  is
employed  solely  in  providing  means  of  public  in-
struction, it  will  probably  be  disputed,  (indeed  it
ever  has  been,)  when  he  proceeds  to  inflict  Densi-
ties, to  impose  restraints  or  incapacities,  on  the  ac-
count of  religious  distinctions.  They  who  admit
no  other  Just  original  of  civil  government,  than
what  is  founded  m  some  stipulation  with  its  sub-
jects, are  at  liberty  to  contend  that  the  concerns
of  religion  were  excepted  out  of  the  social  com-
pact: that,  in  an  afl&lr  which  can  only  be  trans-
acted between  Cod  and  a  man's  own  conscience,
no  commission  or  authority  was  ever  delegated  to
the  civil  magistrate,  or  covJd  indeed  be  transferred
from  the  person  himself  to  any  other.  We,  how-
ever, who  have  rejected  this  theory,  because  we
cannot  discover  any  actual  contract  between  the
state  and  the  people,  and  because  we  cannot  allow
any  arbitrary  fiction  to  be  made  the  foundation  of
real  rights  and  of  real  ohligations^find-  ourselves
precluded  from  this  distinction.  The  reasoning
which  deduces  the  authority  of  civil  government
from  the  will  of  God,  and  which  collects  that  will


magistrate

of  general  utility :  in  plainer  terms,  that  whatever
be  the  subject  to  be  regulated,  it  is  lawful  for  him
to  interfere  whenever  his  inteference,  in  its  gene-
ral tendency,  appears  to  be  conducive  to  the  com-
mon interest.  There  is  nothing  in  the  nature  of
religion,  as  suchj  which  exempts  it  from  the  au-
thority of  the  legislator,  when  the  safety  or  welfare
of  the  community  requires  his  interposition.  It
has  been  said,  indeed,  that  religion,  pertaining  to
the  interest*  of  a  life  to  come,  lies  beyond  the  pro-
vince.of  civil  government,  the  office  of  which  is
confined  to  the  affairs  of  this  life.  But  in  reply
to  this  objection,  it  may  be  observed,  that  when
the  laws  interfere  even  m  religion,  they  interfere
only  with  temporals;  their  effects  terminate,  their
power  operates  only  upon  those  rights  and  in-
terests, which  conte^emy  belong  to  their  disposal.
The  acta  of  the  legislature,  the  edicts  of  the  prince,
the  sentence  of  the  judge,  cannot  affect  my  sal-
tation: nor  do  they,  without  the  most  absurd
arrogance,  pretend  to  any  such  power :  but  they
may  deprive  me  of  liberty,  of  property,  and  even
of  fife  itself,  on  account  of  my  religion;  and  how-
ever I  may  complain  of  the  injustice  of  the  sen-
tence by  which  1  am  condemned,  I  cannot  allege,
thatthenjagistnUehastTaiisgresBedtheboundanes
of  his  jurisdiction;  because  the  property,  the  lib-
erty, and  the  life  of  the  subject,  may  be  taken
away  by  the  authority  of  the  laws,  for  any  reason
winch,,  in  the  judgment  of  the  legislature,  renders
each  a  measure  necessary  to  the  common  welfare.
Moreover,  as  the  precepts  of  religion  may  regulate
all  the  offices  of  life,  or  may  be  so  construed  as  to
extend  to  all,  the  exemption  of  religion  from  the
control  of  human  laws  might  afford  a  plea,  which
would  exclude  cavil  government  from  every  autho-
rity over  the  conduct  of  its  subjects.  Religious
liberty,  is,  like  civil  liberty,  not  an  immunity  from
ieeteaint,butthe  being  restrained  by  no  law,  but


what  in  a  greater  degree  conduces  to  the  puWe
welfare.

Still  it  is  right  "to  obey  God  rather  than  man."
Nothing  that  we  have  said  encroaches  upon  the
truth  of  this  sacred  and  undisputed  maxim :  the
right  of  the  magistrate  to  ordain,  and  the  oblig%-
tion  of  the  subject  to  obey,  in  matters  of  religion,
may  be  very  different;  ana  will  be  so,  as  often  as
they  flow  from  opposite  apprehensions  of  the  Di-
vine will  In  affairs  that  are  properly  of  a  civil  na-
ture, in  u  the  things  that  are  Casar's,"  this  differ-
ence seldom  happens.  The  law  authorises  the
act  which  it  enjoins ;  Revelation  being  either  silent
upon  the  subject*  or  referring  to  the  laws  of  the
country,  or  requiring  only  that,  man  act  by  some
fixed  rale,  and  that  this  rule  be  established  by
competent  authority.  But  when  human  laws  in-
terpose their  direction  in  matters  of  religion,  by
dictating,  for  example,  the  object  or  the  mode  of
divine  worship ;  by  ^prohibiting  the  profession  of
some  articles  of  faith,  and  by  exacting  that  of  others,
they  are  liable  to  clash  with  what  private  persons
believe  to  be  already  settled  by  precepts  of  Reve-
lation ;  or  to  contradict  what  God  himself,  they
think,  hath  declared  to  be  true.  In  this  case,  on
whichever  side  the  mistake  lies,  or  whatever  plea
the  state  may  allege  to  justify  its  edict,  the  sub-
ject can  have  none  to  excuse  lus  compliance.  The
same  consideration  also  points  out  the.  distinction*
as  to  .the  authority  of  the  state,  between  temporals
and  spirituals.  The  magistrate  is.  not  to  be  obeyed
in  temporals  more  than  spirituals,  where  a  repug-
nancy is  perceived  between  his  commands  and
any  credited  manifestations  of  the  Divine  will;
but  such  repugnancies  are  much  less  likely  to  arise
in  one  case  than  the  other.

When  we  grant  that  it  is  lawful  for  the  ma-
gistrate to  interfere  in  religion  as  often  as  his  in-
terference appears  to  him  to  conduce,  in  its  general
tendency,  to  the  public  happiness;  it  may  be  argued,
from  this  concession,  that  since  salvation  is  the
highest  interest  of  mankind,  and  since,  consequent-
ly, to  advance  thai,  is  to  promote  the  public  hap-
piness in  the  best  way,  and  in  the  greatest  degree,
m  which  it  can  be  promoted,  it  follows,  that  it  is
not  only  the  right,  but  the  duty,  of  every  magis-
trate invested  with  supreme  power,  to  enforce  upon
his  subjects  the  reception  of  that  religion  which  ho
deems  most  acceptable  .to  God ;  and  to  enforce  it
by  such  methods  as  may  appear  most  effectual  for
the  end  proposed.  A  popish  king,  for  example,
who  should  believe  that  salvation  is  not  attainable
out  of  the  precincts  of  the  Romish  church,  would
derive  a  right  from  our  principles  (not  to  say  that
he  would  be  bound  by  them)  la-employ  the  power
with  which  the  constitution  intrusted  him,  and
which  power,  in  absolute  monarchies,  commands
the  lives  and  fortunes  of  every  subject  of  the  empire,
in  reducing  his  people  within  that  communion.  We
confess  that  this  consequence  is  inferred  from  the
principles  we  have  laid  down  concerning  Ae  foun-
dation of  civil  authority,  not  without  the  resem-
blance of  a  regular  deduction :  we  confess  also  that
it  is  a  conclusion  which  it  behoves  us  to  dispose  of;
because,  if  it  really  follow  from  our  theory  of  go-
vernment, the  theory  itself  ought  to  be  given  up*
Now  it  will  be  remembered,  that  the  terms  of  our
proposition  are  these :— "  That  it  is  lawful  for  the
magistrate  to  interfere  in  the  affairs  of  religion,
whenever  his  interference  appears  to  hun.  to  con-
duce, by  its  general  tendency,  to  the  public  hap-
nituM.* The  claaeeoi"  general  tendency,"  when


OF  EELIGIOUS  ESTABLISHMENTS,  AND  OF  TOLERATION.


147


fmn  rote  comes  to  be  applied,  will  be  found  a  wjry
etanhVeJit  part  of  the  direction^  It  obliges  the  ma-
gistrate to  reflect,  not  only  whether  the  religion
which  he  wishes  to  propagate  amongst  hie  sub-
ject*, be  that  wBich  will  best  secure  their  eternal
welfare:  not  only,  whether  the  methods  he  employs
be  likely  to  efiectuate  the  establishment  of  that
religion;  bat  also  upon  this  farther  question:
Whether  the  kind  or  interference  which  he  is
■bout  to  exercise,  if  it  were  adopted  as  a  common
maxim  amongst  states  and  princes,  or  received  as
a  general  rule  for  the  conduct  of  government  in
matters  of  religion,  would,  upon  the  whole,  and  in
the  mass  of  instances  in  which  hie  example  might
be  imitated,  conduce- to  the  furtherance  of  human
salvation.  If  the  magistrate,  for  example,  should
think  that,  although  toe  application  of  his  power
might,  in  the  instance  concerning  which  he  dV
■berates,  advance  the  true  religion,  and  together
with  it,  the  happiness  of  his  people,  yet  that  the
same  engine,  in  other  hands,  who  might  assume
the  right  to  use  it  with  the  lute  pretensions  of  rea-
son and  authority  that  he  himself  alleges,  would
more  frequently  shut  out  truth,  and  obstruct  the
m  of-  salvation ;  he  would  be  bound  by  this
,  still  admitting  public  utility  to  be  the  stt-
s  rule  of  his  conduct,  to  refrain  from  expe-
i,  which,  whatever  particular  effects  he  may
expect  from  them,. are,  in  thejr  general  operation,
dangerous  or  hurtful.  If  there  be  any  difficulty
in  the  subject,  it  arises  from  that  which  is  the
cause  of  every  difficulty  in  morals ;— the  competi-
tion of  particular  and  general  consequences ;  or,
what  is  the  same  thing,  the  submission  of  one  ge-
neral rule  to  another  rule  which  is  still  more


Bearing  then  in  mind,  that  it  is  the  'general
tendency  of  the  measure,  or,  in  other  words,  the
effects  which  would  arise  from  the  measure  be-
ing generally  adopted,  that  fixes  upon  it  the  cha-
racter of  rectitude  or  injustice:  we  proceed  to
inquire  what  is  the  degree  and  the  sort  of  inter-
ference of  secular  laws  in  matters  of  religion,
which  are  likely  to  be  beneficial  to  the  public
happiness.  There,  are  two  maxims  which  will
in  a  great  nieasure  regulate  our  conclusions  Upon
tins  head  The  fito  1s,  that  any  form  of  Chris-
tianity is  better  than  no  religion  at  all :  the  second,
that,  of  dtfferent  systems  of  frith,  that  is  the  best
which  m  the  truest  The  first  of  these  positions
will  hardly  be  disputed,  when  we  reflect  that
•very  sect  and  modification  of  Christianity  holds
oat  the  happiness  and  misery  of  another  life,  as
depending  chiefly  upon  the  practice  of  virtue  or
ofvicein  this;  and  that  the  distinctions  of  virtue
and  vine  am  nearly  the  same  in  alL  A  person
who  acts  under  the  uniauarion  of  these  hopes  and
fear*}  though  combined  with  many  errors  and  su-
is  more  likely  to  advance  both  the
_  jftness  and  his  own,  than  one  who  is
"or  all  expectation  of  future  account.
The  latter  proposition  is- founded  in  theeonsider-
atioh,  that  the  principal  importance  of  religion
consists  in  its  inffuence  upon  the  fete  and  condi-
tinai  of  a  future  existence.  This  influence  be-
longs only  to  that  religion  which  comes  from  God.
A  political  religion  may  be  framed,  which  shall
embrace  the  purposes,  and  describe  the  duties  of
pofitical  society  perfectly  /  well;  but  if  it  be  not  de-
■vered  by  God4,  what  assurance  does  it  afford.
that  the  decisions  of  the  Divine  judgment  will
hawj  any  regard  to  tfaajrules  which  it  contains?


By  a  man  who  acta  with  a  view  to  a  future  t
ment,  the  authority  of  a  religion  is  the  first  t  ^
inquired  after ;  a  religion  which  wants  authority,
with  him  wants  every  thing.  .Since  then  this  au-
thority appertains,  not  to  the  religion  which  is
most  commodious, — to  the  religion  which  i*  most
sublime  and  efficacious,— to  the  religion  which  suits
best  with  the  form,  or  seems  most  calculated  to
uphold  the  power  and  stability,  of  civil  govern-
ment,— but  only  to  that  religion  which  comes  from
God;  we  are  justified  in  pronouncing  the  true
religion2  by  its  very  truth,  and  independently  of
all  considerations  of  tendencies,  aptness,  or  any
other  internal  qualities  whatever,  to  be  universally
the  best.

From  the  first  proposition  foHoWBthisinference,
that  when  the  state  enables  its  subjects  to  learn
•ome  form  of  Christianity,  by  distnbuting  teach-
ers of  a  religious  system  throughout  the  country,
and  by  providing  for  the  maintenance  of  these
teachers  at  the  public  expense ;  that  is,  in  fewer
terms,  when  the  bwsefflawisA  a  natkwal  reunion,
they  exercise  a  power  and  an  interference,  which
are  likely,  in  their  general  tendency,  to  promote
the  interest  of  mankind ;  for,  even  supposing  the
species  of  Christianity  which  the  laws  patronise
to  be  erroneous  and  corrupt,  yet  when  the  option
lies  between  this  religion  and  no  religion  at  all,
(which  would  be  the  consequence  of  leaving  the
people  without  any  public  means  of  instruction,
or  any  regular  celebration  of  the  offices  of  Chris-
tianity,^ our  proposition  teaches  us  that  the  former
alternative  is  constantly  to  be  preferred.

But  after  the  right  of  the  magistrate  to  establish
a  particular  religion  has  been,  upon  this  pAncipal,
admitted;  a  doubt  sometimes  presents  itself,  whe-
ther the  religion  which  .he  ought  to  establish,  be
that  which  he  himself  professes,  or  that  which  he
observes  to  prevail  amongst  the  majority  of  the
people. Now  when  we  consider  this  question
with  ar  view  to  the  formation  of  a  general  rule
upon  the  subject,  (which  view  alone  can  furnish  a
iust  solution  of  the  doubt,)  it  must  be  assumed  to
be  an  equal  chance  whether  of  the  two  religions
contain  more  of  trathL— ^that  of  the  magistrate,  or
that  of  the  people. The  chance  then  that  is  left
to  truth  being  equal  upon  both  suppositions,  the
remaining  consideration  will  be,  from  which  ar-
rangement more  efficacy  can  be  expected ; — from
air  order  of  men  appointed  to  teach  the  people  their
own  religion,  or  to  convert  them  to  another  1 In
my  opinion,  the  advantage  lies  on  the  side  of  the
former  scheme ;  and  this  opinion,  if  it  be  assented
to,  makes  it  the  duty  of  the  magistrate,  m  the
choice  of  the  religion  which  he  establishes,  to
-consult  the  faith  of  the  nation,  rather  than  his  own.
The  case  also  of  dissenters  must  be  determined
by  the  principles  just  now  stated. Toleration  is
of  two  kinds : — the  allowing  to  dissenters  the  un-
molested profession  and  exercise  of  their  religion,
but  with  an  exclusion  from  offices  of  trust  ana
emolument  in  the  state ;  which  is  a  partial  tole-
ration :  and  the  admitting  them,  without  dsstinc-  .
Hon,  to  all  the  civil  privOeges  and  capacities  of
other  citizens;  which  is  a  complete  toleration.
The  expediency  of  toleration,  and  consequently  the
right  oi  every  citizen  to  demand  it,  as  .far  as  relates
to  liberty  of  conscience,  and  the  claim  of  being  pro-
tected in  the  free  and  safe  profession  of  his  reli-
gion, is  deduciblc  from  the  second  of  t>ose  proposi-
tions which  we  have  delivered  as  the  grounds  of  .
our  conclusions  upon  the  subject. That  pcoposi-


rt*


MORAL  AND  POLITICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


-I


tion  assert*  troth;  and  troth  in  the  abstract  to  be
the  supreme  perfection  of  every  religion.  The
advancement,  consequently,  and  discovery  of  troth,
is  that  end  to  which  all  regulations  concerning  re-
ligion ought  principally  to  be  adapted.  Now,  every
species  of  intolerance  which  enjoins  suppression
and  silence,  and  every  species  of  persecution  which
enforces  such  injunctions,  is  adverse  in  the  progress
of  truth ;  forasmuch  as  it  causes  that  to  be  fixed  by
one  Bet  of  men,  at  one  time,  which  is  much  better
'arid  with  much  more  proliability  of  success,  left  to
tile  independent  and  progressive  inquiry  of  sepa-
rate individuals.  Truth  results  from  discussion
and  controversy,  and  is  investigated  by  the  labours
and  researches  of  private  persons.  Whatever,
therefore,  prohibits  these,  obstructs  that  industry
and  that  liberty,  which  it  is  the  common  interest
of  mankind  to  promote.  In  religion,  as  in  other
subjects,  truth,  if  left  to  itself,  wiB  almost  always
obtain  the  ascendency.  If  different  religions  be
professed  in  the  same  country,  and  the  minds  of
men  remain  unfettered  and  unawed  by  intimida-
tions of  law,  that  religion  which  is  founded  in
maxims  of  reason  and  credibility,  will  gradually
gain  over  the  other  to  it.  I  do  not  mean  that  men
will  formally  renounce  their  ancient  religion,  but
that  they  will  adopt  into  it  the  more  rational  doc-
trines, the  improvements  and  discoveries  'of  the
neighbouring  sect:  by  which  means  the  worse
rehgion,  without  the  ceremony  of  a  reformation,
will  insensibly  assimilate  itself  to  the  better.  If
popery,  for  instance,  and  protestantism,  were  per-
mitted to  dwell  quietly  together,  papists  might  not
become  protestants  (for  the  name  is  commonly  the
last  thing  that  is  changed,*)  but  they  would  be-
come .more  enlightened  and  informed ;  they  would
try  Kttleand  little  incorporate  into  their  creed  many
of  the  tenets  of  protestantism,  as  well  as  imbibe  a
portion  of  its  spirit  and  moderation.

The  justice  and  expediency  of  toleration  we
found  primarily  in  its  conduciveness  to  truth,  and
in  the  superior  value  of  truth  to  that  of  any  other
quality  which  a  religion  can  possess:  this  is  the
principal  argument;  but  there  are  some~  auxiliary
considerations,  too  important  to  be  omitted.  .The
confining  of  the  subject  to  the  religion  of  the  state,
is  a  needless  violation  of  natural  lirjerty,  and  is  an
Instance  in  which  constraint  is  always  grievous.
Persecution  produces  no  sincere  conviction,  nor
any  real  change  of  opinion ;  on  the  contrary,  it
vitiates  the  public  morals,  by  driving  men  to  pre-
varication ;  and  commonly  ends  in  a  general  though
secret  infidelity,  by  imposing,  under  the  name  of
revealed  religion,  systems  of  doctrine  which  men
cannot,  believe,  and  dare  not  examine :  finally,  it
disgraces  the  character,  and  wounds  the  reputa-
tion of  Christianity  itself,  by  making  it  the  author
of  oppression,  cruelty,  and  bloodshed.

Under  the  idea  of  religious  toleration,  I  in-
clude the  toleration  of  aa  books  of  serious  ar-
gumentation: but  I  deem  it  no  infringement  of
religious  liberty,  to  restrain  the  circulation  of  ridi-
cule, invective,  and  mockery,  upon  religious  sub-
jects; because  this  species  of  writing  applies
solely  to  the  passions,  weakens  the  judgment,  and
contaminates  the  imagination,  of  its  readers;  has
no  tendency  whatever  to  assist  either  the  investi-


*  Would  we  let  the  nam*  stand,  we  might  often  at-
tract men,  without  their  perceiving  it,  much  nearer  to
ourselves,  than,  if  they  did  perceive  it.  they  would  be
willing  to


gation  or  the  impression  of  troth :  en  the  contrary*
whilst  it  stays  not  to  distinguish  between  the  au-
thority of  difierent  religions,  it  destroys  alike  the
influence  of  all.

Concerning  the  admission  of  dissenters  front
the  established  religionto  offices  and  employments
in  the  public  service,  (which  is  necessary,  to  ren-
der toleration  complete,)  doubts  have  been  effter*
tained,  with  some  appearance  of  reason.  It  is
possible  that  such  religious  opinions  may  be  hold-
en,  as  are  utterly  incompatible  with  the  necessary
functions  of  civil  government ;  and  which  opinions
consequently  disqualify  those  who  maintain  them
from  exercising  any  share  in  its  administration.
There  have  been  enthusiasts  who  held  that  Chris-
tianity has  abolished  all  distinction  of  property,
and  that  she  enjejns  upon  her  followers  a  com-
munity of  goods.  With  what  tolerable  propriety
could  one  of  this  sect  ba^  appointed  a  judge  or  .a
magistrate,  whose  office  it  is  to  decide  upon  ques-
tions of  private  right,  and  to  protect  men  in  the
exclusive  enjoyment  of  their  property?  It  would
.be  equally  absurd  to  intrust  a  military  command
to  .a  Gtuaaer,  who  believes  it  to  be  contrary  to  the
Gospel  to  take  up  arms.1  This  is  possible ;  there-
fore it  cannot  be  laid  down  as  an  universal  truth,
that  religion  is  not,  in  its  nature,  a  cause  which
will  justiry  exclusion  from  public  employments.
When  we  examine,  however,  the  sects  ef  Chris-
tianity which  actually  prevail  in  the  world,  we
must  confess  that,  with  the  single  exception
of  refusing  to  bear  arms,  we.  find  no  tenet  in  any
of  them  which  incapacitates  men  for  the  service
of  the  state.  It  has  indeed  been  asserted,  that'
discordancy  of  religions,  even  apposing,  each,
reli{£on  to  be  free  from  any  errors  that  anect  the
safety  or  the  conduct  ef  government,  is  enough  to
rendervmen  unfit  to  act  together,  in  public  stations.
But  upon  what  argument)  or  upon  what  expe-
rience, is  this  assertion  founded  1  I  perceive  no
reason  why  men  of  different  religious  persuasions)
may  not  sit  upon  the  same  bench,  deliberate  in
the  same  council,  or  fight  in  the  same  ranks,  as
well  as  men  of-  various  or  opposite  opinions  upon
any  controverted  topic  of  natural  philosophy,  his-
tory, or  ethks.

There  are  two  cases  in  which  test-laws-  axe
wont  to  be  applied,  and  in  which,  if  in  any,  they
may  be  defended.  One  is,  where  two  or  more  re-
ligions are  contending  for  establishment;  and
where  there  appears  no  way  of  putting  on  end  to
the  contest,  but  «by  giving  to  one  rehgion  such  a
decided  superiority  in  the  legislature  and  govern-
ment of  the  country,  as  to  secure  it  against  dan-
ger from  any  other.  I  own  that  T  should  assent
to  this  precaution  with  jnany  scruples.  If  the  dis-
senters from  the  establishment  become  a  majority
of  the  people;  the  establishment  itself  ought  to  he
altered  or  qualified.  If  there  exists  amongst  the
different  sects  of  the  country  such  a  parity  of
numbers,  interest,  and  power,  as  to  render  the
preference  of  one  sect  to  the  rest,  and  the  choice
of  that  sect,  a  matter  of  hazardous  success,  and  of
doubtful  election,  some  plan  similar  to  that  which
is  meditated  in  North  America,  and  which  wo
have  described  in  a  preceding  part  of  the  present
chapter,  though  encumbered  with  great  difficulties.
'  may  perhaps  suit  better  with  this  divided  state  o?
public  opinion,  than  any  constitution  of  a  national
church  whatever.  In  all  other  situations,  the  es-
tablishment will  be  strong  enough  to  maintain  it-
self.  However,  if  a  test  be  applicable  with  justice


OP  POPULATION  AND  PROVISION.


%$$


trpoTi  tbb  principle  at  all,  H  ought  to  be  applied
in  regal  governments,  tope  ohieiinagistmte  Lira-
self,  whose  power  ought  otherwise  overthrow  or
cnange  the  established religion  of  the  country,  in
opposition  to  the  will  and  sentiment*  of  the  people.

The  second  case  of  txlcusion,  and  in  which,  I
flunk,  the  measure  is  more  easily  vindicated,  is
thai  of  a  country  in  which  some  disaffection  to  the
subsisting  government  happens  to  he  connected
with  certain  religious  distinctions.  The  state  un-
doubtedly has  a  right  to  refuse  its  power  and  its
confidence  to  those  who  seek  its  destruction.
Wherefore,  if  the  generality  of  any  religious  sect
entertain  dispositions  hostile  to  the  constitution,
and  if  government  have  no  other  way  of  knowing
its  enemies  than  by  the  religion  -which  they  pro-
fess, the  professors  of  that  religion  may  justly  be
emuded  from  offices  of  trust  and  authority.  But
even  here  it  should  be  observed,  that  it  is  not
against  the  religion  that  government  shuts  its
doors,  but  against  those  political  principles,  which,
however  independent  they  may  be  of  any  article
of  religious  fai£h7  the  members  of  thai  communion
are  found  in  feet  to  hold.  Nor  would  the  legisla-
tor make  rennous  tenets  the  test  of  men's  incli-
nations towards  the  state,  if  he  oouki  discover  any
mother  thai  was  equally  certain  and  notorious.
Thus,  if  the  members  of  the  Romish  church,  for
the  most  part  adhere  to  the  interests,  or  maintain
the  right,  of  a  foreign  pretender  to  the  crown  of
these  Kingdoms ;  and  if  mere  he  noway  of  dis-
tinguishing those  who  do  from  those  who  do  not
retain  such  dangerous  prejudices;  government  is
well  warranted  in  fencing  out  the  whole  sect  from
situations  of  trust  and  power. '  But  even  in  this
example,  it  is  not  to  popery  that  the  laws  object,
hut  to  popery  as  the  mark  of  iacobitism ;  an  equivo-
eal  indeed  and  fallacious  mark,  but  the  best  and  per-
haps the  only  one,  that  can  be  devised.  But  men
it  should  be  remembered,  mat  as  the  connexion
between  popery  and  jacobitisin,  which  is  the  sole
cause  of  suspicion  and  the  sole  justification  of
those  severe  and  jealous  laws  which  'have  been
enacted  against  the  professors  of  that  religion,
warf  accidental  in  its  origin,  so  probably  it  wul  be
temporary  in  its  duration;  and  that  these  restric-
tkras  ought  not  to  continue  one  day  longer  than
some  visible  danger  renders  them  necessary  to  the
preservation  of  public  tranquillity.

After  all,  it  may  be  asked ;  Why  should  not
the  legislator  direct  his  test  against  the  political
princi^efl  themselves  which  he  wishes  to  exclude,
rather  than  encounter  them  through  the  medium
of  religious  tenets,  the  oply  crime  and  the  only
danger  of  which  consist  in  their  presumed  al-
liance with  the  former  1  Why,  for  example,
should  a  man  be  required  to  renounce  transub-
stantiation,  before  he  be  admitted  to  an  office  in
the  state,  when  it  might  seem  to  be  sufficient
that  he  abjure  the  pretender  ?  There  arVbut  two"
m  that  can  be  given  to  the  objection  which


this  question  contains :  first,  that  it  is  not  opinions
whicn  the  laws  fear,  so  much  as  inclinations ;  and.
that  political  inclinations  are  not  so  easily  detected
by  the  affirmation  or  denial  of  any  abstract  pro-
position in  politics,  as  by  the  discovery  of  the
rehgious  creed  with  which  they  are  wont  to  be
united :  secondly,  that  when  men  renounce  their
religion,  they  commonly  quit  all  connexion  with
the  members  of  the  church  which  they  have  left;
that  church  no  longer  expecting  assistance-  or
niendahip  from  them:  whereas  particular  persona


might  insinuate  themselves  mto  offices  of  trust
and  authority,  by  subscribing  political  as*  ilhsw,
and  yet  retain  their  predilection  for  the  interests
of  the  religious  sect  to  which  they  continued  to
belong.  By  which  means,  government  would
sometimes  find,  though  it  could  not  accuse  the
individual,  whom  it  had  received  into  its  service,
of  disaffection  to  the  civil  establishment,  yet  tha&
through  him,  it  had  communicated  the  aid  and
influence  of  a  powerful*  station  to  a  party  who
were  hostile  to  the  constitution.  These -answers,
however,  we  propose  rather  than  defend.  The
measure  certainly  cannot  be  defended  at  all,  ex*
cept  where1  the  suspected  union  between  certain
obnoxious  principles  in  politics,  and  certain  tenet*
in  religiem  is  nearly  universal;  in -which  case,  it
makes  little  difference  to  the  subscriber,  whether
the  teat  be  religious  or  political;  and  the  stats
is  somewhat  better  secured  by  the  one  than  the
other.

The  result  of  our  examination  of  those  general
tendencies,  by  which  every  interference  of  civil
government  in  matters  of  reunion  ought  to  be  tried,
m  this :  "  That  a  comprehensive  national  rehgun,
guarded  by^  a  few  axticleaof  peace  and  conformity,
together  with  a  legal  provision  for  the  clergy  of
that  religion ;  and  with  a  complete  toleration  of  aH
dissenters  from  the'  established  church,  without
,  than  what  8


any  other  limitation  or  exception,
from  the  conjunction  of  dangerous  political  dispo-
sitionswith  certain  religious  tenets;  appears  to  be,
not  only  the  most  just  and  liberal,  bat  the  wisest
and  safest  system,  which  a  state  can  adopt :  in-
asmuch as  it  unites  the  several  perfections  which
a  religious  constitution  ought  to  aim  at :— Kberty
of  conscience,  with  means  of  instruction;  the
progress  of -truth,  with  the  peace  of  society ;  the
right  of  private  judgment,  with  the  care  of  the
public  safety ."

CHAPTER  XI.

Of  Population  and  Provision ;  and  of  Agricul-
ture and  Commerce,  as  subservient  thereto.  .

The  final  view  of  all  rational  politics  is,  to  pro-
duce the  greatest  Quantity  of  happiness  in  a  given
tract  of  country.  The  riches,  strength,  and  glory
of  nations;  the  topics  which  history  celebrates,
and  which  alone  almost  engage  the  praises  and
possess  the  admiration  of  mankind ;  have  no  value
farther  than  as  they  contribute  to  this  end.  When
they  interfere  with  it,  they  are  evils,  and  not  the
less  real  for  the  splendour  that  suiTounds  them. .

Secondly:  Although  we  speak  of  communities
as  of  sentient  beings;  although  we  ascribe  to
them  happiness  and  misery,  desires,  interests,
and  passions;  nothing  really  exists  or  feels  but
individuals.  The  happiness  of  a  people  is  made
up  of  the  happiness  or  single  persons  ^  and  the
quantity  of  happiness  can  only  be  augmented  by
increasing  the  number  of  the  percipients,  or  the
pleasure  of  their  perceptions.

Thirdly :  Notwithstanding  that  diversity  of
condition,  especially  different  degrees  of  plenty,
freedom,  and  security,  greatly  vary  the  quantity
of  happiness-  enjoyed  By  the  same  number  of
individuals:  and  notwithstanding  that  extreme
cases  may  be  found,  of  human  beings  so  galled
by  the  rigours  of  slavery,  that  the  increase  of
numbers  is  only  the  amplification  of  misery :  yet,
within  certain  limits,  and  within  those  Bents


160


MORAL  AND  POLITICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


to  which  civil  HA  if  diversified  wider  the  tem-
pemte  governments  that  obtain  in  Europe,  it  may
te  affirmed,  1  think,  with  certainty,  that  the  quan-
tity of  happiness  produced  in  any  given  district,
as  far  depends  uport  the  number  of  inhabitants,
that,  in  comparing  adjoining  periods  in  the  same
country,  the  collective  happiness  will  be  nearly
in  the  exact  proportion  of  the  numbers ;  that  is,
twice  the  number  of  inhabitants  will  produce
double  the  quantity  of  happiness :  in  distant  pe-
riods, and  different  countries,  under  great  changes
or  great  dissimilitude  of  civil  condition,  although
the  proportion  of  enjoyment  may  fell  much  short
of  toe  numbers,  yet  still  any  considerable  excess
of  numbers  will  usually  carry  with  it  a  prepon-
demtion  of  happiness ;  -that,  at  least,  it  may  and
ought  to  be  assumed,  in  all  political  deliberations.
that  a  larger  portion  of  happiness  is  enjoyed
amongst  ten  persons,  possessing  the  means  of
healthy  subsistence,  than  can  be  produced  by
Jive  persona,  under  every  advantage  of  power,
affluence,  and  luxury.

„  Prom  these  principles  it  follows,  that  the  quan-
tity of  happiness  in  a  given  district,  although  it  is
possible  it  may  be  increased,  the  number  of  in-
habitants remaining  the  same,  is  chiefly  and  most
naturally  affected  by  alteration  of  the  numbers:
that,  consequently,  the  decay  of  population  is  tjie
greatest  evu  that  a  state  can  suffer;  and  the  im-
provement of  it,  the  object  which  ought,  in  all
countries,  to.  be  aimed  at,  in  preference  to  every
other  political  purpose  whatsoever.

The  importance  of  population,  and  the  supe-
riority of  ti  to  every  other  national  advantage,
are  points  necessary  to  lie  inculcated,  and  to  be
understood ;  inasmuch  as  false  estimates,  or  fan-
tastic notions,  of  national  grandeur,  are  per-
petually drawing  the  attention  of  statesmen  and
legislators  from  the  care  of  this,  which  is,  at  all
times,  the  true  and  absolute  interest  of  a  country :
for  which  reason,  we  have  stated  these  points
with  unusual  formality.  We  win  confess,  how-
over,  that  a  competition  can  seldom  arise  between
die  advancement  of  population  and  any  measure
of  sober  utility',  because,  in  the  ordinary  progress
of  human  affairs,  whatever,  in  any  way,  con-
tributes to  make  a  people  happier,  tends  to  render
them  more  numerous.

In  the  fecundity  of  the  human,  as  of  .every
other  species  of  animals,  nature  has  provided  for
an  indefinite  multiplication.  Mankind  have  in-
creased to  their  present  number  from  a  single
pair ;  the  offspring  of  early  marriages,  in  the  or-
dinary couiw  of  procreation,  do  more  than  replace
the  parents:  in  countries,  and  under  circum-
stances very  favourable  to  subsistence,  the  popu-
lation, has  been  doubled  in  the  Apace  of  twenty
years;  the  havoc  occasioned  by  wars,  earthquakes,
famine,  or  pestilence,  is  usually,  repaired  in  a  short
time. — These  indications  sufficiently  demonstrate
the  tendency  of  nature;  in  the  human  species,  to
a  fttn*iwn«»?  increase  of  its  numbers.  -  It  becomes,
therefore,  a  question  that  may  reasonably  be  pro-
pounded, what  are  the  causes  which  confine  or
check  the  natural  progress  of  this  multiplication  1
And  the  answer  which  first  presents  itself  to  the
thoughts  of  the  inquirer  is,  that  the  population  of
a  country  must  stop  when  the  country  can  main-
tain no  more;  that  is,  when  the  inhabitants  are
already  so  numerous  as  to  exhaust  all  the  pro-
vision which  the  soil  can  be  made  to  produce.
This,  however,  though  an  insuperable  oar,  will


seldom  be  found  to  be  that  which  actuauy  check*
the  progress  of  population  in  any  country  of  the
world;  because  toe  number  of  the  people  have
seldom,  in  any  country,  arrived  at.  this  limit,  or
even  approached  to  it  The  fertility  of  the  ground,
in  temperate  regions,  is  capable  of  being  improved
by  cultivation  to  an  extent  which  is  unknown;
much,  however,  beyond  the  slate  of  improvement
in  any  country  in  Europe.  In  our  own.  which
holds  almost  the  first  place  in  the  knowledge  and
encouragement  of  agriculture,  let  it  only  be  sup-
posed that  every  field  in  England,  of  the  same
original  quality  with  these  in  the  neighbourhood
of  the  metropolis,  and  consequently  capable  of  the
same  fertility,  were,  by  a  like  management,  made
to  yield  an  equal  produce;  and  it  may  be  asserted,
I  believe  with  truth,  that  the  quantity  of  human
provision  raised  in  the  island  would  be  increased
five-fold.  The  two  principles,  therefore,  upon
which  population  seems  primarily  to  depend,  the
fecundity  of  the  species,  and  the  capacity  of  the
soil,  would  hi  most,  perhaps  in  ail  countries,
enable  it  to  proceed  much  farther  than  it  has  yet
advanced.  The-  number  of  marriageable  women,
who,  in  each  country,  remain  unmarried,  afford  a
computation  how  much  the  agency  of  nature  in
the  diffusion  of  human  life  is  cramped  and  con-
tracted ;  and  the  quantity  of  waste,  neglected;  or
mismanaged  surface, — toother  with  a  comparison,
hke  the  preceding,  of  the  crops  raised  from  the  sou
in  the  neighbourhood  of  populous  cities,  and  un-
der a  perfect  state  of  cultivation,  with  those  which
lands  of  equal  or  superior  quality  yield  in  different
situations, — will  show  in  what  proportion  the  in-
digenous productions  of  the  earth  are  capable  of
being  farther  augmented.

The  fundamental  proposition  upon  the  subject
depopulation,  which- must  guide  every  endeavour
to  improve  it,  and  from  which  every  conclusion
concerning  it  may  be  deduced,  is  this :  "  Wherever
the  commerce  between  the  sexes  is  regulated  by
marriage,  and  a  provision  for  that  mode  of  sub-
sistence, to  which  each  class  of  the  community  is
accustomed,  can  be  procured  with  ease  and  cer-
tainty, there  the  number  of  the  people  will  in-
crease ;  and  the  rapidity,  as  well  as  the  extent,  of
the  increase,  will  be  proportioned  to  the  degree  in
which  these  causes  exist"

This  proposition  we  will  draw  out  into  the  se-
veral principles  which  it  contains.

I.  First,  the  proposition  asserts  the  "necessity
of  confining  the  intercourse  of  the  sexes  to  the
marriage-union."  It  is  only  in  the  marriage-union
that  this  intercourse  is  sufficiently  prolific.  Be-
side which,  family  establishments  alone  are  fitted
to  perpetuate  a  succession  of  generations.  The
offspring  of  a  vague  and  promiscuous  concubinage
are  not  only  few,  and  liable  to  perish  by  neglect,
but  are  seldom  prepared  for,  or  mtroducedinto
situations  suited  to  the  raising  of  families  of  their
own.  Hence  the  advantages  of  marriages.  Now
nature,  in  the  constitution  of  the  sexes,  has  pro-
vided a  stimulus  which  will  infallibly  secure  the
frequency  of  marriages,  with  all  their  beneficial
effects  upon  the  state  of  population,  provided  the
male  part  of  the  species  be  prohibited  from  ir-
regular gratifications.  This  impulse,  which  is  suf-
ficient to  surmount  almost  every  impediment  to
marriage,  will  operate  in  proportion  to  the  dif-
ficulty, expense,  danger,  or  infamy,  the  sense  of
guilt,  or  the  fear  of  punishment,  which  attend  li-
centious indulgences.  Wherefore,  in  countries  in


OF  POPULATION  AffD  PROVISION.


151


irhich  stuwatence  is  become  scarce,  it  behoves  the
■late  to  watch  over  the  public  morals  with  in-
creased solicitude;  for  nothing  but  the  instinct  of
nature,  under  the  restraint  of  chastity,  will  induce
man  to  undertake  the  labour,,  or  consent  to  the  sa-
crifice of  personal  liberty  and  indulgence,  which
the  support  of  a  fcmlly,  in  such  circumstances,
requires.

II.  The  second  requisite  whkh  ourproposition
states  as.  necessary  to  the  success  of  population,  is,
"the  ease  and  certainty  with  which  a  provision
can  be  procured  for  that  mode  of  subsistence  to.
which  each  class  of  the  community  is  accustomed."
It  is  not  enough  that  men's  ikUurat^ wants  be
supplied;  that  a  provision  adequate  to  the  real
exigencies  of  human  life  be  attainable :  habitual
superfluities  become' actual  wants;  opinion  and
fashion  convert  articles  of  ornament'  and  luxury
into  necessaries  of  fife. And  it  must  not  be  ex-


pected from  men  in  general,  at  least  in  the  present
Relaxed  state  of  morals  and  discipline,  that  they
will  enter  into  marriages  which  degrade  their  con-
dition, reduce  their  mode  of  living,  deprive  them
of  the  accommodations  to  which  they  have  been
accustomed,  or  even  of  those  ornaments  or.  ap-
pendages of  rank  and  station  which  they  have
been  taught  to  regard  as  belonging  to  their  birth,
or  class,  or  profession,  or  place  in  society.  The
tame  consideration,  namely,  a  view  to  their  ac-
customed mode  of  life,  which  is  so  apparent  in  the
superior  order  of  the  people,  has  noless  influence


upon  those  ranks  which  compose  the  mass  of  the
community.  The  kind  and  quality  of  food  and
liquor,  the  species  of  habitation,  furniture,  and
clothing,  to  which  the  common  people  of  each
country  are  habituated,  must  be  attainable  with
ease  and  certainty,  before  marriages  will  be  suf-
ficiently early  and  general  to  carry  the  progress
of  population  to  its  just  extent.  It  is  in  vain  to
allege,  that  a  mere  simple  diet,  ruder  habitations,
or  coarser  apparel,  would  be  sufficient  for  the  pur-
poses of  life  and  health,  or  even  of  physical  ease
and  pleasure.  Men  wm  not  marry  with  this  en-
couragement For  instance:  when  the  common
people  of  a  country  are  accustomed  to  eat  a  large
proportion  of  animal  food,  to  drink  wine,  spirits,
or  beer,  to  wear  shoes  and  stockings,  to  dwell  in
stone  houses,  they  win  not  marry  to  live  in  clay
cottages,  upon  roots  and  milk,  with  no  other
clothing  than  skins,  or  what  is  necessary  to  de-
fend the  trunk  of  the  body  from  the  effects  of
cold ;  although  these  last  may  be  all  that  the  sus-
tentatkm  of  fife  and  health  requires,  or  that  even
contribute  much  to  animal  comfort  and  enjoy-


The  ease,  then,  and  certainty,  with  which  the
means  can  be  procured,  not  barely  of  subsistence,
but  of  that  mode  of  subsisting  which  custom  hath
in  each  country  established,  fonfl  the  point  upon
winch  the  state  and  progress  of  population  chiefly
depend.  Now,  there  are  three  causes  which  evi-
dently regulate  this  point:  the  mode  itself  of  sub-
sisting which  prevails  inHhe  country ;  the  quan-
ttv  of  provision  suited  to  thatmode  of  subsistence,
which  is  either  raised  in  the  country  or  imported
into  it ;  and,  lastly,  the  distribution  of  that  provision.

These  three  causes  merit  distinct  consideration.

I.  The  mode  of  living  which  actually  obtains  in
a  country.  In  China,  where  the  inhabitants  fre-
quent the  sea  shore,  or  the  banks  ef  large  rivers,
and  subsist  in  a  great  measure  upon  fish;  the
papulation  is  described  to  be  excessive. This  pe-


culiarity arises,  not  probably,  from  any  civil  advan-
tages, any  care  or  policy,  any  particular  consti-
tution or  superior  wisdom  or  government;  but
simply  ^from  hence,  .that  the  species  of  food,  to
which  custom  hath  reconciled  the  desires  and  in-
clinations of  the  inhabitants,  is  that  which,  of  aO
others,  is  procured  in  the  greatest  abundance,
with  the  most  ease,  and  stands  in  need  of  the
least  preparation.  The  natives  of  Indostan  being
confined,  by  the  laws  of  their  religion,  to  the  use
of  vegetable  food,  and  requiring  little  except  rice,
which  the  country  produces  in  plentiful- crops;
and  food,  in  warm  climates,  composing  the  only
want  of  life ;  these  countries  are  populous  under
all  the  injuries  of  a  despotic,  ana  the  agitations
of  an  unsettled  government.  If  any  revolution,
or  what  would  be  called  perhaps  refinement  of
manners,  should  generate  in  these  people  a  taste ,
for  the  flesh  of  animals,  similar  to  what  prevails  .
amongst  the  Arabian  hordes;  should  introduce
flocks  and  herds  into  grounds  which  are  now  co-
vered with  corn;  should  teach  them  to 'account  a
certain  portion  of  this  species  of  food  amongst  the


spite  of  evay  effort  of  die  laws,  or  even  of  any
improvement  that  might  take  place  in  their  civil
condition.  In  Ireland,  the  simplicity  of  living
alone,  maintains  a  considerable  degree  of  popula-
tion, under  great  defects  of  police,  industry,  and


Under  this  head,  and- from  a  view  of  these  con-
siderations, may  be  understood  the  true  evil  and
proper  danger  of  luxury.

Luxury,  as  it  supplies  employment  and  pro-
motes industry,  assists  population.  But,  then
there  is  another  consequence  "attending  it,  which
counteracts  and  often  overbalances  these  advan-
tages. When,  by  introducing  more  superfluities
into  general  reception,  luxury  has  rendered  the
usual  ^accommodations  of  life  more  expensive,  ar-
tificial, and  elaborate,  the  difficulty  of  maintaining
a  family  conformably  with  the  established  mode
of  living,  becomes  greater,  and  what  each  man
has  to  spare  from  his  personal  consumption  pro-
portionabiy  less:  the  effect  of  which  is,  that  mar-
riages* grow  less  frequent,  agreeably  to  the  maxim
above  bid  down,  and  which  must  be  remembered
as  the  foundation  of  all  our  reasoning  upon  the
subject,  that  men  will  not  marry  to  sink  their
place  or  condition  in  society,  or  to  forego  those
indulgences  which  their  own  habits,  of  what  they
observe  amongst  their  equals,  have  rendered  ne-
cessary to  their  satis&ction.  This  principle  is  ap-
plicable to  every  article  of  diet  and  dress,  to  houses,
furniture,  attendance  j  and  this  effect  will.be  felt
in  every  class  of  the  community.  For  instance :
the  custom  of  wearing  broad-cloth  and  fine  linen,
repays  the  shepherd  and  flax-grower,  feeds  the
manufacturer,  enriches  the  merchant,  gives  not
only  support  but  existence  to  multitudes  6f  fami-
lies: hitherto,  therefore,  the  effects  are  beneficial ;
and  were  these  the  only  effects,  such  elegancies,
or,  if  you  please  to  call  them  so,  such  luxuries,
could  not  be  too  universal.  But  here  follows  the
mischief  r  when  once  fashion  hath  annexed  the
use  of  these  articles  of  dress  to  any  certain  class,
the'  noddling  ranks,  for  example,  of  the  com-
munity, each  individual  of  that  rank  finds  them
to  be  neceseariea  of  life,  that  is,  finds  himself
obliged  to  comply  with  the  example  of  his  equals,


168


MORAL  AND  POLITICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


and  to  maintain  that  appearance  which  the  cus-
tom of  society  requires.  This  obligation  creates
such  a  demand  upon  his  income,  and  adds  so
much  to  the  cost  and  burden  of  a  family,  as  to
put  it  out  of  bis  power  to  many,  with  the  pros-
pect of  continuing  his  habits,  or  of  maintaining
njs  place  and  situation  in  tfie  world.  We  see,  in
this  description,  the  cause  which  induces  men  to
waste  their  lives  in  a  barren  celibacy ;  and  this
cause,  which  impairs  the  very  source  of  popula-
tion, is  justly  placed  to  the  account  of  luxury:

It  appears,  then,  that  luxury,  considered  witE
a  view  to  population,  acts  by  two  opposite  effect* ;
and  it  seems  probable  that  there  exists  a  point  in
the  scale,  to  which  luxury  may  ascend,  or  to  which
the  wants  of  mankind  may  be  multiplied  with  ad-
vantage to  the  community,  and  beyond  which  the
prejudicial  consequences  begin  to  preponderate.
The  determination  of  this  point,  though  it  as-
sume the  form  of  an  arithmetical  problem,  depends
upon  circumstances  too  numerous,  intricate,  and
undefined,  to.  admit  of  a  precise  solution,  How-
ever, from  what  has  been  observed  concerning
the  tendency  of  luxury  to  diminish  marriages,
in  which  tendency  the  evil  of  it  resides,  the  fol-
lowing general  conclusions  may  be  established : —

1st.  That,  of  different  kinds  of  luxury,  these
are  the  most  innocent  which  afford  employment
to  the  greatest  number  of  artists  and  manufac-
turers; or 'those,  in  other  words,  in  which  the
price  of  the  work  bears  the  greatest  proportion  to
that  of  the  raw  material. — Thus,  luxury  in  dress
or  furniture,  is  universally  preferable  to  luxury  in
eating,  because  the  articles  which  constitute  the
one,  are  more  the  production  of  human  art  and
industry,  than  those  which  supply  the  other.

ddly,  That  it  is  the  diffusion,  rather  than  the
iiegm  of  luxury,  which,  is  to  be  dreaded  as  a  na-
tional evil  Too  mischief  of  luxury  consists,  as
we  have  seen,  in  the  obstruction  which  it  forms
to  marriage.  Now  it  is  only  a  small  part  of  the
people  that  the  higher  ranks  in  any  country  com-
pose ;  for  which  reason,  the  facility  or  the  difficulty
of  supporting  the  expense  of  their  station,  and  the
consequent  increase  or  diminution  of  inarrioges
among  them,  will  influence  the  state  of  popuJa-.
tion  but  little.  So  long  as  the  prevalency  of  luxury
is  confined  to  a  few  of  elevated  rank,  much  of  the
-benefit  is  felt,  and  little  of  the  inconyeniency.
But  when  the  imitation  of  the  same  manner  de-
scends, as  H  always  will  do,  into  the  mass  of  the
people.;  when  it  advances  the  requisites  of  living,
beyond  what  it  adds  to  men's  abilities  to  purchase
them ;  then  it  is  that  luxury  checks  the  formation
of  families,  in  a  degree  that  ought  to  alarm  the
public  fears.

3dly,  That  the  condition  most  mvourable  to
population  is  that  of  a  laborious,  frugal  people,
ministering  to  the  demands  of  an  opulent,  luxurious
nation;  because  this  situation,  whilst  it  leaves
them  every  advantage  of  luxury,  exempts  them
from  the  evils  which  naturally  accompany  its  ad-
mission into  any  country.

II.  Next  to  the  mode  of  living,  we  are  to  con-
aider  "  the  quantity  of  provision  suited  to  that
mode,  winch  is  either  raised  in  the  countryy  or
imported  into  it:"  for  this  is  the  order  in  Which
we  assigned  the  causes  of  population,  and  under-
took to  treat  of  them.  Now,  If  we  measure  the
quantity  of  provision  by  the  number  of  human
bodies  it  will  support  in  due  health  and  vigour,
this  quantity,  the  extent  and  quality  of  the  soil


from  which  it  is  raised  being  given,  win  depend
greatly  upon  the  kind.]  For  instance :  a  piece  of
ground  capable  of  supplying  animal  food  suf-
ficient for  the  subsistence  of  ten  persons,  would
sustain,  at  least,  the  double  of  that  number  with
grain,  roots,  and  milk.  The  first  resource  of  savage
fife  is  in  the  flesh  of  wild  animals ;  hence  the  num-
bers amongst  savage  nations,  compared  with  the
tract  of  country  which  they  occupy,  are  univer-
sally small ;  because  this  species  of  provision  is,
of  all  others,  supplied  in  the  slenderest  proportion.
The  next  step  was.  the  invention  of  pasturage,  or
the  rearing  of  flocks  and  herds  of  tame  animals:
this  alteration  added  to  the  stock  of  provision
much.  But  the  last  and  principal  improvement
was  to  follow;  namely^  tillage,  or  the  artificial
production 'of  corn,  esculent  plants,  and  roots.
This  discovery,  whilst  it  changed  the  quality  o£
human  food,  augmented  the  quantity  m  a  vast
proportion.  So  far  as  the  state  of  population  is
governed  and  limited  by  the  quantity  of  provision,
perhaps  there  is  no  single  cause  that  affects  it  so
powerfully,  as  the  kind  and  quality  of  food  which
chance  or  usage  hath  introduced  into  a  country.
In  England,  notwithstanding  the  produce  of  the
soil  has  been,  of  late,  considerably  increased,  by
the  enclosure  of  wastes,  and  the  adoption,  in
many  places,  of  a  more  successful  husbandry,  yet
-we  do  not  observe  a  corresponding  addition  to  the
number  of  inhabitants;  the  reason  of  which  ap-
pears to  me  to  be,  the  more  general  consumption
of  animal  food  amongst  us.  Many  ranks  or  peo-
ple whose  ordinary  diet  was,  in  the  last  century,
prepared  almost  entirely  from  milk,  roots,  ami
vegetables,  now  require  every  day  a  considerable
portion  of  the  flesh  of  animals.  Hence  a  great
part  of  the  richest  lands  of  the  country  are  con-
verted to  pasturage.  Much  also  of  the  bread-corn,
which  went  directly  to  the  nourishment  of  human
bodies,  now  only  contributes  to  it  by  fattening  the
flesh  of  sheep  and  oxen.  # The  mass  and  volume
of  provisions  are  hereby  diminished ;  and  what  is
gained  in  the  melioration  of  the  soil,  is  lost  in  the
quality  of  the  produce.  This  consideration  teaches
us,  that  tillage,  as  an  object  of  national  care  and
encouragement;  is  universally  preferable  to  pas-
turage, because  the  kind  of  provision  which  it
yields,  goes  much  farther  in  the  sustentation  of
human  life.  Tillage'is  also  recommended  by  this
additional  advantage,  that  it  aflbrds  employment
to  a  much  more  numerous  peasantry.  Indeed,
pasturage  seems  to  be  the  art  of  a  nation,  either
imperfectly  civilized,  as  are  many  of  the  tribes
which  cultivate  it  in  the  internal  .parts  of  Asia;
or  of  a  nation,  like  Spain,  declining  from  its  sum-
mit by  luxury  and  inactivity.

The  land  and  quality  of  provision,  together
with  the  extent  and  capacity  of  the  soil  from
which  it  is  raised,  being  the  same ;  the  quantity
procured  will  principally  depend  upon  two  circum-
stances,— the  ability  of  the  occupier,  and  the  en-
couragement which  he  receives.  The  greatest
misfortune  of  a  country  is  an  indigent  tenantry.
Whatever  be  the  native  advantages  of  the  soil,  or
even  the  skill  and  industry  of  the  occupier,  the-
want  of  a  sufficient  capital  confines  every  plan,  as
well,  as  cripples  and  weakens  every  operation  of
husbandry.  This  evil  is  felt,  where  agriculture
is  accounted  a  servile  or  mean  employment :  where
farms  are  extremely  subdivided  and  badly  fur-
nished with  habitations;  where  leases  are  un-
known, or  are  of  short  or  precarious  duration.


OP  POPULATION,  AND  PROVISION.


153


Wtfh  respect  to  the  encouragement  of  husbandry ;
m  this,  a*  in  every  other  employment,  the  true  re-
waid  of  industry  is  in  the  price  and  sale  of  the
produce. — The  exclusive  right  to  the  produce,  is
the  only  incitement  which,  acts  constantly  and
universally;  the*  only  spring  which  keeps  nu-
man  labour'  in  motion.  All  therefore  that  the
laws  can  do,  is  to  secure  this  right  to  the.occupier
of  (he  ground;  that  is,  to  constitute  such  a  system
of  tenure,  that  the  full  and  entire  advantage  of


Who  does  not  assist  in  the  production.  By  the
occupier.  I  here  mean,  not  so.  much  the  person
who  performs  the  work,  as  him  who  procures  the
labour  and  directs  the  management :  and  I  con-
aider  the  whole  profit  as  received  by  the  occupier,
when  the  occupier  is  benefited  by  the  whole
value  of  what  is  produced,  which. is  the  case  with
the  tenant  who  pays  a  fixed  rent  for  the  use  of
land,  no  leas  than  with  the  proprietor  who  holds
it  as  his  own.  The  one  has  the  same  interest  in
tike  produce,  and  in  the  advantage  of  every  im-
provement, as  the  other.  Likewise  the  proprietor,
though  he  grant  out  his  estate  to  form,  may  be
-considered  as  the  occupier,  insomuch  as  he  regu-
lates the  occupation  by  the,  choice,  superintend-
ency,  and  encouragement,  of  his  tenants,  by  the
disposition  of  his  lands,  by  erecting  buildings,  pro-
viding accommodations,  by  prescribing  conditions,
or  supplying  implements  and  materials  of  improve-
ment ;  and  is  entitled,  by  the  rale  of  public  expe-
diency above  mentioned,  to  receive,  in  the  advance
of  bis  rent,  a  share  of  the  benefit  which  arises
feom  the  increased  produce  of  his  'estate.  The
violation  of  this  fundamental  maxim  of  agrarian
policy  constitutes  the  chief  objection  to  tiiexholding
of  lands  by  the  state,  by  the  king,  by  cosporate
bodies,  by  private  persons  in  right  of  their  offices
or  benefices.  The  incanveniency  to  the  public
arises  not  so  much  from  the  unalienable  quality  of
lands  thus  holden  in  perpetuity,  as  from  hence ;
that  proprietors  of  this  description  seldom  con-
tribute much  either  of  attention  or  expense  to  the
cultivation  of  their  estates,  yet  claim,  by  the  rent,
a  share  in  the  profit  of  every  improvement  that  is


made  upon  them. This  complaint  can  only  be
obviated  by  u  long  leases  at  a  fixed  rent,"  which


convey  a  lane  portion  of  the  interest  to  those  who
actually  conduct  the  cultivation.  The  same  ob-
jection is  applicable  to  the  holding  of  lands  by
foreign  proprietors,  and  in  some  degree  to  estates
of  too  great  extent  being  placed  in  the  same


III.  Beside  the  production  of  provision,  there
remains  to  be  considered  the  distribution. — it  is
m  vain  that  provisions  abound  in  the  country,
unless  I  be  able  to  obtain  a  share  of  them.  This
reflection  belongs  to  ewrr  individual.  The  plenty
of  provision  produced,  the  quantity  of  the  public
stock  affords  subsistence  to  wmvftuals,  and  en-
-eoaragement  to  (he  formation  of  families,  only  in
proportion  as  it  Js  distributed,  that  is,  in  propor-
tion as  these  individuals  are  allowed  to  draw  from
It  a  supply  of  their  own  wants.  The  distribution,
therefore,  becomes  of  equal  consequence  to  popu-
lation with  the  production. — Now  there  is  out
one  principle  of  Distribution  that  can  ever  become
luuversal,  namely,  the  principle  of  "exchange ;"
or,  in  other  words,  that.every  man  have  something
to  give  in  retain  for  what  he  wants. Bounty,


however  it  may  come  in  aid  of  another  principle,
however  it  'may  occasionally  qualify  the  rigour,  or
supply  the  imperfection,  of  an  established  rule  of
distribution,  can  never  itself  become  that  rule  or
principle ;  because  men  will  not  work  to  give  the
produce  of  their  labour  away. — Moreover,  the
only  equivalents  that  can  be  offered  in  exchange
for  provision  are  power  and  labour.  All  property
is  power.  What  we. call  property  in  land/ is  the
power  to  use  it,  and  to  exclude  others  from  the
use.  Money  is  the  representative  of  power^  be-
cause it  is  convertible  into  power:  the  value  of
it  consists  in  its  faculty  of  procuring  power  over
things  and  persons.  But  power  which  results
from  civil  conventions  (and  of  this  kind  is  what
we  caH  a  man's  fortune  or  estate,)  is  necessarily
confined  to  a  few,  and  is  withal  soon  exhausted :
whereas  the  capacity  of  labour  is  every  man's
natural  possession,  and  composes  a  constant  anfl
.renewing  fund.  The  hire,  therefore,  or  produce
of  personal  industry,  is  that  which  the  bulk  of
every  community  must  bring  to  market  in  ex-
change for  the  means  of  subsistence;  in  other
words,  employment  must,  in  every  country,  be  the
medium  of  distribution,,  and  the  source  of  supply
to  individuals.  But  when  we  consider  the  pro-
duction and  distribution  of  provision,  as  distinct
from,  and  independent  of,  each  other;  when,  sup-
posing the  same  quantity  to  be  produced,  we
inquire  in  what  way,  or  according  to  what  rule,
it  may  be  distributed  ;  we  are  led  to  a  conception
of  the  subject  not  at  all  agreeable  to  truth  and
reality ;  for,  in  truth  and  reality,  though  provision
must  be  produced  before  it  be  distributed,  yet  the
production  depends,  in  a  (Treat  measure^  upon  the
distribution.  The  quantity  of  provision  raised
out  of  the  ground,  so  far  as  the  raising  of  it
requires  human  art  or  labour,  will  evidently  be
regulated  by  the  demand :  the  demand,  or;  in  other
-words,  the  price  and  sale,  being  that  which  alone
rewards  the  care,  or  excites  the  diligence,  of  the
husbandman.  But  the  sale  of  provision  depends
upon  the  number,  not  of  those  who  want,  hut  of
those  who  have  something  to  offer  in  return  for
what  they  want;  not  of  those  who  would  consume,
hut  of  those  who  can  buy:  that  is,  upon  the  num-
ber of  those  who  have  the  fruits  of  some  other
kind  of  industry  to  tender  in  exchange  for  what
they  stand  in  need  of  from  the  production  of  the

We  see,  therefore,  the  connection  between  po-
pulation and  employment.  Employment  anpets
population  "  directly,"  as  it  affords  the  only  me*
dium  of  distribution  by  which  individuals  can
obtain  from  the  common  stock  a  supply  for  the
wants  of  their  families :  it  affects  population,  "in*
directly,''  as  it  augments  the  stock  itself  of  provi-
sion, in  the  only,  way  by  which  the  production  of
it  can  be  effectually  encouraged,— by  furnishing
purchasers.  No  man  can  purchase  without  an
equivalent ;  and  that  equivalent,  by  the  generality
of  the  people,  must  in  every  country  be*  derived
from  employment.  And  upon  this  basis  is  found-
ed the  public  benefit  of  trade,  that  is  to  say,  its
subserviency  to  population,  in  which  its  only  real'
utility  consists.  Of  that  industry,  and  of  those
arts  and  branches  of  trade,  which  are  employed  in
the  production,  conveyance,  and  preparation,  of
any  principal  species  of  human  food,  as  of  the
business*  of  the  husbandman,  the  butcher,  "baker,
brewer,  corn  merchant,  etc.  we  acknowledge  the
Aecessity :  likewise  of  those  manufactures  which  -


164


MORAL  AND  POLITICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


furnish  us  with  warm  clothing,  convenient  habi-
tation*, domestic  utensils,  as  of  the  weaver,  tailor,
smith,  carpenter,  cYc.  we  perceive  (in  climates,
however,  like  our*,  removed  at  a  distance  from  the
.  ami,)  the  conducivenesa  to  population,  by  their
lendering  human  life  more  healthy,  vigorous,  and
Comfortable.  Bui  not  one  half  the  occupations
which  compose  the  trade  of  Europe,  rail  within
either  of  these  descriptions.  Perhaps  two-thirds
of  the  manufacturers  in  England  are  employed
upon  articles  of  confessed  luxury,  ornament,,  or
splendour ;  in  the  superfluous  embellishment  of
some  articles  which  are  useful  in  their  kind,  or
upon  others  which  have  no  conceivable  use  or
wjrae  but  what  is  founded  in  caprice  or  fashion.
What  can  be  less  necessary  or  less  connected  with
the  sustentation  of  human  life,  than  the  whole
produce  of  the  silk,  lace,  and  plate  manufac-
tory 1  yet  what  multitudes  labour  in  the  different
branches  of  these  arts  1  What  can  be  imagined
more  capricious  than  the  fondness  for  tobacco  and
snufft  yet  how  many  various  occupations,  and
how  many  thousands  in  each,  are  set  at  work  in
administering  to  this  frivolous  gratification !  Con-
cerning trades  of  this  kind,  (and  this  kind  com-
prehends more  than  half  the  trades  that  are  exer-
cised,) it  may  fairly  be  asked,  "  How.  since  they
add  nothing  to  the  stock  of  provision,  do  they  tend
to  increase  the  number  of  the  people  V  We  are
taught  to  say  of  trade,  "  that  it  maintains  multi-
tude*;" but  by  what  means  does  it  maintain
them,  when  it  produces  nothing  upon  which  the
support  of  human  life  depends  T— In  like  manner
with  respect  to-  foreign  commerce;  of  that  mer-
chandise which  brings  the  necessaries  of  life  into
a  country,  which  imports,  for  example,  corn,  or
cattle,  or  cloth,  or  fuel,  we  allow  the  tendency  to
advance  population,  because  it  increases  the  stock
of  provision  by  which  the  people  are  subsisted.
But  this  effect  of  foreign  commerce  is  so  little  seen
m  our  own  country,  that  I  believe,  it  may  be  af-
firmed of  Great  Britain,  who*  Bishop  Berkley  said
of  a  neighbouring  island,  that,  if  it  were  encom-
passed with  a  wall  of  brass  fifty  cubits  high,  the
country  might  maintain  the  same  number  or  in-
habitants', that  find  subsistence  in  it  at  present;
and  that  every  necessary,  and  even  every  real
comfort  and  accommodation  of  human  life,  might
be  supplied  in  as  great  abundance  as  they  now  are.
Here,  therefore{  as  before,  we  may  fairly  ask,  ty
what  operation  it  is,  that  foreign  commerce,  which
brings  into  the  country  no  one  article  of  human
subsistence,  promotes  the  multiplication  of  human
life?

-  The  answer  of  this  inquiry,  will  be  contained  in
the  dulcussion  of  another,  viz :

Since  the  soil  will  maintain  many  more  than
it  can  employ,  what  must  be  done,  supposing  the
country  to  be  full,  with  the  remainder  of  the  in-
habitants 1  They  who,,  by  the  rules  of  partition,
(and  some  such  must  be  established  in  every
country,  J  are  entitled  to  the  land ;  and  they  who,
by  then*  labour  upon  the  soil,  acquire  a  right  in  its
produce,  will  not  part  with  their  property  for
nothing ;  or,  rather,  they  will  no  longer  raise  from
the  soil  what  they  can  neither  use  themselves,  nor
exchange  for  what  they  want  Or,  lastly,  if  these
were  willing  to  distribute  what  they  could  spare
of  the  provision  which  the-  ground  yielded,  to
others  who  had  no  share  or  concern  in  the  pro*
perty  or  cultivation  of  it,  yet  still  the  most  enor-
mous mischiefs  would  ensue,  fipom  great  numbers


remaining  unemployed.  The  idleness  of  one  half
of  the  community  would  overwhelm  the  whole
with  confusion  and  disorder.  One  only  way  pre*
sents  itself  of  removing  the  difficulty  which  Una
question  etates,  and  which  is  simply  this:  that
they,  whose  work  is  not  wanted,  nor  can  be~ em-
ployed, in  the  raising  of  provision  out  of  the
around,  convert  their  bands  and  ingenuity  to  the
fabrication  of  articles  winch  may  gratify-and  re-
ouite  those  who  •  are  ■  so  employed,  or  who  by  the
division  of  lands  in  the  country,  are  entitled  to
the  exclusive  possession  of  certain  parts  of  them.
By  this  contrivance,  all  things  proceed  well.  The
occupier  of  the  ground  raises  from  it  the  utmost
that  ne  can  procure,  because  he  is  repaid  for  what
he  can  spare  by  something  else  which  he  wants,
or  with  which  he  is  pleased:  the  artist  or  manufac-
turer, though  he  have  neither  any  property  in  the
soil,  nor  any  concern  m  its  cultivation,  is  regularly
supplied  with  the  produce,  because  he  gives,  in
exchange  for  what  he  stands  in. need  of,  something
upon  which  the  receiver  places  an  equal  value :
and  the  community  is  kept  quiet,  while  both
sides  are  engaged  in  then*  respective  occupa-
tions.

It  appears,  then,  that  the  business  of  orfe  half
of  mankind  is,  to  set  the  other  half  at  work;  that
is,  to  provide  articles  which,  by  tempting  the
desireet  may  stimulate  the  industry,  and  call  forth
the  activity,  of  those  upon  the  exertion  of  whoso
industry.  and  the  application  of  whose  faculties,
the  production  of  human  provision  depends.  A
certain  portion  only  of  human  labour  is,  or  can  be
productive;  the  rest  is  instrumental; — both  equal-
ly necessary,  though  the  one  have  no  other  object
than  to  excite  the  other.  It  appears  also,  that  it
signifies  nothing,  as  to  the  main  purpose  of  txadep
how  superfluous  the  articles  which  it  furnishes  are;
whether  the  want  of  them  be  real  or  imaginary ;
whether  it  be  founded  in  nature,  or  in  opinion,  in
fashion,  habit,  or  emulation :  it  is  enough  that  they
be  actually  desired  and  sought  after.  Flourishing
cities  are  raised  and  supported  by  trading  in  to-
bacco; populous  towns  subsist  by  the  manufac-
tory of  ribands.  A  watch  may  be  a  very  unne-
cessary appendage  to  the  dress  of  a  peasant;  yet.
if  the  peasant  will  till  the  ground  in  order-  to  ob-
tain a  watch,  the  true  design  of  trade  is  answered :
and  the  watchmaker  while  he'  polishes  the  case,
or  files  the  wheels  of  his  machine,  is  contributing
to  the  production  of  corn  as  effectually,  though
not  so  directly,  as  if  he  handled  the  spade  t*
held  the  plough.  The  use  of  tobacco  has  been
mentioned  already,  not  only  as  an  acknowledged
superfluity,  but  as  affording  a  remarkable  example
of  the  caprice  of  human,  appetite :  yet  if  the  fisher-
man will  ply  his  nets,  or  the  mariner  fetch  rice
from  foreign  countries,  in  order  to  procure  to
himself  this  indulgence,  the  market  is  supplied
with  two  important  articles  of  provision,  by  the
instrumentality  of  a  merchandise  which  has  no
other  apparent  use  than  the  gratification  of  a
vitiated,  palate.

But  it  may  come  to  pass  that  the  husbandman,
land-owner,  or  whoever  he  be  that  is  entiled  to
the  produce  of  the  soil,  will  no  longer  exchange  it
for  what  the  manufacturer  has  to  offer.  He  is
already  supplied  to  the  extent  of  his  desires.  For
instance,  he  wants  no  more  cloth ;  he  will  no
longer  therefore  give  the  weaver  corn  in  return,
for  the  produce  ofnis  looms :  'hut  he  would  readily
give  it  for  tea,  or  for  wine. When  the  weaver


OP  POPULATION  AND  PROVISION.


165


tods-tirift  to  be  the  ease,  he  has  nothing  to  do  but
to  send  his  cloth  abroad,  in  exchange  for  tea  or
for  wine,  which  he'  may  barter  for  that  provision
which  the  offer  of  his  cloth  will  no  longer  procure.
The  circulation  is  thus  revived :  and  the  benefit
of  the  discovery  is,  that,  whereas  the  number  of
weavers,  who  could  find  subsistence  from  their
pment,  was  before  limited  by  the  eonsump-
'  cloth  in  the  country,  that  number  is  now.
~,  in  proportion  to  the  demand  for  tea

This  is  the  principle  of  foreign  com-

In  the  magnitude  ana  complexity  of  the
machine,  the  principle  of  motion  is  sometimes  lost
or  unobserved ;  but.  it  is  always  simple  and  the .
same,  to  whatever  extent  it  may  be  diversified
and  enlarged  in  its  operation.  .

The  effect  of  trade  upon  agriculture,  the  process
of  which  we  have  been  endeavouring  to  describe,.
is  visible  in  the  neighbourhood  of  trading  towns,
-  and  in  those  districts  which  carry  on  a  communi-
cation with  the  markets  of  trading  towns.  The
husbandmen  are  busy  and  skilful ;  the  .peasantry
laborious ;  the  land  is  managed  to  the  best  advan-
tage ;  and  doable  the  quantity  of  corn  or  herbage
(articles  which  are  ultimately  converted  into  hu-
man provision)  raised  from  it,  of  what  the  same
soil  yields  in  remoter  and  more  neglected  parts  of
die  country.  Wherever  a  thriving  manufactory
finds  means  to  establish  itself,  a  new  vegetation
springs  up  around  it  I  believe  it  ifTtrae  that  agri-
culture never  arrives  at  any  considerable^  much
less  at  its  highest,  degree  of  perfection,  where  it  is
not  connected  with  trade ;  that  is,  where  the  de-
mand for  the  produce  is  not  increased  by  the  con-
sumption of  trading  atiee.

Let  it  be  remembered  then,  that  agriculture  is
the  immediate  source  of  human  provision ;  that
trade  conduces  to  the  production  or  provision  only
as  It  promotes  agriculture ;  that  the  whole  system
of  commerce,  vast  and  various  as  it  is,  hath  no
other  public  importance  than  its  subserviency  to
this  end.

We  return  to  the  proposition  we  laid  down,  that
u  employment  universally  promotes  population."
From  tms  proposition  it  follows,  that  the  compa-
rative utility  of  different  branches  ef  national  com-
merce is  measured  by  the  number  which  each
branch  employs.  Upon  which  principle  a  scale
"may  easily  be  constructed,  which  shall  assign  to
the  several  kinds  and  divisions  of  foreign  trade,
their  respective,  degrees  of  public  importance.  In
this  scale,  the/rsf  place  belongs  to  the  exchange
of  wrought  goods  for  raw  materials,  as  of  broad
cloth  for  raw  silk;  cutlery  for  wool;  decks  or
watches  for  iron,  flax,  or  furs;  because  this  traffic
provides  a  market  for  the  labour  that  has  already
Men  expended,  at  the  same  time  that  it  supplies
materials  for  new  industry.  Population  always
flourishes  where  this  species  of  commerce  obtains
to  any  considerable  degree.  It  is  the  cause  of
employment,  or  the  certain  indication.  As  it
takes  off  the  manufactures  of  the  country,  it  pro-
motes employment ;  as  it  brings  in  raw  materials,
it  supposes  the  existence  of  manufactories  in  the
country,  and  a  demand  for  the  article  when  manu-
factured. The  aeoond  place  is  due  to  that  com-
merce, which  barters  one  species  of  wrought  goods
for  another,  as  stufis  for  calicoes,  fustians  for  cam-
brics, leather  for  paper,  or  wrought  goods  for
articles  Which  require  no  farther  preparation,  as
for  wine,  oil,  tea,  sugar.  &c.  This  also  assists
employment ;  because,  wqen  the  country  is  stock-


ed with  one  kind  of  manufacture,  it  renews  the
demand  by  converting  it  into  .another:  but  it  is  in-
ferior to  the  former,  as  it  promotes  this  end-  by  one
aide  only  of  the  bargain, — by  what  it  carries  out.
^The  last,  the  lowest,  and  most  disadvantageous
Species  of  commerce,  is  the  exportation  of  raw  -
materials'  in  return  for  wrought  goods :  as  when
wool  is  sent  abroad  to  purchase  velvets ;  hide*  or
peltry,  to  procure  shoes,  hats,  or  linen  doth.  This
trade  is  unfavourable  to  population,  because  it
leaves  no  room  or  demand  tor  employment,  either
in  what  it  takes  out  of  the  country,  or  in  what  it
brings  into  it.  Its  operation  on  both  sides  is
noxious.  By  its  exports!  it  diminishes  the  very
subject  upon  which  the  industry  of  the  inhabit*
ants  ought  to  be  exercised ;  by  its  imports,  it  les-
sens the  encouragement  of  that  industry,  in  the
same  proportion  that  it  supplies  the  consumption
of  the  country  with  the  produce  of  foreign  labour.
Of  different  branches  of  rnanufactory,  those  are,
in  their  nature,  the  most  beneficial,  in  which  the
price  of  the  wrought  article  exceeds  in  the  highest
proportion  that  ot  the  raw  material :  for  this  excess
measures  the  quantity  of -employment,  or,  in  other
words,  the  number  of  manufacturers,  which  each
branch  sustains.  The  produce  of  the  ground  is
never  the  most  advantageous  article  of  foreign
commerce.  -Under  a  perfect  state  of  public  econ-
omy, the  soil  of  the  country  should  be  applied
solely  to  the  raising  of  provisions  far  the  inhabit-
ants, and  its  trade  be  supplied  by  their  industry.
A  nation  will  never  reach  its  proper  extent  of
population,  so  long  as  its  principal  commerce  con-
sists in  the  exportation  or  corn  or  cattle,' or  even
of  wine,  oil,  tobacco,  madder,  indigo,  timber ;  be-
cause, these  last  articles  take  up  that  surface
which  ought  .to  be  covered  with  the  ^materials  of
human  subsistence.

It  must  be  here  however  noticed,  that  we  have
all  along  considered  the  inhabitants  of.  a  country
as  maintained  by  the  produce  of  the  country ;  and
that  what  we  have  said  is  applicable  with  strictness
to  this  supposition  alone.  The  reasoning,  never-
theless, may  easily  be  adapted  to  a  different  case :
for  when  provision  is  not  produced,  but  imported.
what  has  been  affirmed  concerning  provision,  will
be,  in  a  great  measure,  true  of  that  article,  whe-
ther it  be  money,  produce,  or  labour,  which  Is
exchanged  for  provision.  Thus,  when  the  Dutch
raise  madder,  and  exchange  it  for  corn ;  or  when
thepeople  or  America  plant  tobacco,  and  send  it
to  Europe  for  cloth ;  the  cultivation  or  madder  and
tobacco  becomes  as  necessary  to  the  subsistence  of
the  inhabitants,  and  by  consequence  will  affect
the  state  of  population  in  these  countries  as  sensi-
bly, as  the  actual  production  of  food,  or  the  manu-
factory of  raiment.  Tn  -like  manner,  when  the
same  inhabitants  of  Holland,  earn  money  by  the
carriage  of  the  produce  of  one  country  to  another,
and  with  that  money  purchase  the  prevision  from
abroad,  which  their  own  land  is  not  extensive
enough  to  supply,  the  increase  or  decline  of  this
carrying  trade  will  influence  the  numbers  of  the
people  no  less  than  similar  changes  would  do  in
the  cultivation  of  the  soil.

The  few  principles  already  established,  will
enable  us  to  describe  the  effects  upon  population
which  may  be  expected  from  the  following  im-
portant articles  of  national  conduct  and  economy :

1.  Emigration.— Emigration  maj  be  either
the  overflowing  of  a  country,  or  the  desertion.
As  the  increase  of  the  species  is  indefinite;  and


156


MORAL  AND  POLITICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


the  number  of  inhabitant!  which  any  given  tract
or  surface  can  support,  finite ;  it  is  evident  that
great  number*  may  be  constantly  leaving  a
country,  and  yet  the  country  remain  constantly
full.  Or  whatever  be  the  cause  which  invincibly
limits  the  population  of  a  country ;  when  the
number  of  the  people  has  arrived  at  that  limit,
the  progress  of  generation,  beside  continuing  the
succession,  win  supply  multitudes  for  <  foreign
emigration.  In  thess  two  cases,  emigration  nei-
ther indicates  any  political  decay,  nor  in  truth
diminishes  the  number  of  the  people ;  nor  ought  to
be  prohibited  or  discouraged.  But  emigrants  may
relinquish  their  country,  from  a  sense  of  insecurity ,
oppression,  annoyance,  and  inoonveniency.  Nei-
ther, again,  here  is  it  emigration  which  wastes
the  people,  but  the  evils  that  occasion  it.  It
would  be  in  vain,  if  it  were  practicable,  to  confine
the  inhabitants  at  home;  for  the  same  causes
which  drive  them  out  of  the  country,  would  pre-
vent their  multiplication  if  they  remained  in  it.
'Lastly ;  men  may  be  tempted  to  change  their  sit-
-  nation  by  the  allurement  of  a  better  climate,  of  a
more  refined  or  luxurious  manner  of  living ;  by  the
prospect  of  wealth ;  or,  sometimes,  by  the  mere
nominal  advantage  of  higher  wages  and  prices.
This  class  of  emigrants,  with  whom  alone  the
laws  can  interfere  with  effect,  will  never,  I  think,
be  numerous.  With  the.  generality  of  a  people,
the  attachment  of  mankind  to  their  homes  and
country,  the  irksomeness  of  seeing  new  habita-
tions, and  of  living  amongst  strangers,  will  out-
weigh, so  long  as  men  possess  the  necessaries*  of
life  in  safety,  or-  at  least  so  long  as  they  can  ob-
tain a  provision  for  that  mode  of  subsistence
which  the  class  of  citizens  to  which  they  belong
we  accustomed  to  enjoy,  all  the  inducements  that
the  advantages  of  a  foreign  land  can  oner.  There
appear,  therefore,  to  be  Tew  cases  in  which  emi-
gration can  be  prohibited,  with  advantage  to  the
state ;  it  appears  also  that  emigration  is  an  equi-
vocal symptom,  which  will  probably  accompany
the  decline  of  the  political  body,  but  Which  may
likewise  attend  a  condition  of  perfect  health  and


II.  Colonization. — The  only  view  under
which  our  subject  will  permit  us  to  consider
co&mizotton,  is  in  its  tendency  to  augment  the
population  of  the  parent  state.— Suppose  a  fertile,
out  empty  island,  to  lie  within  the  reach  of  a
country  in  which  arts  and  manufactures  are  al-
ready established ;  suppose  a  colony  sent  out  from
such  a  country,  to  take  possession  of  the  island,
and  to  live  there  under  the  protection  and  au-
thority of  their  native  government :  the  new  set-
tlers will  naturally  convert  their  labour  to  the  cul-
tivation of  the  vacant  soil,  and  with  the  produce
of  that  soil  will  draw  a  supply  of  manufactures
from  their  countrymen  at  home.  Whilst  the  in-
habitants continue  few,  and  lands  cheap  and  fresh,
the  colonists  will  find  it  easier  and  more  profitable
to  raise  com,  or  rear  cattle,  and  with  corn  and  cat-
tle to  purchase  woollen  cloth,  for  instance,  or  linen,
than  to  spin  or  weave  these  articles  for  themselves.
The  mother-country,  meanwhile,  derives  from  this
connexion  an  increase  both  of  provision  and  em-
ployment It  promotes  at  once  the  two  great  re-
2 urates  upon  which  the  facility  of  subsistence,  and
y  consequence  the  state  of  population,  depend,—
production  and  distribution ;  and  this  in  a  man-
ner the  most  direct  and  beneficial.  No  situation
can  be  imagined  more  fovourable  to  population,


than  that  of  a  country  which  works  up  goods  for
others,  whilst  these  others  are  cultivating  new
tracts  of  land  for  them;  for  as,  in  a  genial  cli-
mate, and  from  a  fresh  soil,  the  labour  of  one  man
will  raise  provision  enough  for  ten?  it  is  manifest
that,  where  all  are  employed  in  agriculture,  much
the  greater  part  of  the  produce  will  be  spared
from  the  consumption ;  -and  that  three  out  of  four,
at  least  to  those  who  are  maintained  by  it,  will
reside  in  the  country  which  receives  the  redun-
dancy. When  the  new  country  does  not  remit
provision  to  the  old  one,  the  advantage  is  less;
but  stilt  the  exportation  of  wrought  goods,  by
whatever  return  they  are  paid  for,  advances  popu-
lation in  that  secondary  way,  in  which  those  trades
promote  it  that  are  not  employed  in  the  produc-
tion of  provision.  Whatever  prejudice,  therefore,
some  late  events  have  excited  against  schemes  of
colonization,  the  system  itself  is  founded  in  ap-
parent national  utility ;  and  what  is  more,  upon
principles  favourable  to  the  common  interest  of
human  nature;  for  it  does  not  appear  by  what
other  method  newly-discovered  ana  unfrequented
countries  can  be  peopled,  or  during  the  infancy  of
their  establishment  be  protected  or  supplied.  The
error  which  we  of  this  nation  at  present  lament,
seems  to  have  consisted  not  so-much  in  the  ori- '
ginai  formation  of  colonies,  as  in  the  subsequent
management;  in  imposing  restrictions  too  rigor-
ous, or  in  continuing  them  too  long;  in  not  per-
ceiving the  point  of  time  when  the  irresistible
order  and  progress  of  human  affairs  demand  n
change  of  laws  and  policy.  *

III.  Money.— Wnerc  jiumey  abounds,  the  peo-
ple are  generally  numerous:  yet  gold  and  silver
neither  feed  nor  clothe  mankind ;  nor  are  they  in
all  countries  converted  into  provision  by  pur-
chasing the  necessaries  of  life  at  foreign  markets;
nor  do  they,  in  any  country,  compose  those  arti-
cles of  personal  or  domestic  ornament  which  cer-
tain orders  of  the  community  have  learnt  to  re-
gard as  necessaries  of  life,  and  without  the  means
of  procuring  which,  they  will  not  enter  into
femily-estahlUhments :— at  least,  this  property  of
the  precious  metsJs  obtains  ma  very  snWl  degree.
The  effect  of  money  upon  the  number  of  the  peo-
ple, though  visible  to  observation,  is  not  explained
without  some  difficulty.  To  understand  this  con-
nexion properly,  we  must  return  to  the  proposi-
tion with  which  we  concluded  our  reasoning  upon
the  subject;  "  that  population  is  chiefly  promoted
by  employment."  Now  of  employment,  money  is
partly  the  indication,  and  partly  the  cause.  The
only  way  in  which  money  regularly  and  spon-
taneously Jlowsinto  a  country,  is  in  return  for  the
goods  that  are  sent  out  of  it,  or  the  work  that  is
performed  by  it ;  and  the  only  way  in  which  mo-
ney is  retained  in  a  country,  is  by  the  country's
supplying,  in  a  great  measure,  its  own  consump-
tion of  manufactures'.  Consequently,  the  quan-
tity of  money  found  in  a  country,  denotes  the
amount  of  labour  and  employment;  but  still,
employment,  not  money,  is  the  cause  of  popula-
tion ;  the  accumulation  of  money  being  merely  a
collateral  effect  of  the  same  cause,  or  a  circum-
stance which  accompanies  the  existence,  and
measures  the  operation,  of  that  cause.  And  this
is  true  of  money,  only  whilst.it  is  acquired  by  the
industry  of  the  inhabitants.  The  treasures  which
belong  to  a  country  by  the  possession  of  mines,  or
by  the  exaction  01  tribute  from  foreign  dependen-
cies, afford  no  conduskn  concerning  the  state  of


OP  POfrtJLATlON  AND  PROVISION.


187


ifafion.  The  influx  from  these  sources  may
nmense,  and  yet  the  country  remain  poor  and
■peopled;  of  which  we  see  an  egregious  example
in  the  condition  of  Spain,  since  toe  acquisition  of
its  South-American  dominions.

(  Bat,  secondly,  money  may  become  also  a  real
and  an  operative  cause  of  population,  by  acting
a*  a  stimulus  to  industry,  and  by  facilitating  the
mean*  of  aubsistence.  The  ease  of  subsistence,
and  the  encouragement  of  industry,  depend  nei-
ther upon  the  price  of  labour,  nor  upon  the  price
of  provision,  but  up6n  the  proportion  which  one
bean  to  the  other.  Now  the  influx  of  money  into
a  country,  naturally  tends  to  advance  this  pro-
portion; that  is,  every  fresh  accession  of  money
raises  the  price  of  labour  before  it  raises  the  price
of  provision.  When  money  is  brought  from
abroad,  the  persons,  be  they  who  they  will,  into
whose  hands  it  first  arrives,  do  hot  buy  up  pro-
vision with  it  but  apply  it  to  the  purchase  and
payment  of  laoour.  If  the  state  receives  it,  the
state  dispenses"  what  it  receives  amongst  soldiers,
sailors,  artificers,  'engineers,  shipwrights,  work-
men;— if  private  persons  bring  home  treasures
of  sold  and  stiver  they  usually  expend  them  in
the  Duildingof  housesj  the  improvement  of  estates,
the  purchase  of  fiinnture,  dress,  equipage,  in  ar-
ticles-of  luxury  or  splendour: — if  the  merchant  be
enriched  by  returns  of  his  foreign  commerce,  he
appfiee  his  mcreased  capital  to  the  enlargement
of  his  business  at  home.'  The  money  ere  long
comes  to  market  for  provision;  but  it  cornea
thither  through  the  hands  of  the  manufacturer,  the
artist,  the  husbandman,  and  labourer.  Its  effect,
therefore,  upon  the  price  of  art  and  labour,  will
precede  its  effect  upon  the  price  of  provision :  and
during  the  interval  between  one  effect  ana  the
other,  the  means  of  subsistence  will  be  multiplied
and  facititated,as  well  as  indjustry  be  excited  by
dew  rewards.  When  the  greater  plenty  of  money
in  circulation  has  produced  ah  advance  in  the
price  of  provision,  ^corresponding  to  the  advanced
of  labour,  its  effect  ceases.  The  labourer  no
gains  any  thing  by  the  increase  of  his
It  is  not,  therefore,  the  quantity  of  specie
into  a  country,  but  the  continual  in-
crease of  that  quantity,  from  which  the  advantage
arises  to  employment  and  population.  It  is  only
the  accession  of  money  which  produces  the  effect,
and  it  is  only  by  money  constantly  flowing  into  a
country  that  the  effect  can  be  constant  Now
whatever  consequence  arises  to  the  country  from
the  influx  of  money,  the  contrary  may  be  ex-
pected to  follow  from  the  diminution  of  its  quan-
tity: and  accordingly  we  find,  that  whatever
cause  drains  off  the  specie  of  a  country,  faster
than  the  streams  which  feed  it  can  supply,  not
only  impoverishes  the  country,  but  depopulates
St  The  knowledge  and  experience  of  this  effect
hare  given  occasion  to  a  phrase  which  occurs  in
almost  every  discourse  upon  commerce  or  polities.
The  balance  of  trade  with  any  foreign  nation  is
■aid  to  be  against  or  in  favour  of  a  country,  sim-
ply as  it  tends  to  carry  money  out,  or  bring  it  in :
that  is,  according  as  the  price  of  the  imports  ex-
ceeds or  fells  short  of  the  price  of  the  exports :  so
invariably  is  the  increase  or  diminution  of  the
specie  or  a  country  regarded  as  a  test  of  the  pub-
Be  advantage  or  detriment  which  arises  from  any
branch  of  its  commerce,

IV.  Taxation.— As  tabes  take  nothing  out
of  a  country;  as  they  do  not  diminish  the  public


stock,  only  vary  the  distribution  of  it,  they  are
not  necessarily  prejudicial- to  population.  If  the
state  .exact  money  from  certain  members  of  .the
community,  she  dispenses  it  also  amongst  other
members  of  the  same'  community.  They  who
contribute  to  the  revenue,  and  they  who  are  sup-
ported or  benefited  by  the  expenses  of  govern-
ment, are  to  be  placed  one  against  the  ether ;  and
whilst  what  the- subsistence  of  one  part  is  profited
by  receiving,  compensates  for  what  that  of  the
other  suffers  by  paying,  the  common  fund  of  the
society  is  not  lessened.  This  is  true :  but  it  must
be  observed,  that  although  the  sum  distributed  by
the  state  be  always  equal  to  the  sum  collected
from  the  people,  yet  the  gain  and  loss  to  the
means  of  subsistence  may  be  very  unequal  /  and
the  balance  will  remain  an  the  wrong  or  the
right  side  of  the  account,'  according  as  the  money
passes  by  taxation  from  the  industrious  to  the
idle,  from  the  many  to  t|ie  few,  from  those  who
want  to  those  who  abound,  or  in  a  contrary  di*
rection.  For  instance :  a  tax  upon  coaches,  to  be
laid  out  in  the-  repair  of  roads,  would  probably  im-
prove the  population  of  a  neighbourhood;  a  tax
upon  cottages,  to  be  ultimately  expended  in  the
purchase  and  support  of  coaches,  would  certainly
diminish  it.  In  like  manner,  a  tax  upon  wine  or
tea  distributed  in  bounties  to  fishermen  or  hus-
bandmen, would  augment  the  provision  of  a  coun-
try; a  tax  upon  fisheries  and  husbandry,. how-
ever indirect  or  concealed,  to  be  converted,  when
raised,  to  the  procuring  of  wine  or  tea  for  the  idle
«nd  opulent;  would  naturally  impair  the  public
stock.  The  effect,  therefore,  of  taxes,  upon-  the
means  of  subsistence,  depends  not  so  much  upon
the  amount  of  the  sum  levied,  as  upon*  the
object  of  the  tax  and  the  application.  Taxes
likewise  may  be  so  adjusted  as  to  conduce  to  the
restraint  of -luxury,  and  the  correction  of  vice;
to  the  encouragement  of  industry,  trade,-  agricul-
ture, and  marriage.  Taxes  thus  contrived,  become
rewards  and  penalties;  not  only  sources  of  re-
venue, .but  instruments  of  .police.  Vices  indeed
themselves  cannot  be  taxed,  without  holding  forth
such  a  conditional  toleration  of  them  as  to  destroy
men's  perception  of  their  guilt ;  a  tax  comes  to  be
considered  as.a  commutation:  the  materials, how-
ever, and  incentives  of  vice,  may.  Although,  for
instance,  drunkenness  would  be,  on  this  account
an  unfit  object  of  taxation,  yet  public  houses  and
spirituous  liquors  are  very  properly  subjected  to
heavy  imposts.

Nevertheless,  although  it  may  be  true  that
taxes  cannot  be  pronounced  to  be  detrimental  to
population,  by  an  absolute  necessity  in  their  na-
ture ;  and  though,-  under  some  modifications,  and
when  urged  ■only  to  a  certain  extent  they  may
even  operate  in  favour  of  it;  yet  it  will  be  round,
in  a  great  plurality  of  instances,  that  their  ten-
dency is  noxious.  Let  it  be  supposed  that  nine
famines  inhabit  a  neighbourhood;  each  possessing
barely  the  means  of  subsistence,  or  of  that  mode
of  subsistence  which  custom  hath  established
amongst  them ;  let  a  tenth  family  be  quartered
upon  these,  to  be  supported  by  a  tax  raised  from
the  nine;  or.  rather,  let  one  of  the  nine  have  his
income  augmented  by  a  similar  deduction  from
the  incomes  of  the  rest;  in  either  of  these  cases,
it  is  evident  that  the  whole  district,  would  be
broken  up:  for  as  the  entire  income  of  each  is
supposed  to  be  barely  sufficient  for  the  establish-


158


MORAL  AND  POLITICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


destroy*  thmt  estabfohment.  Now^  it  is  no  answer
Urthis  objection,  it  is  no  apology  for  the  grievance,
to  say,  that  nothing  is  taken  out  of  the  neighbour-
hood ;  that  the  atock  is  not  diminished :  the  mis-
chief is  done  by  deranging  the  distribution.  Nor,
again,  is  the  luxury  of  one  family,  or  even  the
maintenance  of  an  additional  family,  a  recom-
pense to  the  country  for  the  ruin  of  nine  others. —
Nor,  lastly,  will  it  alter  the  effect  though  it  may
conceal  the  cause,,  that  the  contribution,  instead
of  being  levied  directly  upon  each  day's  wages,
is  mixed  up  in  the  price  of  some  article  of  con-
stant use  and  consumption,  as  in  a  tax  upon
candles,  malt,  leather,  or  fuel.  This  example  illus-
trates the  tendency  of  taxes  to  obstruct  subsist-
ence •  and  the  minutest  degree  of  this  obstruction
will  be  felt  in  the  formation  of  families.  The
example,  indeed,  forms  an  extreme  case;  the  evil
is  magnified,  in  order  to  render  its  operation  dis-
tinct and  visible.  In  real  life,  families  may  not  be
broken  up,  or  forced  from  their  habitation,  houses
be  quitted,  or  countries  suddenly  deserted,  in  con-
sequence of  any  new  imposition  whatever ;  but
marriages  will  become  gradually  leas  frequent.

It  seems  necessary,  however,  to  distinguish  be-
tween the  operation  of  a  new  tax,  and  the  effect
of  taxes  which  have  been  long  established.  In
the  course  of  circulation,  the  money  may  flow  back
to  the  hands  from,  which  it  was  taken.  The  pro-
portion between  the  supply  and  the  expense  of
subsistence,  which  had  been  disturbed  by  the  tax,
may  at  length  recover  itself  again.  In  th*  in-
stance just  now  stated,  the  addition  of  a  tenth
family  to  the  neighbourhood,  or  the  enlarged  ex-
penses of  one  of  the  nine,  may,  in  some  shape  or
other,  so  advance  the  profits,  or  increase  the  em-
ployment, of  the  rest,  as  to  make  fuM  restitution
for  the  share  of  their  property  of  which  it  deprives
them;  or,  what  is  more  likely  to  happen,  a  reduc-
tion may  take  place  in  their  mode  ol  living,  suited
to  the  abridgment  of  their  incomes.  Yet  still  the
ultimate  and  permanent  effect  of  taxation,  though
distinguishable  from  the  impression  of  a  new  tax,
Is  generally  adverse  to  population.  The  proportion
above^spoken  of.  can  only  be  restored  by  one  side
or  other  of  the  following  alternative :  by  the  peo-
ple either  contracting  their  wants,  which  at  the
same  time  diminishes  consumption  and  employ-
ment ;  or  by  raising  the  price  of  labour,  which  ne-
cessarily adding  to  the  price  of  the  productions
and  manufactures  of  the  country,  checks  their
sale  at  foreign  markets.  A  nation  which-  is  bur-
thened  with  taxes,  must  always  be  undersold  by
a  nation  which  is  free  from  them,  unless  the  dif-
ference be  made  up  by  some  singular  advantage
of  climate;  soil,  skill,  or  industry.  This  quality
belongs  to  all  taxes  which  affect  the  mass  of  the
community,  even  when  imposed  upon  the  proper-
est  objects,  and  applied  to  the  fairest  purposes.
But  abuses  are  inseparable  from  the  disposal  of
public  money.  As  governments  are  usually  ad-
ministered, the  produce  of  public  taxes  is  ex-
pended upon  a  train  of  gentry,  in  the  maintaining
of  pomp,  or  in  the  purchase  of  influence.  The
conversion  of  property  which  taxes  effectuate,,
when  they  are  employed  in  this  manner,  is  -at-
tended with'  obvious  evils.  It  takes  from  the  in-
dustrious, to  give  to  the  idle;  it  increases  the
number  of  die  latter;  it  tends  to  accumulation;
it  sacrifices  the  conveniency  of  many  to  the  luxury
of  a  few;  it  makes  no  return  to- the  people,  from
whom  the  tax  is  drawn,  that  is  satisfactory  or  n>


telUgible;  it  encourages  no  activity  which  hi  use-
ful or  productive.

The  sum 'to  be  raised  being  settled,  a  wise
statesman  will  contrive  his  taxes  principally  with
a  view  to  their  effect  upon  population  ;  that  is,  he
will  so  adjust  them  as  to  give  the  least  possible
obstruction  to  those  means  of  subsistence  by  which
the  mass  of  the  community  is  maintained.  We
are  accustomed  to  an  opinion,  that  a  tax,  to  be
just,  ought  to  be  accurately  proportioned  to  the
circumstances'of  the  persons  who  pay  it  But
upon  what,  it  might  be  asked,  is  this  opinion
founded;  unless  it  could  be  shown  that  such  a
proportion  interferes  the  least  with  me  general
conveniency  of  subsistence  1  Whereas  I  should
rather  believe,  that  a  tax,  constructed  with  a  view
to  that  conveniency,  ought  to  rise  upon  the  dif-
ferent classes  of  the  community,  in  a  much  higher
ratio  than  the  simple  proportion  of  their  incomes.
The  point  to  be  regarded  is,  not  what  men  have,
but  what  they  can  spare;  and  it  is  evident  that  a
man  who  possesses  a  thousand  pounds  a  year,
can  more  easily  give  up  a  hundred,  than  a  man
with  a  hundred  pounds  a  year  can  part  with  ten;
that  is,  those  habits  of  life  which  are  reasonable
and  innocent,  and  upon  the  ability  to  continue
which  the  formation  of  families  depends,  will  be
much  less  affected  by  the  one  deduction  than  the
other:  it  is  still  more  evident,  that  a  man  of  a
hundred  pounds  a  year  would  not  be  so  much
distressed  in  his  subsistence,  by  a  demand  from
him  of  ten  pounds,  as  a  man  of  ten  pounds  *
year  would  be  by  the  loss  of  one :  to  which  we
must  add,  that  the  population  of  every  country
being  replenished  by  the  marriages  of.  the  lowest
ranks  or  the  society,  their  accommodation  and  re-
lief become  of  more  importance  to  the  state,  than
.the  conveniency  of  any  higher  but  less  numerous
order  of  its  citizens.  But  whatever  be  the  pro-
portion which  public  expediency  directs,  whether
the  simple,  the  duplicate,  or  any  higher  or  inter-
mediate proportion  of  men's,  incomes,  it  can  never
be  attained  hy  any  single  tat*  as  no  single  object
of  taxation  can  be  found,  which  measures  the
ability  of  the.  subject  with  sufficient  generality
and  exactness.  It  is  only  by  a  system  and  variety
of  taxes,  mutually  balancing  and  equalising  one
another,  that  a  due  proportion  can  be  preserved.
For  instance:  if  a  tax  upon  lands  press  with
greater  hardship  upon  those  who.  live  in  the
country,  it  may  be  properly  counterpoised  by  a
tax  upon  the  rent  of  houses,  which  will  affect
principally  the  inhabitants  of  large  towns.  Dis-
tinctions may  also  be  framed  in  some  taxes,  which
shall  allow  abatements  or  exemptions  to  married
persons;  to  the  parents  of  a.  certain  number  of
legitimate  children;  to  improvers  of  the  soil;  to
particular  modes  of  cultivation,  as  to  tillage  in
preference  to  pasturage;  and  in  general  to  that
industry  which  is  immediately  proauctiver  in  pre-
ference to  that  which  is  only  instrumental ;  but
above  all,  which  may  leave  the  heaviest  part  of
the  burthen  upon  the  methods,  whatever  they  be>
of  acquiring  wealth  without  industry,  or  even  of
subsisting  in  idleness.

V.  Exportation  op  bread-corn. — Nothing
seems  to  have  a  more  positive  tendency  to  reduce
the  number  of  the  people,  than  the  sending  abroad
part  of  the  provision  by  which  they  are  maintained ;
yet  this  has  been  the  policy  of  legislators  very
studious  of  the  improvement  of  their  country.  In
order  to  reconcile  ourselves  to  a  practice  which


OP  JPOPTJLATION  AND  PROVISION.


159


appear*  to  militate  with  the  chief  interest,  that  is,
with  the  population  of  the  country  that  adopts  it,
we  must  be  reminded  of  a  maxim  which:  belongs
to  the  productions  both  of  nature  arid" art,  "that  it
is  impossible  to  have  enough  without  a  Super-
fluity/' The  .point  of  sufficiency  cannot,  in  any
case,  be  so  exactly,  hit  upon,  as  to  have  nothing
to  spare,  yet  never  to  want  Thus  peculiarly  true
of  bread-corn,  of  which  the  annual  increase  is
extremely  valuable.  As  it  is  necessary  thai  the
crop  be  adequate  to  the  consumption  in  a  year  of
scarcity,  it  must,  of  consequence,  greatly  exceed
it  in  a  year  of  plenty.  A  redundancy  therefore
will  occasionally  arise  from  the  very  care  that  is
taken  to  secure  the  people  against  the  danger  of
want;  and  it  is  manifest  that  the- exportation  of
this  redundancy  subtracts  nothing  from  the  num-
ber that  can  regularly  be  maintained  by  the  pro-
duce of  the  soil.  Moreover,  as  the  exportation'  of
corn,  under  these  circumstances,  is  attended  with
no  direct  injury  to  population,  so  the  benefits
which  indirectly  arise  to  population  'from  foreign
commerce,  belongs  to  this,  in  common  with  other
species  of  trade ;  together  with  the  peculiar  advan-
tage of  presenting  a  constant  incitement  to  the
skiU  and  industry  of  the  husbandman,  by  the
promise  of  a  certain  sale  and  an  adequate  price,
under  every  contingency  of  season  and  produce.
There  is  another  situation,  in  which  com  may
not  only  be  exported,  but  in  which  the  people  can
thrive  by  no  other  means:  that  is,  of  a  newly
settled  country,  with  a  fertile  soil.  The  exporta-
tion of  a  large  proportion  of  the  corn  whicha  coun-
try produces,  proves,  it  is  true,  that  the  inhabitants
have  not  yet  attained  to  the  number  which  the
country  is  capable  of  maintaining :  but  it  does  not
prove  but  that  they  may  be  hastening  to  this  limit
with  the  utmost  practicable  celerity,  which  is  the
perfection  to  be  sought  for  in  a  young  establish-
ment In  all  cases  except  these  two,  and  in  the
former  of  them  to  any  greater  degree  than  what
is  necessary  to  take  off  occasional  redundancies,
the  exportation  of  com  is  either  itself  noxious  to
population,  or  argues  a  delect  of  population  arising
from  some  other  cause.

/  VI.  Abridgment  of  labour. — It  has  long
been  made  a  question,  whether  those  mechanical
contrivances  which  abridge  labour,  by  perform-
ing the  same  work  by  fewer  hands,  be  detrimental
or  not  to  the  population  of  a  country.  From
what  has  been  delivered  in  preceding  parts  of  the
present  chapter,  it  will  be  evident  that  this  ques-
tion is  equivalent  to  another, — whether  such  con-
trivances diminish  or  not  the  quantity  of  employ-
ment The  first  and  most  obvious  effect  undoubt-
edly is  this;  because,  if  one  man  be  made  to  do
.  what  three  men  did  .before,  two  are  immediately
discharged :  but  if,  by  some  more  general  and  re-
moter consequence,  they  increase  the  demand  for
work,  or,  what  is  the  same  thing,  prevent  the  di-
minution of  that  demand,  In  a  greater  proportion
than  they  contract  the  number  of  hands  by  which
it  is  performed,  the  quantity  of  employment,  upon
the  whole,  will  gain  an  addition.  Upon  which
principle  it  may  be  observed,  first,  that  whenever
a  mechanical  invention"  succeeds  in  one  place,  it  \s
necessary  that  it  be  imitated  in  every  other,  where
the  same  manufacture  is  carried  on ;  for,  it  is  mani-
fest, that  he  who  has  the  benefit  of  a  conciser  ope-
ration, will  soon  outvie  and  undersell  a  competitor
who  continues  to  use  a  more  circuitous  labour.  It
»  also  true,  in  the  second  place,  that  whoevexjtrtJ


discover  or  adopt  a  mechanical  improvement,  wilt
for  some  time,  draw  to  themselves  an  increase  of
employment^  and  that  this. preference  may  con-
tinue even  after  the  improvement  has  become
general  r  for,  in  every  kind  of  trade,  it  is  not  only
a  great  but  permanent  advantage,  to  have  once
preoccupied  tne  public  reputation.  Thirdly,  after
every  superiority  which  might  be  derived  from  the-
pbssessiott  of  a  secret,  has  ceased,  it  may  be  well
questioned  whether  even  then  any  loss  can  accrue
to  employments  The  same  money  will  be  spared
to  the  same  article  still.  "Wherefore,  in  proportion
as  the  article  can  be  afforded  at  a  lower  price,  by
reason  of  an  easier  orshorter  process  in  the  manu-
facture, it  will  either  grow  into  more  general  use,
or  an  improvement  will  take  place  in.  the  quality
and  fabric,  which  will  demand  a  proportionable
addition  or  hands.  The  number  of  persons  em-
ployed in  the- manufactory  of  stockings,  has  not.  I
apprehend,  decreased  since  the  invention  of  stock-
ing-mills. The  amount  of  what  is  expended  upon
the  article,  after  subtracting  from  it  the. price  of
the  raw  material,  and  consequently  what  is  paid
for  work  in  this  branch  of  our  maiuifactorieq,  is  not
less  than  it  was  before.  Goods  of  a  finer  texture
are  worn  in  the  place  of  coarser.  This  is  the
change  Which  the  invention  has  produced;  and
which  compensates  to  the  manufactory  for  every
other  inconveniency.  Add  to  which,  that  in
the  above,  and  in  almost  every  instance,  an  im-
provement which  conduces  to  the  recommenda-
tion of  a  manufactory,  either  by  the  cheapness
of  the  quality  of  the  goods,  draws  up  after  it  many
dependent  employments,  in  which  no  abbreviation
has  taken  place.


From  the  reasoning  that  has  been  pursued,  and
the  various  considerations  suggested  in  this  chap-
ter, a  judgment  may,  in  some  sort,  be  formed,  how
far  regulations  of  law  are  in  their  nature  capable
of  contributing  to  the  support  and  advancement  of
population.  1  say  how  far ;  for,  as  in  many  sub-
jects, so  especially  in  those  which  relate  to  com-
merce, to  plenty,  to  riches,  and  to  the  number  of
people,  more  is  wont  to  be  expected  from  laws,  than
laws  can  do.  Laws  can  only  imperfectly  restrain
that  dissoluteness  of  manners,  which,  by  diminish-
ing the  frequency  of  marriages,  impairs  the  very
source  of  population.  Laws  cannot  regulate  the
wants  of  mankind,  their  mode  of  iiving,  or  their
desire  of  those  superfluities  which  fashion,  more
irresistible  than  laws,  has  once  introduced  into
general  usage:  or,  in  other  words,  has  erected  into
necessaries  of  life.  Laws  cannot  induce  men  to
enter  into  marriages,  when  the  expenses  of  a
family  must  deprive  them  of  that  system  of  ac-
commodation to  which  they  have  habituated  their
expectations.  Laws,  by  their  protection,  by  as-
suring to  the  labourer  the  fruit  and  profit  of  his
labour t  may  help  to  make  a  people  industrious;
but  without  industry,  the  laws  cannot  provide
either  subsistence  or  employment;  laws  cannot
make  corn  grow  without  tod  and  care,  or  trade
flourish  without  art  and  diligence.  In  spite  of  all
laws,  the  expert,  laborious,  honest  workman,  will
be  employed,  in  preference  to  the  lazy,  the, un-
skilful, the  fraudulent,  and  evasive :  and  tjiis  is  not
more  true  of  two  inhabitants  of  the  same  village,
than  it  is  of  the  people  of  two  different  countries,
which  communicate  either  with  each  other,  or  with


165


MORAL  AND  POLITICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


fee  not  of  the  World  The  natural  basis  of  trade
to  rivsJship  of  quality  and  price ;  oil  which  to  the
aame  thing,  of  skill  and  industry.  -  Every  attempt
to  force  trade  by  Operation  of  law,  that  is,  by  com-
pelling persons  to  buy  goods  atone  market,  which
they  can  obtain  cheaper  and  better  from  another,
ia  sure  to  be  either  eluded  by  the  oujck-sighted-
ness  arid  incessant  activity  of  private  interest,  .or
to  be  frustrated  by  retaliation.  One  half  of  the
Commercial  laws  of  many  states  are  calculated
.merely  to  counteract  the  restrictions  which  have
been  imposed  by  other  states.  Perhaps  the  only
way  in  which  toe  interposition  of  law  is  salutary
in  trade,  is  fin  the  prevention  of  frauds.

Next  to  the  indispensable  requisites  of  internal
peace  and  security,  the  chief  advantage  which  can
be  derived  to  population  from  the  interference  of
law,  appears  to  me  to  consist  in  the  encourage-
ment ot  agriculture.  This,  at  least,  is  the  direct
way  of  increasing  the  number  of  the  people :  every
other  mode  being  effectual  only  by  its  influence
upon  this.  Now  the  principal  expedient  by  which
such  a  purpose  can  be  promoted,  is  to  adjust  the
laws  of  property,  as  nearly 'as  possible,  to  the  two
following  rules;  first,  "  to  give  to  the  occupier  all
the  power  over  the  soil,  which  to  necessary  for  its
perfect .  cultivation  /'-—secondly, . "  to  assign  the
whole-  profit  of  every  improvement  to  the  persons
by  whose  activity  it  is  carried  on."  What  we  call
property  in  land,  as  hath  been  observed  above,  is
power  over  it.  Now  it  to  indifferent  to  the  public  in
whose  hands  this  power  resides,  if  it  be  rightly  used ;
it  matters  not  to  whom  the  land  belongs,  if  it  be
well  cultivated.  When  we  lament  that  great  estates
are  often  united  in  the  same  hand,  or  complain
that  one  man  possesses  what  would  be  sufficient
for  a  thousand,  we  suffer  ourselves  to  be  misled  by
words.  The  owner  of  ten  thousand  poundB  a-year,
c&tuwme*  little  more  of  the  produce  of  the  soil  than
the  owner  of  ten  pounds  a-year.  If  the  cultivation
,  be  equal,  the  estate  in  the  hands  of  one  great  lord,
affords  subsistence  and  employment  to  the  same
number  of  persons  as  it  would  do  if  it  were  divided
amongst  a. nundred- proprietors.  In  like  manner
we  ought  to  judge  of  the  effect  upon  the  public  in-
terest, which  may  arise  from  lands  being  holden
by  the  king,  or  by  the  subject ;  by  private  persons,
or  by  corporations ;  by  laymen,  of  ecclesiastics \:  in
fee,  or  for  life ;  by  virtue  of  office,  or  in  right  of  in-
heritance. I  do  not  mean  that  these  varieties  make
no  difference,  but  I  mean  that  all  the  difference
they  do  make  respects  the  cultivation  of  the  lands
which  are  so  holaen.

There  exist  in  this  country,  conditions  of  tenure
which  condemn  the  land  itself  to  perpetual  sterility.
Of  this  kind  to  the  right  of  common,  which  pre'
eludes  each  proprietor  from  the  improvement,  or
oven  the  convenient  occupation,  of  his  estate,  with-
out (what  seldom  can  be  obtained)  the  consent  of
many  others.  This  tenure  is  also  usually  embar-
rassed by  the  interference  of  manorial  claims,
under  which  it  often  happens  that  the  surface  be-
longs to  one  owner,  and  the  soil  to  another ;  so
that  neither  owner  can  stir  a  clod  without  the  con-
currence of  his  partner  in  the  property.  In  many
manors,  the  tenant  is  restrained  from  granting
leases  beyond  a  short  term  of  years ;  which  renders
every  plan  of  solid  improvement  impracticable.
In  these  cases,  the  owner  wants,  what  the  first
rule  of  rational  policy  requires,  "  sufficient  ptiwef
over  the.  soil  for  its  perfect  cultivation."  This
power  ought  lobe  extended  to  him  by  some  easy


and  genera]  law  of  enfranchisement,  partition,  and
enclosure;  which,  though  compulsory  upon  the
lord,  or  the  rest  of  the  tenants,  whilst  it  has  in  view
the  melioration  of  the  soil,  and  tenders  an  equitable
compensation  for  every  right  that  it  takes  away,  is
neither  more  arbitrary,  nor  more  dangerous  to  the
stability  of  property,  than  that  which  is  done  in
the  construction  of  reads,  bridges,  embankments,
navigable  canals,  and  indeed  in  almost  every  pub-
lic work,  in  which  private  owners  of  land  are
obliged  to  accept  that  price  for  their  property  which
an  indifferent  jury  may  award.  It  may  here-  how-
ever, be  proper  to  observe,  that  although  tne  en-
closure of  wastes  and  pastures  be  generally  bene-
ficial to  population,  yet  the  enclosure  of  lands  in
tillage,  in  order  to  convert  them  into  pastures,  it
as  generally  hurtful.

But,  secondly,  agriculture  is  discouraged  by  every
constitution  of  landed  property  which  lets  in  those,
whq  have  no  concern  in  the  improvement  to  a
participation  of  the  profit.  This  objection  is  ap»
plicable  to  all  such  customs  of  manors  as  subject
the  proprietor,  upon  the  death  of  the  lord  or  tenant,
or  the  alienation  of  the  estate,  to  a  fine  apportioned
to  Che  improved  value  of  the  land.  But  of  all  in-
stitutions which  are  in  this  way  adverse  to  .culti-
vation and  improvement,  none  to  so  noxious  as  that
oitiiktt.  A  claimant  here  enters  into  the  produce,
who  contributed  no  assistance  whatever  to  the  pro-
duction. When  years,  perhaps,  of  care  and  toil
have  matured  an  improvement;  when  the  hue*
bandman  sees  new  crops  ripening  to  his  skill  and
industry;  the  moment  ne  to  ready  to  put  his  sickle
to  the  grain,  he  finds  himself  conmeUed  to  di-
vide his  harvest  with  a  stranger.  Tithes  are  a
tax  not  only  upon  industry,  hut  upon  that  industry
which  feeds  mankind ;  upon  that  species  of  exer-
tion which  it  to  the  aim  of  all  wise  laws  to  cherish
and  promote ;  and  to  uphold .  and  excite  which,
composes,  as  we  have  seen,  the  main  benefit  that
the  community  receives  from  the  whole  system  of
trade,  and  the  success  ef  commerce.  And,  toge-
ther with  the  more  general  incenveniency  that  at-
tends the  exaction  of  tithes,  there  to  this  additional
evil,  in  the  mode  at  least  according  to  which  they
are  collected  at  present,  that  they  operate  as  a
bounty  upon  pasturage.  The  burthen  of  the  tax
falls  with  its  chief,  if  not  with  its  whole  weight,
upon  tillage ;  that  to  to  say,  upon  that  precise  mode
of  cultivation,  which,  as  hath  been  shown  above,
it  to  the  business  of  the  state  to  relieve  and  remu-
nerate, in  preference  to  every  other.  No  mea-
sure of  such  extensive  concern  appears  to  me  so
practicable,  nor  any  single  alteration  so  beneficial,
as  the  conversion  of  tithes  into  corn-rents.  ^  This
commutation,  lam  convinced,  might  be  so  adjusted
as  to  secure  to  the  tithe-holder  a  complete  and
perpetual  equivalent  for  his  interest,  and  to  leave
to  industry  its  full  operation,  and  entire  reward.


CHAPTER  Xn.

Of  War ,  and  qf  Military  Establishment*.

Because  the  Christian  Scriptures  describe  ware
as  what  they  are, — as  crimes  or  judgments,  some
have  been  led  to  believe  that  it  is  unlawful  fore.
Christian  to  bear  arms.  But  it  should  be  remem-
bered that  it  may  be  necessary  for  individuals  to
unite  their  force,  and  for  this  end  to  resign  them-
selves to  the  direction  of  a  common  will ;  and  yet


OP  WAft,  AND,  OF  MILITARY  ESTABLISHMENTS.


161


H  nay  h&  trjae  tint  that  wiH  is  .often,  'actuated  by
criminal  motives,  and  oilervtietermined  to  destruc-
fpe  purposes.  Hence,  althoiigiUhe  ori^m  of  wanh

."be  ascribed,  in  Scripture,  to  .ink  operation  of  law-
lees  and  malignant  passion;*  and  though  war  it-
self "be  enumerated  among  the  sorest  calamities

..  with  which  a  land  can  be  visited,  the  .profession
of>  a  soldier  is  nowhere  forbidden  or  condemned.
When  the -soldiers  demanded  of  John  (he  Baptist
what  they  should  do,  he  said  untothem,  /'  Do  vio-
lence to  no  man,  neither  accuse  any  falsely,  and
be  content  wj[th  Your  wages."t  In  which  answer
we  do  not  find-that,  in  ortle r  to  prepare  themselves
for  the  reception  et  the  kingdom  of  Qod,  if  was
required  of  soldiers  to  relinquish  their  profession,"
but  only  that  they  should  beware  of  the  vices- of
which  that  profession  was  accused.  The  precept
which  follows,  *  Be  content  with  your  wages"
supposed  them  to  continueon  their  situation.  .  It
was  of  a-Rorotfh  centurion  that  Christ  (ironouneed
that  memorable  eulogy. "  I  have  not  found  sogreat
Jaith,  bo,  not  in  Israel.'?  The  first  Gentile  con-
vert* who- was  received  into  the  Christian  church,
and  to  whom- the  Gospel  was  imparted  by  the  im-
mediate' and  especial  direction  of  Heaven,  held
tile  same  station :  and  in  the  history  of  this  trans-
action we  discover  not  the  smallest  intimation,
that  Cornelius,  upon  becoming  a  Christian^  quit-
ted the  service  of  the  Roman  legion ;  that  his  pro-
fession was  objected^,  to,  or  his  continuance  in  it  con-
sidered as  in  any  wise  Inconsistent  with  his  new
character.  " -

In  applying  the  principles  of  morality  to  the  af-
fair* of  nations,  tne  difficulty  which  meets  us,
arises  from  hence, "  that  the  particular  consequence

.  sometimes  appears  to  exceed  the  value  of  the  gen-
eral rule."  In  this  circumstance  is  founded  the
only  distinction  that  exists  between  the  case  of
independent  states,  and  of  independent  indi-
viduals. .  In  the  transactions  of  private  persons,
no  advantage  that  results  from  the  breach  of  a
general  law  of  justice,  can  compensate  to  the
public  for  the  violation  of  the  law ;  in  the  concerns
of  empire v  this  may  sometimes  be  doubted.  Thus,
that  tne  'faith  of  promises  ought  to  be  maintained,
as  far  as  is  lawful^  and  as  far  as  was  intended  by
the  parties,  wliateYerinconveniency  either  of  them
may  suffer  by  his  fidelity,  in  the  intercourse  of
private  life,  is  seldom  disputed;  -because  it  is
evident  to  almost  every  man  who  reflects  upon
the  subject,  that  the  common  happiness  gains
more  by  the  preservation  of  the  rule,  than  it  could
do  by  the  removal*  of  the  inconyeniency.^  But
when  the  adherence  to  «  public  treaty  would  en-
slave a  whole  people ;  would  block  up  seas.,  rivers,
or  harbours;  depopulate  cities;  condemn  fertile.
regions  to  eternal  desolation ;  eat  off  a  country
from  its  sources  of  provision,  or  deprive  it  of  those
commercial  advantages  to  which  its  climate,  pro-
duce,' or  situation  naturally  entitle  it:  the  magni-
tude of  the  particular  evil  induces  us  to  can  in
question  the  obligation  of  the  general  rale.  Moral
Philosophy  furnishes  no  precise  sohitionjo  these
doubts,  she  cannot  pronounce  that  any  rule  of
morality  is  so  rigid  as  to  bend  to  no  exceptions ;
nor,  on  the  other  hand,  can  she  comprise  these
exceptions  wjthin  any  previous  description.  She
confesses  that  the  obligation  of  every  law  depends


•Ji
X


iv.i.


rLokeiliM.
jAota,  jlL


upon  4ts  ultimate  utility  y  that  thk  utility,  having
a  finite  and  determinate- value,  situations  may  be
feigned,.-  and  consequently  may.  possibly-  arise,  in
which  the  general  tendency  is  outweighed  by  the
enormity  of  the  particular  mischief:  but  she  re*
^callsj-  at  the  same  time,  to  the- consideration 'of  the
inquirer,  the  almost  inestimable  importance,  as  of
other  general  rules  of  relative  justice,  so  especially
or  national  and  personal  fidelity ;  tne  unseen,  if
not  unbounded,  extent  of  the  mischief  which  must
follow  from  tfie  want  of  it ;  the  danger  of  leaving
it  to  the  sufferer  to  decide  upon  the  comparison
of  particular  and  general  consequences ;  and  the
still  greater  danger  of  such  "decisions  being  drawn
kito  future,  precedents.^  If  treaties,  for  instance,
be  no  longer  binding  than  whilst  they  are  conve-
nient, or  until  the  inconveniencv.  -aecerfd  to  a*
certain  point,  (which  point  must  be  fixed  by  the
judgment,  or  rather  by  the  feelings^  of  the-  com-
phuning  party ;)  or  if  such  an  opinion,  after  being'
authorised  by  a  few  examples,  come  at  length  to
prevail ;  one,  and  almost  the  only  method  ofavert-
mg  or  closing  the  calamities  of  war,  of  either  pre-
venting or  putting  a  stop  to  the  destruction  of
mankind,  is  lost  to  the  world  for  ever..  We  do
not  say  that  no  evil  can  exceed  this,  nor  any  pes-*
siblc  advantage  compensate  it ;  but  we.  say  that  a
loss,  which  affects  ail,  will  scarcely  be  made  up '
to  the  common  stock  of  human  happiness  by  any
benefit  that  can  be/procured  to  a  single  nation,
which  k however  respectable,  when  compared  with
any  other  single  nation,  bears' an  inconsiderable
proportion  to  the  whole.  These,  however,  are
the  principles  upon  which' the- calculation  is  to  bo
formed.  It  is  enough  in  this  place,  to  remark
the  cause  which  produces  the  hesitation  mat  we
Sometimes  feel,  in  applying  rules  of  personal  pro-
bity to  the  conduct  of  nations;

As  between  individuals  itjs  found  injpossible
to  ascertain  every  duty  by  an  immediate  reference
to  public  utility,  not  only  because  such  reference
is  oftentimes  tod  remote  for  .the  direction  of  private
consciences,  but  because  a  multitude  of  cases  arise
in  which  it  is  mdiflercntlothe  general  interest  by-
what  rule  men  act,  though  it  be  absolutely  neces-
sary that  they  act  by  some  constant  and  known
rule  or  other:  and  as,  for  these  reasons,  certain
positive  constitutions  are  wont  to  be  established  in,
every  society,  which,  when  established,  become  aa
obligatory  as  the'  original  principles  of  natural
justice  themselves;  so,  likewise,  it  is  between  io^
dependent  communities.  Together  with  those,
maxims  of  universal  equity  which  are  common  to
states  and  to  individuals,  and  by  which  the  rights
and  conduct  of  the  one  as  well,  as  the  other,  ought
to  b$  adjusted,  when  they  fall  within  the  scope
and  application  of  such  maxims ;  there  Exists  also
amongst  sovereigns  a  system  of  artificial  jurispru-
dence, under  the  name  of  the  law  qfnaiwns.  Ill
this  code  are  found  the  rules  which  determine  the
rightyto  vacant  or  newly  discovered  countries}
those  which  relate*  to  the  protection  of  fugitives,
the  privileges  of  ambassadors,  the  condition  and
duties  of  neutrality,  the  immunities  of  neutral
ships,  ports,  and  coasts,  the  'distance  from  shore  to,
which  these  immunities  extend,  thd  distinction
between  free  and  contraband  goods,  and  a  variety
of  subjects  of  the  same  kind.  Concerning  which
examples,  and  indeed  the  principal  part  ofwhat  is
called  the  jus  gentium,  it  may  be  observed^  that,
the  rules  derive  their  moral  force,  fhy  which  I
mean  the  reganbt&t  ought  to  be  paid  to  them  by
14*


16B


MORAL  AND  POLITICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


tfre  ooneaenoos  of  sovereigns,)  not  from  their  in-
ternal reasonableness  or  justice,  for  many  ef  them,
are  perfectly  arbitrary,  nor  yet  fipom  the  authority
by  which  they  were  estobfished,  for  the  greater
part  have  grown  maenefoW  into  usage,  without
any  public  compact,  formal  acknowledgment,  or
even  anown  original  ;<  but  simply  from  the  fact  of
their  beui^  established,  and  the  general  duty  of
conforming  to  established  roles  upon  questions,
and  between  parties,  where  nothing'  but  positive
regulations  can  prevent  disputes, 'and  where  dis-
putes are,  followed  by  such  destructive  conse*
guencjes.  The  first  of  the  instances  vthkbwe  have
just  now  enumerated,  may  be  selected  for  the  illus-
tration of  this  remark. '  The  nations  of  Europe
consider  .the  sovereignty  of  newly-discovered  coun-
tries -as  belonging  to  the  prince  or  state  whose
Subject  makes  the  discovery :  and  in  pursuance  of
this  rule,  it  is  usual  for  a  navigator,  who  falls  upon
an  unknown  shore,  to  take  possession  of  it,  in
the  name  of  his  sovereign  at  home,  by  erecting
.  his  standard,  or  displaying  his  flag  upon  a  desert
coast  Now  nothing  can  lie  more  fanciful,  or  less
substantiated  by  any  considerations  of  reason  or
justice,  than  the  right  which  such  discovery,  or
-  the  transient  occupation  and  idle  ceremony  that


selves  to  submit  to  this  pretension^  Yet  when  we
reflect  that  the  claims  to  newly-discovered  coun-
tries can  hardly  tie  settled,  between  the  different
nations  which  frequent  them,  without  some  posi-
tive, rule  or  other;  that  such  claims,  if  left  un-
settled, would  prove  sources  of  ruinous  and  frtal
contentions;  that  the  rule  already  propose^,  how-
ever arbitrary j  possesses  one  principal  quality  ofa
rute^—determination  and  certainty:  above  all,
that  it  is  acquiesced  in,  and  that  no  one  has  power
to  substitute  another,  however  he  might  ..con-
trive a  betterl  in  its  place :  when  we  reflect  upon
these  properties  of  the  rule,  or  rather  upon  these
consequences  of  rejecting  its  authority,  we  are  led
to  ascribe  to  it  the  .virtue  and  obligation  of  a  j>re-
cept  ef  natural,  justice,  because  we  perceive  in  it
that  which  is  the  foundation  of  justice  itself, —
public  importance  and-  utility.  And  a  prince  who
should  dispute  this  rule,  for  the  want  or  regularity
in  its  formation,  or  or  intelligible  justice  in  its
principle,  and  by  such  disputes  should  disturb  the
tranquillity  of  nations,  and  at  the  same  time  lay
-tike  foundation  of  future  disturbances,  would  be
httle  less  criminal  than  he  who  breaks  the  public
peace,  by  a  violation  of  engagements  to  which  he
had  hnneelf  consented,  or  by  an  attack  upon  those
national  rights  which  are  founded  immediately  in
the  law  or  nature,  and  in  the  first  perceptions  of
equity.  The  same  thing  may  be  repeated  of  the
rules  which  the  law  of  nations  prescribes  in  the
other  instances  that  were  "mentioned,  namely,  that
the  ofjscurity  of  their  origin,  or  the  arbitrariness  of
their  principle,  subtracts  nothing  from  the  respect
that  is  doe  to  than,  when  once  established. -


'.  Wat  may  be  considered  with  a  view  to  its
em/set  and  tts  conduct.

The  justifying  causes  of  war,  are,  deliberate
invasions  of  right,  and  the  necessity  of  main-
taining such  a  balance  of  power  amongst  neigh-
bouring nations,  as  that  no  single  state,  ox  con-


fedesecy  of  states,  be  strong  enough  to  ovanrhefao
thereat'  The  objects  of  iust  war,  are,  precaution,
defence,  or  reparation.  In  a  large?  sense,  every
just,  war  is, a  defentiu  ,war,  inasmuch  as  every
just  war  suppose*  an  injury  perpetrated,  *&>
temnfteoVor  feared.

*fhe  iqtufjicient  causes  or  unjustifiable  mo-
tives of  war,  are  the  family  alliance*,  the  personal
friendships,  of  the  personal  quarrels,  of  princes;
the  internal  disputes  which  are  carried  on  in  other
nations ;  the  justice  of  other  wars;  the  extension
-of  territory,  or  of  trade^  the  misfortunes  or  acci-
dental weakness  of  a  neighbouring^*  rival  nation.

There  are  too  lessons  of  rational  and  sober
policy,  which,  *f  it  were  possible  to  inculcate  them
into  the  councils  of.  princes,  would  exclude  .many
of  the  motives  of  war,  and  allay  thar  restless  am*
bition  which  is  constantly  stirring  up  one  part  of
mankind  against  another.  . .

The  first  of  these  lessons  admonishes  princes
to  "place  their  glory  and  their  emulation,  not  in
extent  of  territory,  bat  in  raisins;  the  greatest
quantity  of  tapjiiness  out  of  a  given  territory.''.
The  enlargement  of  territory  by  conquest  is  not
only  not  a  just  object  of  war,  butin  the  greater  part
of  the  instances  in  which  it  is  attempted,  not'even
desirable.  It  is  certainly  not  desirable  where  it
adds  nothing  to  the  numbers,  the  enjoyments,  or  ,
the"  security,  of  the  conquerors.  What. com-
monly is  gsiped  to  a  nation,  by  the  annexing  of
new  dependencies,  or  the  subjugation^  of » other
countries  to  its  dominion,  but  a  wider  frontier  to
defend  j  more  interfering  claims  to  vindicate;
more  quarrels,  more  enemi^a,  more  rebeffidns,  to
encounter ;  a  greater  force  to  keep  up  by  sea  arid
bind;  more  services  to  provide  for,  and  more
establishments  to  pay  1  And,  in  order  to  draw
from  these  acquisitions  something  that  may  make
up  for  the  charge  of  keeping  them,'  a  revenue  is  to
be  extorted,  or  a  monopoly  to  be  enforced  and
watched,  at  an'  expense  which  coats  half  their,
produce.  Thus  the  provinces  are  oppressed,  in
order  to  pay  for  being  ill-governed ;  and  the  ori-
ginal-state is  exhausted  in  maintaining  a  feeble
authority  over  discontented  subjects.  No  assign-
able portion  of  country  is  benefited  by  the  change ;
and  if  the  sovereign  appear  to  himself  to  be  en-
riched or  strengthened,  when  every  part  of  hk
dominion  is  made  poorer  and  weaker  than  it  was,
it  is  probable  that  ne  is  deceived  by  apppearances*
Or  were  it  true  that  the  grandeur  of  the  prince  is
magnified  by  "those  exploits ;  the  glory  which  is
purchased,  and  the  ambition  which  is  gratified,  by
the  distress  of  one  country  -without,  adding  to  the
happiness  of  another,  which  at  the  game  time
enslaves  the  new  and  impoverishes  the  ancient
part  of  the  empire,  by  whatever  names  it  'may  be
known  <jt  flattered,  ought  to  be  an  object  of  uni-
versal execration ;  and  oftentimes  not  more  so  to
fhe  vanquished,  than  to  the  very  people  whose
armies  or  whose  treasures  have  achieved  the
victory.

There  are,  indeed,  two  eases  in  which  the  ex-
tension of  territory  may  be  of  real  advantage,  and
to  both  parties.  The  first  is.  where  an  empire
thereby  reaches  to  the  natural  boundaries  which
divide  it  from  the  rest  of  the  world.  Thus  we  ac-
count the  British  Channel  the  natural  boundary
which  separates  the  nations  of  England  and
France:  and  if  France  possessed  any  countries  on
this,  or  England  any  cities  or  provinces  on  that,
side  of  the  sea,  recovery  of  such  towns  and  district!


OF  WAS,  AND  OP  MILITARY  ESTABLISHMENTS.


W


toTwftftl  nay  be  baled  their  natural  sovereign,
though  it  ma j  not  baa  Just  reason  for  ccmmericing'
War,  would  be  a  proper  roe  to  make  of  victdry.
The  other  casew,  wh^reneifehbcroring  states,  being
severalty  too  small  and-weak  to  defend  themselves
against  the  dangers'  that  surround  them,  eaa  onlv'
he  safe  by-  a  strict  and  constant  junction  of  their
strength:  here  conquest  -will  enect  the  purposes
of  eoniexkratioe  ana  alliance;  and  the  union  which
if  proposes  »  often  more  done  and  permanent  than
that  which  results  from  voluntary  association.
Thro,  if  theheptarehy  had  continued  in  England,
the  different  kingdom  of  it  might  have  separately
fallen  a  prey  to  foreign  invasion:  and  although
the  interest  and  danger  of  one  part  of  .the  island
were  in  troth  common  to  every  other  part^it  might
have  been  difficmlt'to  nave  circulated  this  persua-
sion, amongst,  independent  nations,  .or  »to  have
united  them  in  any  regular  or-  steady  opposition
to  their  continental  enemies,  had  not  the  valehr
and  fortune  uf  an  enterprising  prince  moorporated
t^e  whete.lnto  a  single  monarchy.  Here,  tke  con-
quered gamed  as  much  by  the  revolution,  as  the'
.conqueror*,  in  like  manner,  and  for  the'  same
reason,  when;  the  two  royal  families  of  Spain
were  met  together  in  one- race  of  princes,  and  the
several  provinces  of  France  hao*  devolved  into  the
sossessjon  of  a  single  sovereign,  it  became  unsafe
fcr  the  inhabitant*  of  Great  Britain  any  longer  to
remain  nncfer  separate  governments.  The  union
of  England  and  Scotland,  which  transformed  two
quarrelsome  neighbours'  into  one  powerful  empire,
and  which  was  first  brought  about  by  the .  course
of  succession,  and  afterwaros  completed  by  amica-
ble convention,  would  have  been  a  fortunate  oan-
clusion  of  hostilities/had  it  been  effected  by  the
operations  of  war, — These  two  cases  being  ad-
mitted, namely,  the  obtaining  of  natural  bounda-
ries' and  barriers,  aud  the  including  under  the  seine
government  those  who  have  a  common  .danger
and  a  common  enemy  to  guard  against-,  I  know
.not  whether  a  third  can  be  thought  of,  in  which
die  extension  of  empire  by  conquest  is  useful  even
to  the  conquerors.

The  second  rule  of  prudence  which  oughtto  be
recommended  to  those  who  conduct  the  anairs  of
nations,  is,  "  never  to  pursue,  national  Honour  as
distinct  from  national  interest."  This  rule  ac-
knowledges that  it  is  often  necessary  to  assert  the.
lwnourotanationforthesakeof  itemterest  The
spirit,  and  courage  joi  a- people,  are  supported  by
nattering  their  pride.  Concessions  which  betray
too  much  of  fear  or  weakness,  though'  they  relate
to  points  of  merer  ceremony^  invite  demands  and
attacks  of  more  serious  importance,  Our  rule
allows  all  this;  and  only  directs  that,  when  points
of  honour  become  subjects  of  contention  between
sovereigns,  or  are*  likely  to  be  made  the  occasion  of
war,  they  be  estimated  with  a  reference  to  utility,
vubnattby  themselves.  "  The  dignity  of  his  crown,
the  honour  of  his  hag,  the„glory  of  ids  arms/'  in
the  mouth  of  a  prince;  are-  stately  and  imposing
terms;  but  the  ideas  they  inspire,  are  insatiable.
It  may  be  always  glorious  to  conquer,  whatever
be  the  justice  or  the  war,  or  the  price  of  the  vic-
tory. The  dignity  of  a  sovereign  may  not  permit
him  to  recede  from  claims  of  homage  and  respect,
at  whatever  expense  of  national  peace  and  happi-
ness they  are  to  be  maintained  -f  however  unjust
they  may  have  been  in  their  original,  or  in  their
continuance  however  useless  to  the  possessor,  or
inortirying  and  vexatious  to  other  states.  The  pur-


suit of  honour,  when  set  loose  from  the  admonitions
-of  prudence,  becomes  in  kinna  wild  and  romantic
passion :  eager  to  encage,  and  gatherwg  fury  jn  its
progress,  it  is  checked -by  no  difficulties,  repelled  by
no  dangers ;  fry  forgets  or  despises  these  considera-
tions of  safety,  ease;  wealth,  and  plenty,  which,  in
the  eye  of  true  public  wisdom,  compose  the  objects
to  which  the  renown*  of  arms,  the  fame  of  "victory*
arCenly  instrumental  and  subordinate.  Tbepur-'
suit  of  interest,  on  the  other  hand,  is  a  sober  pnnci*
pie ;  computes  costs  and  consequences ;  is  cautious
of  entering  into  war  j  stops  in  time :  whenregujated
by  those  universal  maxims  of  relative  justice  which
betojig«to  the  affairs  of  communities  as  wefl  asuf
private  persons,  it  is  tne  right  principle  for  nations
to  proceed  by:  ewawhen  it  trespasses  upon  these
regulations,  it  'is  -much  less  dangerous,  •  because
much  more  temperate  than  the  other.  v .
,  II.  The  conduct  ojf  war.— If  the  cause  and  end
of  war  be  justinabfeY  aH  the  means  that  appear
necessary  to  the  .end,  are  justifiable  -also.  This
is  the  principle  which  defends  jkhew  extremities
to  which  the  violence  ofwar  usually  proceeds :  for
since  war  is  a  contest  by/orce  between  parties  who *
acknowledges  no  eonuuon  superior,  and  since,  it '
indades  not  in  its  idea  the  suppositioaof  any  con-
tention which  should  place  limit*  to  the  opera-
tions of  force,  it  -has  naturally  no  boundary  but
that  in  which  force  terminates,—-*!*  obstruction
of  the  life  agaa^  winch  the  force  is  dweted.  Let
it  be  observed,  however,  that  the  ncense  of  war  au-
thorises no  acts  of  hostility,  but  wj^at  are  necessary
or  conducive  to  the  end  and  object  of  the  war.
Gratuitous  barbarities  borrow  no  excuse  from  thia
plea:  of  winch  kind  is  every  cruelty  and  every  nv
suit  that  serves  only  to  ixaspentie  the  suffering!, .
or  to  incense  the  hatred,  uf  an  enemy,  without
weakening  Ma  strength,  or  many  banner  tending
to  procure  his  submission;  such  as  the  slaughter
of  captives,  the  subjecting  of  them  to  moignitif*
unr  torture,  the  violation  of  women,  the  profenation
of  temples,  the  demolition  of  public  buildings,
libraries,  statues,  and  in  general  the  destruction
or  deJaang  sf  works  that  conduce  nothing  to  an-
noyance or  defence.  These  enormities  are  pro-
hibited not  only  by  the  practice  of  civilized  nations,
but  by  the  law  of  nature  itself;  si  having  no  proper  (
tendency  to  accelerate'  the  termination,  or  acconv-  '*
plish  the  object  of  the  wiu* ;  and  as  containing  that
jvhich  in  peace  and  war  is  equally  unjustifiable,?--
ultimate  and  gratuitous  <mschie£

-There  are  other  restrictions  imposed  upon  the
conduct'  of  war,  not  by  die  law  of  naturepnmarny.
but  by  the  tarts  qf  war,  first)  and  by  the  law  of
nature  as  seconding  and  ratifying  the  laws  of  war.
The  laws  of  war  are  pert  of  the  law  of  nations;
and  founded,  si  to  their  authority,  upon  the  same
principle- with  the  rest  of  that  code,  namely,  upon
the  feet  of  their  being  established,  no  matter  when
or  by  whom  j  upon  the  expectation  of  their  being
mutually  observed,  in  consequence  of  that  esta-
blishment; and  upon  the  general  utility  which
results  from  such  observance.  The  binding  force
of  these  rules  is  the  greater,  because  the  regard
that  is  paid  to  them  must  be  universal  or  none,
Tb*hreach  of  the  rule  can  only  be  punished  by  the
'subversion  of  the  mile  its&f  r  on  which  account,  the
whole  mischief  that  ensues  from  the  laws  of  those
salutary  restrictions  which  such  rules  prescribe,  is
justly  chargeable  upon  the  first ^ aggressor.  To
this  consideration  may  be  referred  $e  duty  of  re-
training in  war  from  poison  and  from  ntmstina-


1ft


MORAL  AND  PO^TIPAL  PHILOSOPHY,


tion~ If  the  lew  of  nature
it  may  be  dfaneult  to


Jy  be  consulted,
t  .between  these


»nd  Other  methods  of  destruction,  which  ore  prac-
ticed without  scruple  by  nations  at  war.  If  it  be
lawful  to  kill  an^enemy  at  alt;  it  «eems  jawfti  to
do  soi>y  one-  mode  of  death  as  well  -a*  by.  another ;
ty'a  dote  of  poison,  a*  by  the  .point  of  'a  sword ;
by  the  hand  of  an  assassin,  as  by"  the  attack,  of  an
army:  for  if  it  be  said  that  one  -species  of  assault
leaves  to  an  enemy  toe  power  of  defending  itself
against  it,  and  that  the  other  two  does  not;  it  may
fee  answered,  that we  posseseet  least  die  same  right
to  eut  off  an  enemy's  defenec,'that  we  have  to  seek
his  destruction.  In  this,  manner  might  the.  ques-
tion be  debated,  if  there  existed  n6-nile  or  law  of
war  upon  the  subject.  But  when  we  observe  that
such  practices  ate  at  present  excluded  by  the  usage
and  opinions  of  civilized  nation*;  that  the  first  re-
couneto  them  would  be  followed  by  instant  re-
taliation; that' the  mutual  license,  which  such
attempts  must' introduce,  would  fill -both  sides  with
the  ttuserjrof  continual  dread  and  suspicion,  with-,
eat  adding-to  the  strength  or*  success^  of  -either ;
that  when  the  example  came  to~be  more  generally
imitated,  which  it  soon  would  be,  an>r  the  senti-
ment that  condemns  It  had  been  once  broken  in
upon,  it  would  greatly  aggravate  the.  horrors  and
calamities  of- war,  yet  procure  nd  superiority  to
any  of  the  nations  engaged  in  it';  when  we  view
these  effects,  we  join  in  the  public  renrobationVof
such  fetal  expedients,  a»o£  the  admission  amongst
mankind  of  new  and  enormous  evils  without  ne-
cessity or  advantage. — The  law  of  nature,  we  see
at  length,  forbids  these  innovations,  as  so  many
tfansgrjessionB  of  a  beneficial  general  ruts  actually
subsisting. -*

The  license  of  war  then  acknowledges  two  limi-
tations: it  authorises-  po  hostilities  Which  have  not
an  apparent  tendency  to  effectuate  the  object  of  the
War;  it  respects  those  yositivc  laws  which  the
custom  of  nations  hath  sanctified,  and  which
whilst  they  are  mutually-  conformed  to,  mitigate
the  calamities  of  war;  without  weakening  its  ope-
rations, or  diminishing  the  power  or  safety  .of
belligerent  states.


Xong  end  various  experience  seems  to  have
convinced  the  nations  of  Europe/  that  nothing
but  a  standing  army  can  oppose  a  standing  army,
where  the  numbers  on  each  side  bear  any  mode-
rate proportion  to  one  Another.  The  first  stand- '
mg  army  that  appeared  in  Europe  after  the  fall  of
die  Roman  legion,  was  that  which  was  erected  in
France.,by  Charles  VII.  about  the  middle  of  the
fifteenth  century :  and  that  the  Institution  hath,
sirice  become  general,  can  only  be  attributedto-the
superiority  and  success  which  are  everywhere  ob-
served to  attend  it.  The  truth  is,  the  closeness,
regularity,  and  quickness,  of  their  movements ;  the
unreserved^bistantaneous,  and  almost  mechanical,
obedience  to  orders ;  the  sense  ofpcrsonal  honour,
and  the  familiarity  with  danger,  which  belong  to
a  disciplined,  yeterari,  and  embodied  soldiery,  give
such  vnrmnes*  and  intrepidity  to  their  approach,
such  weight,  and  execution  to  theirattackx  as  are
not  to  be  withstood  by  loose  ranks  of  occasional  and
newly-levied  troops,  who  are  liable,  .by  their  inex-
perience to  disorder  and  confusion,  and  in  whom
fear  is  constantly  augmented  by  novelty  arid,  sur-
prise. It  is  possible  that  a  militia,  with  a  great


excess  of  numbers,  and  a  ready  supply  of  reerosw
may  sustain:  a  defensive  or  a  flying,  war  against
regular  .troops :  it  is  also  true  that  any  service,
which  keeps  .soldiers -for  a  while  together)  and
inures  them  by  little  and  little  to  the  ^a^ts  of  war
and  the  dangers  >of  action,-  transforms  them  in  ef-
fect into  a  standing  army*  But  upon  this  plan  it
may  be  necessary  tor  almost  a  whole  nation  to  go
out  to  was  to  repel  an  invader;  beside  that  a  peo-
ple so  unprepared -must  always  have  the  seat,  and  .
With  it  the  miseries;  of  war  at  home,  being  utterly
incapable  of  carrying  their  operations  into  a,  foreign
country.  - ^

From  the  acknowledged^anperiority  ef  standing
armies,  it  follows,  not  only  -that  it  is.  unsafe*  for  a
nation  to  disbarfd  its  regular  troops,  whilst  neigh-
bouring kingdoms  retain  theirs;  but  nlso  that
regular  troops  provide  for  the  public  service  at  toje
least  possible  expense.  I  suppose  a  certain  quan-
tity ot  military  strength  to  be  neoeseary,  and  I  say
that  a  standing  army  costs  the  community  less
than  eny  other  establishment  which  presents
to  an  ^enemy  the  .same  force.  The  constant
drudgery  of  fow  employments  is  not  only  incom-  "
patible  with  any  great  degree  of  perfection  or  ex-
peitness  in  the  profession  of  a  soldier,  but  the  pro-
fession of  a  soldier  almost  always  unfits  men  for
the  business  of  regular  occupations.  Of  three  in-
habitants of  a  village,  it  is  better  that  one'  should
addict  himself  entirely  to  arms,  -and  the  other  two
stay  constantly  at  "home  to  cultivate  the  ground,
than  that  all  three  should  mix  the  avocations  oT  a
camp,  with  the  business  of  husbandry.-  By  the
former  arrangement,  the  country  gains  one  con*-
plete  soldier,  «nd  two  Jndustrious  husbandmen  ;-
from  the  latter  k  receives  three  raw  mihtfe-men,
-who  are  at  the  same  time-three  idle  and  profligate
peasants.  It  should  be  considered  also,,  that  the
emergencies.  6f  war  wait  not  for  seasons.  When)
there  is  no  standing  army  ready  for  immediate
service,  it  may  be  necessary  to  call  the  reaper  from
the  fields  ihliarveBt2  or  the  ploughman  in  seed
time;  and  the  provision  of  a  whole  year  may
perish  by  the  interruption  of  one  month's  labour.
A  standing -army,  therefore,  is  not  only  a  more
effectual,  but  a  cheaper,  method  of  providing  for
the  public  safety,  than  any  other,  becauaelt  adds
more  than  any  other  to  the  common  .strength,  and
takes  less  from  that  which  composes  the  wealth  of
a  nation, — its  stock  of  productive  industry.

There  is  yet  another  distinction  between  stand-
ing armies  and  militias,  which  deserves  a  more  at-
tentive consideration  than  any  that  has  been
mentioned.  When  the  state  relies,  for  its  defence,
upon  a  militia:,  it  is  necessary  that  arms  be  pu$
into  the  hands  of  thtf  people,  at  large.  The  naV
Iitia  itself  must  be  numerous^  in  proportion,  to  the
want  or  inferiority  of  its  discipline,  and  the  imbe-
cilities or  defects  of  its  constitution. '  Moreover,  as
sucji  a  militia  must  be  supplied-hy  rotation,  allot-
ment, or  some  mode  of  succession  whereby  they
who  have  served  e  certain  time  are  replaced  by
fresh  drafts  from  the  country ;  a  niucn  greater
number  will  be  instructed  in  the  use  jaf  arms,  and

S'U  have  been  occasionally  embodied  together,
in  are  actually  employed,  of  than  are  supposed
to  be  wanted,  at  the!  same  time.  Now  what
effects  upon  the  civil  condition  of  .the  country  may
be  looked  for  from  this  general  diffusion  of  the
military  character,  becomes  an  inquiry  of  great
importance  and  delicacy.  To  me  it  appears  doubt-
ful whether  any  government  can.  be  long  secure,


OF  WAB,  AND  OPJflUTA&Y  ESTABUSHMENT&


where  tint  peopfe  are  acquainted  with  the  use  of
anas,  and  accustomed  to  resort  to  them.  Every
foction  wiH  find  fceelf  at  the 'head  of  an  army ;
every  disgust  will  excite  commotion,  and  every
commotion  become^ tavil  war.'  Nothing, Dfejfcape,
can  .govern  £  nation  of  armed,  citpene  out  that
whk£  governs  an  army,-vde«potism. I  do  not,


that  a  regular  government  would  become  ssmain  long.


despotic  by  training  up  its  subjects  to  the  know-
ledge and  exercise  of  arms,  but  that  it  Would  see-
long  be  forced  to  give  way  to  despotism,  in  some
*^^p^Kri&i^caontrfwwldbe)&)e
to  what  is  evett  Worse  than  a-  settled  and  constitu-
tional  despotism—to  perpetual  rebellions,  and.  to'
perpetual  revolutions;  to  short  and  violent  usur-
pafesnsj  to  (he  anecennve  tyieaayof  governors,
rendered  cruel  and  jealous'by  thedanger  andin-
etahifty. of  their  situation.

The  same  purposes  of  "strength  and  efficacy
which  make  a  standing  army  necessary  at  all,
make  it  necessary  in  mixed  governments,  that
this  army  he  submitted  to  the-  management  and
dbeetmn  of  the  prince':  forhowever  wetLa  nopuhu*
council  may  be  qualified  for  the  offices  of  legisla-
tion, His  altogether  unfit  for  the  conduct  of  war :
in  which,  success  usually  depends  upon  vigour
and  enterprise ;  upon'  secrecy,  dispatch,  and'una-


„  ;  upeb  a  omck  perception  opportunities,.

and  the  power  of  setting  every  opportunity
immediately.  It  is  likewise  necessary  that  the
obedience 'of  an  army  be  as  prompt  ana  active  as
possible ;  for  which  reason  it  ought  to  he  made  an
obedience  of  will  and  emulation.  Upon  this  con-
sideration is  founded  the  expedieney^ipaving  to
tile  prince  not  .only  the  government -and  destina-
tion of  the  army,  but  the  appointment  and  pro-
motion oi  its  officers:  because  *  a  ~aesjgn  is  then
alone  fikeff  to  be^executed  with  seal  fend  fidelity
when  the  person  who  issues  the  order,  cheeses
the  mstrammtts,  and- rewards  the -service.  To
which  we  may  subjoin,  thai,  in  governments  tihejjweterity,  thefr  Jdndred,  and  their  country.


165


ours,  if  the  direction  and  officering  of  the  army
were  placed  in  the  hands  of  the  dexnoeratic  part  of
the  constitution,  this  power,  added  to  what  they
already  possess,  would  so,  overbalance  all  that
would  be  left  of  regal  prerogative,  that  little  would
remain  of  monajchy  m  the  constitution,  but  the
and  expense;  nor. would  these  probably'


Whilst  wo  describe,  however,  theiad  vantages' of
standing  ^armies,  we  must  not  conceal  the-danger.
These  nropertie*.  of  their  constitution,— the  sol-
diery bemg  separatad  in  a  mat  degree  from  the
rest  of  the  comntunitv,  their  being  closely  linked
amongst  themselves  by  habits  of  society  and  sub-
ordination, and  the  dependency  of  the  whets
chain  upon  the  wiU  and  fiwoiu;  of  the  prince,—
however  essential  they  may  be  to  the  purposes  fo*
which  armies  are  kept  up,  give  them  an  aspect  in
no  wise-  fovourable  to  public  liberty. The  aanger,

L jg  diminished,  by  maintaining,  on  all

w  as  much  alliance  of  interest,  and  at
much  intercourse  of  sentiment,  between  the  mili-
tary part  of  foe  nation  and  the-other  crdsr*  of  tlp>
people,  as  are  consistent  with  the  union  and  die*
dphne  of  «p(  army.  For  which  purpose,  officers
at  the  army,  upon  whose  disposition  towards  the
commonwealth  a  great  deal  maydepend,  should
be  taken  from  the  principal  families  of  the  country,
and  at  the.  saffl^ time  also  be  encouraged  to  esta-
blish in,  it  fiunifies  of  their  own,  as  wefl  as  be  ad-
mitted to  seats -in  the  senate,  to  hereditary  distinc-
tions, and  to  all  the  civil  honours  and  privileges
that  are  compatible  with  their  profession:  which
circumstances  of  connexion  and  situation  will  jive
them  such  a  share  uv4he  general  rights  or  the
people,  and  so  engage  their  inclinations  on  the
side  or  public  Eherty,  as  to  afford  a  reasonable  se-
curity that  theycarmothe  brought,  by  any  promises
oY  rjeisosa*  aggrandisement,  to -assist,  in  the  exe*
— r  -  of  meesujes  which  nnght,  enslave  their


x .  -  ■*>


UQRM  PAULINA:

J  ■  ,.'.<.--■ THE  TRtTTEt

•'.:•: ■■ , .' ;.  r . %  ';•',- '. >

or,  -\- •  ' ■'

-,  •  ^  '  '  " ' '4 • ' '  j  •'  ^ • -  »^

TflE  &3fll>lTJItE  HISTORY  OF  ST.  PAJJL  EVINCED,


s  ..


TO  TBtE  RIGHT  REVEREND  TOHW  LA#*  D.  IX  / r

L . u>np?Bum€fe<ov  kiuaxa  aio>  acpovbt, ' -  -  .  v  • ?-

Ata  testimony  of  esteem  for  his  virtues  afid  learnings  and  of  gratitude  for  the  long  and.
fatyfuX  friendship  with  vhich  the  Author  hat  been  honoured  fry  him,  this  attempt  to  confirm  the
Evidence  of  the  Christian  History  is  inscribed,  by  his  qfccttonaU  and  matt  obUged  Servant;
»  ^ • - "  '  .  .  '  fcJPALEY.


< -  CHAPTER  I.

Exposition^  of  the  Argument,  '

Tjfr  Vohrnie  of  Chrkian  Scripture*  contains
thirteen  letter*  purporting  to, be  written  by  St.
Paul  :->  contains  also  *  book,  which,  amongst
other  things  professes  to  deliver  the  hwtary,ot  ra-
ther memous  of  the  history,  of  this  name  person.
By  assunriar  the  Mttineness  of  the  letters,  we
may  prove  the  substantial  troth  of  the  history :  or,
by  assuming  the  troth  of  the  history,  we  may  ar-
gue strongly  m  support  of  the  genuineness  of  the
letters.  But  1  assume  neither  one  nor  the  other.
The  reader  is  at  liberty  to  suppose  these  writings
to  have  been  lately  discovered  in  the  library  of  t&
'  Eacurial,  and  to  come  to  our  hands  destitute  of  any
extrinsic  or  eoMatteral  evidence  whatever :  aotf  the
argument  I  am  about  to  offer  is -calculated  to  ahoy*,
shit  a-comparison  ef  the  different  writings  would,
even  under  these  dicanjstancea,  arjbrd  good  rea-
son to  believe  the  pemons  and  transactions  to  have
been  real,  the  letters  authentic,  and  the  narration
in  the  main  to  be  true.

Agreement  or  conformity  between  letters  bear-
ing the  name  of  an  ancient  author,  and  a  -received,
history  of  that  author's  life,  does  not  necessarily
establish  the  credit  of  either  j  because,

1.  The  history  may,  like  Middfeton's  Ufe  of
Cicero,  or  JoronV  Life  of  Erasmus,  have  been
wholly, or  in  pact,  compiled  from  the  letters;  in
which  case  it  is  manifest  that  the  history  adds  no-
thing to  the  evidence  ahteady  afforded  by  the  let-
ters; or,

2.  The  letters  may  have  been  febricated  out  of
the  history ;  a  species  ef  immature  which  .is  cer-
tamly  practicable;  and' which,  without  any  acces-
sion or  proof  or  authority,  would  necessarily  pro-
duce the  appearance  of  conststeney  and  agree-


3:  The.,  history  end  letters  may  have  heen
founded  "upon  some  authority  common  to  both;  as
•upon  reports  and  traditions  which  prevailed  in.  the
age  in  which  they  were  comnosea,  or  upon  some-
ancient  record  now  lost,  which  both  writers  con-  -
suited;  in  which  case  also,  jthe  letters,  without
being  genuine,. may  exhibit  marlfs  of  conformity;
with  the  history;  and  the  bist^y,  without  being  '
true,  may  agree  with  the  letters.

Agreement,  therefore,  or  conformity,  is  only  to
he  relied"  upon  sa<  far .  as  we  can  exclude  these
seven!  jupWsrfdons.  Now  die  point  to  be  noticed
is,  that  in  the  three  cases  above  enumerated,  con-
formity must  be  the  effect  of  design  Where  the
history  is  oomjpiled  from  the  letters,  which  fe  the
first  case,  the  design  and  oomposition  of  the  work;
are  in  general  se  confessed,  or  made  so  evident  by
comparison,  as  to  leave  us  in  no  danger  of  con-
founding the  production- with  original  history,  or
of  mistaling  it  for  an  independent  authority.  The
agreement,  it  is  probable,  will  be  close  and  imiform,
arid  will  easily  be  perceived  to  result  from  the  in-
tention of  the  author,  and  from  the  plan  and  con-
duct ef  his  worh.^Where  the  letters  are  fabri-
cated from  the  history,  which  is  the  second  case,
it  is  always  for  tty  purpose  of  imposing  a  forgery
upon  the  public ;  and  in  order  to  give  colour  and
probability  to  the  fraud,  names,  places,  and  cir-
cumstances, found  in  the  Ustory,  may  be  stu-
diously introduced  into  the  letters,  as  well  as  a  gen-
eral consistency  be  endeavoured  to  be  maintained.  '
But  here  it  is  manifest  that  whatever  cohgruity
appears,  jm  the  consequence  of  meditation,  artifice,
and  design.— The  third  case  is  that  wherein  the
history,  and  the  letters,  without  any-direct  privity
or  communication  with  each  other,  derive  then?
materials  from  -the  same  source;  and,  by  reason
of  their  common  original,  famish  instances  of  ac-
cordance  a^ correspondency.  This  is  a  i"  s—
166


EXPOSITION  OF  TfiE  ARGUMENT.


107


lb  Which  we  nnmV  altow  it  to  pe/nwsnTAs  for
etneaent  writinga  to  be  placed ;  and  it  is  a  situation
in  which  it  is  mote  difficult  to  <nstfagbjah  spu-
rfous  from  genuine  writings,  than  in  either  of  the
casee^escnbeoS  in  the  presiding  suppositions ;
inasmuch  ss  the  congruities'  observable  ate  so  far
accidental,  a*  that  they  are  not  produced  by  the,
immediate  transplanting  of  names  audi  ctrcmnr'
atannes  out  of  one  writing  into  the  other;  But
although,  with  respect  to  etch,  other,  the
ment  in  these  writing*  be  mediate  and
yet,  it  is  not  properly  or  absolutely
became*  with  respect  to  the  conn
from  which  the  information  of  (he  writers  proceeds,
it  is  studied  and  factitious.  The  case  of  which  we
treat  must;  as  to  the  letters,  be  a.  case  of  forgery :
and  when  the  writer  wju>  U  personating^  another,
sits  down  to  his  compoaition— whether  ha  have
thefcistory  with  which  We  now  compare  the  letters,
or  some  other  record  before  him ;  or  whether  he.
have  only  loose  tradition  and  reports-to  g*  by— he
must  adapt  his  imposture*  as  well  as  he  can,  tp
wftfthe  finds  in  these  accounts ;  andhis  adaptations
„  Will  be  the  result  of  counsel,  scheme,  and  industry:
art  must  he  employed :  arid  testigee  will  appear  of
irianagement  and  design.-  Add  to  this,  that,  in
most  or  the  jfohuwing  examples,  the  circumstances
m  which  the  coincidence  is  remarked,  are  of  too
particular  and  domestic  a  nature,  to  have  floated
down  upon  the  stream  of  general  tradition.  -

Of  the  three  cases  which- we  have  stated,  the'
dblereaoa  between  the  first  and  the  two  others  is,
that  m'the  first  the  design  may  be  feir  and  honest,
to  the  Others  it  imjst  be  accompanied  with  the
consciousness  of  fraud ;  but  in  aA  there  is  design.
In  examining,  therefore,  the  agreement  between
ancient  writings,  the  character  of  truth  and  ori-
ginality is  unoeaignednesB^  and' this  test  applies'
to  every  supposition }  for,  whether  we  suppose  the
history  to  be  true,  but  the  letters  spurious;  or,  me
letters  to  he  genuine,  but  the.  history  false ;  or,
lastly;  husehW  to  belong  V)  both—the  history  to
be  amis*,  and  the  letters  fictitious <  the  same  in-
ference will  result— that  either  therewiil  be  ne
agreement  between  them,  w  the  agreement  will
he  the  eflfect  of  design.  Nor  will  it  elude  the
principle  of  this  rule,  to  suppose  the  same  person
to  have  been  the  author  of  all  the  letters,  or  *ven
-thejruthor  both  of  the  letters  and  the  history;  for
no  Vass  desifcn  is  necessary  -to  produce  coincidence
between  different  parts  o$  a  man's  own. writings,
ewpeoaQy  when  they  are  made  to  take  the  diftr-
ent  forms  of  a  history,  and  of  original  letters,  4han
tn  adjust  them  to.the  circumstances  found  in  any
other  writing.  -  «•  * •

With  respect  to  those  ^writings,  of  the  New
Testament  which  are  to  be  the  eubject  of  our
'  conederanon,!  think,  that,>s  to  the  au-


wtiaty  of  4he  epistles,  this  argument,  where  it
sumaentrr  sustained  by  instances,  to  nearly
tdusrve;  for  I  cannot  assign  a. supposition  of


forgery*  in  which  coincidences  of  the  hind  we
Inquire  after  ere .  likely  to  appear.  As  to  the
history,  it  extends  t&  these  poinuf;— It  proves  the
general  reality  of  the.cnx^nwtoncee :  it  proves  the
tnetorian's  knowledge  of  mesa  circumstances.  In
the  present  instance  it  confirms  bis  pretensions  ojf
having  been  a  contemporary,  and  in  the  Jatter  part
of  hit  history,  a  companion,'  of  St.  Paul.  In  a
word,  it  eatabfishes  the  substantial  truth. of  the
narration:  and  sutetontfai  truth  is  that,  which,
in  every  historical  inquiry,,  ought  to  be.  the  first


thingsongfc-an^andaBCertah^:^
groundwork  of  every  other  observation*.,

The  reader  then  will  please  to  remember  this
ward  vndetignedne**,.  s&^ denoting  that  upon
which  the  construction  and  validity  of  our  argu-
ment chiefly  depend.  v  ,

Am  Xo  the  proofs  of  undesjjtaednessi  I  shall  in
thk  place  jay  httle;  4br  1  Juufrather  the  readeVs
persuasion  should  arise,  firom  the  instances  them-
eetve%  and  the-  separate  remarks  with  which  they
may  be  accompanied, then  'from  any  previous  for*
mulary  or  description,  of  argument  in, a  great
plurality  of  examples,  I'trust  he  will  be  per/ectly
convinced  that  no  design  o#  contrivance  whatever
havbeen-eaecvised :  wjJrf  some  of  the  coincidences  >
elleg<ed<  appear  to  be  nninito;jcircuiu)ue,  or  oblique,
let  him  reflect  that  this  verV  indirectness  and  sub-
tilityja  that  which  gives*  mice  and;  propriety  to
the  example.  Broad,  .obvious,  and  explicit  agree-
ments prove  little ;  Jbecause  ft  may  be  .suggested
that  the' insertion  of  such  is  the  onfinaxy  expe-
dient of  every  forgery :  arid  though  they  may  occur,
and  probably  wilj  occur  u>  genuine  writings,  yet
it  cannot  be  proved  that  they  are  pecuhar  to  these;
Thuswhat  St  Pa^l  declares  in  chap.  jd.  of  LCor.
concerning  Uiekinstitutioni>f  the  eudharieW?  Fdr
I  have  received  of  the  Lord  that  which,  i  also  de-
livered unto  you,'  that  the  Lead  Jesus,  the  same
night  in  which  he  warbetraved,  took  brnadV  and,
when  When  given  thanks  he  brake  it,  and  said,
Take;  eat;  tins  is  my  body  which,  is  broken  fur
you ;  this  do  in  remembrance  of-me"*— though  It
be  in  does-  arid  vefbal  cettfifflB*ty  wrth$he  ejcxount
of  the  mme  transaction  preserved  by  St  Luke,  hi
yet  a  conformity  o£  which  no  use  can  be  made  in
our  argument ;  for  if  it  should  be  objected' that  this
was  a  inem-reatal  from  the  gospel,  borrowed,  by
the  author  of  the  epistle;,  for  the  purpose  of  setting
or?  Ins  conumtionhy  an  appearance  of  agreement
with  the  received  account  of ,  the  Lord's  annper,  1
should-  not  know  how  to  repel -the  insinuation.  In
like  mansier;  the  description  which  St  Paul  gives
of  himself  in  his  epistle  tcthe  Fhifcppiane  (iu.  5.)
— "Circoinefeea^the  eighth  'day,  of  the  stock -of
Israel,  of  the  tribe  of  Benjamin,  an  -Hebrew  of
the  Hebrews; .as touching  the  law,  a  Pharisee.;
.concerning  seal,  peiBecutinffjthe  Church  -n  touch-
ing the  righteousness  which  is  in  the- law,  hlame*
less"— 4s,  made  vup  of  pertkulav  so.  plainly  de-  _
iivered  concerning  hhn,in  the*  Acts  or  the  Apos-
tles, the  Epistle  to  the.  Remans,  and  theEpiatte  to
the  Galatuna,  that  I  cannot  deny  but  that  it
would  be  easy  for  an  impostor,  who  was  fabric*,
tingi*  letter  in  the  name  of  St  Paul,  to  collect
these  articles  into  one  view;  :Thia,  therefore,  is  a
conformity  which  we  dp  npt  adduce.  But  when
r  read  in  the  ActeTof  the  Apostlest  that  when
"  Paul  came  to  Derbe  and  Lustra,  behold  aoertain
disciple  wan,  thenvnamed  Tjmetneus,  the  son  of
a  certain  Woman  which  we*  a  jewetos"  and  when,
in  an  epistle  addressed  to  Timothy  I  find  him  re-
minded  of  his  "having, known  the  Holy  Scrip.
tuieeJVomA  child;"'  which  implies  that  he  must;
on  one  side  or  both,  have  been  brought  up  by
Jewish  parent*:  I  conceive  that  I  remark  acoin-
ddence  which  showe  by  its  very  obliquity }  tbtt
scheme  was  not  employed  In  its  «bnnation.  y  In
like  manner,  if  a  coincidence  depend  upon  a<com>
jnrison  of  dates,  or  rather  of  circumstance*  from
which  the  dates  are  gathered— the  more  intricate
thatcomparh^slmufce;  the  more  numerous  the
mtwrmediato  stops  through  whic^  ihe  cojtichiskm


160


BORiE  PJ&ULINJ&*


Is  deduced  j  fo  ft  worf,  the  roan  c#et*jfe«#  the hv
▼estistrian  is*  the  Vetter,  because  the  agreement
which  finely  results  U  thereby  father  removed
from  the  suspicion  ef  couUivaucc,  afiectatkm,  or
design/  :And  it  'fltkoaftd  be  remembered, '


S'j  these  coincidences,  that  it  j»  one  thing  to  he
nute,  arafairthej.to  he  dreearkaj*;  one  thing
to  be  unobserved,  and  BJiether  to  be  obscure;  «f»
thing  to  l»eircuitous  or  obtique,  and  another  to
be  lofted,  dubious,  or  fancifeL  And  this  distinc-
tion ought  always  to  be-  Maine*  in.  ear  thoughts.
The  very.pjuticulartty  of  St.  Paul's  epistles:
the  perpttnal  recurrence  of  names  of  persons  and
i  to  the  mcidente  of


flAcss;  the  frequent

hh>  private  JUe,  and  the  cueojaaUaeee  of  .hie  c
_dmW  and  histoid ;  and  *he: ;  connexion  and  paral-
lehttn^)f  theee'wrth  the  earn©  circumstances  in
the  Acts' of  the  Apostles,  so  an  to  enable  us,  for
the  .moat  part,  to  txnriront  them  one  with  sjibtfaer  ;
so  well  as  the  relation  which  summts  between  the
ejicwnatances,  as  merjtioned  or  referred  to  in  the
dtterent  Epistles  aflbrduo  tncotiadenhle  proof
ef  thegetfumees  of  the  writings,  and  the  natty  of
the  tca^actiDna.  For  as  no  advertency  ie  *«*-
ifcaent  to  guard  against  slips  and  contradictions,
when  ^bxumstancea  are  Bmjtipjied,  and  when
they  are  liable  to  be  detected  by  a


accounts  equally  circumstantial,  an.  mmostor,  I
should  expect,  would  either  have  avoided  particu-
lars entirely,  contenting;  himself,  with  doctrinal


Discussions,  nmnsi  precepts,  and  general  ranee-
Hon;*  or  fr,  for  the  sake  of  imitating  St  PanTe
styfc,  heeiiooJd  have  thought  it  necessary  to  inter-
sperse his  composiHon  with  names  arid  chcum-
stanees,  he  would  Jiave  placed  them  out  of  the
roach  ef  comparison  withthe  history.'  And  I  am
cdnfirmedan  this,  opinion  by  the  inspection  of  two
attempts  to  counterfeit  fit  Paul'*  episttea,  which


the  LsAdiceans,  extant  m*  Latin,  and
•by  Fabriciue,  in  his  eottection  of  apocryphal  scrip-
tures. The  otter  purports  to  be  an  epistle  of  St.
Paul  to  the  CprintDJanVin  answer  to  an  ephtfe
from  tbje  Oormthians  4o  htm.  This  was- trans*
luted  V  Sowderus  Jrom  a  copy  in  dhe-  Armmian
language  whkh  had  been  sent:  to  W.  Whiston,
and  was  s^erwaroay  from  a  more*  perfect  copy
procureurat  Aleppo,  published  by  hie  sons,-  as  an
^pendittothekiedition  of  Moses  Chorenensia.  No,
Greek-copy  exists  of  either :  they  are  tot.ohFrnot
supported  By  ancient  testimony,  but  they,  are  nega-
tived and  excluded;-,  as  they  have  never  found  ad-
""  mission  into  any  catalogued  apostolical  writings,
acknowledged  by,  or  knewrrto,  the  early  ages  of
Christianity,  fir,  the- first  of  these  I  found,  as  I
expected,*,  total e^tftsn/ofrircumataaces. It  is

,  . — v  •  m  •■■

•  Una,  however,  inojt  not  be~  misoneentood.  •  A
parson  writing  to  bis  friends,  and  upon  a  subject  in
watch  the  transactions  of  his  own  life  ware  concerned,
would  probably  be  led,  in  thefcoune  of  his.  letter,-  esptf-
dalty  if  it  was  a  loaf  olie,  to  refer  to  passages  found  in
his  history .,  A  person  addressing  a*  epistle  te  the  pub.
lie  at  large,  or  under  the  form  of  an  episUefetiverraf  a
dissDurse  upon  some  ipeculative'areuiaeuti  would,  nor,
H  is  probable,  sseet  with  an  occasion  of  alluding  to  the '
eJreuoistances.of  hielife  stall;  he  might,  or  be  ftrigfit
noH;  tee-chance  on  either  sMe  is  nearly  equal.  This  U
the  situaUoiujf  the  catholic  epistle.-  Although,  there'-
-lore,  the  presence  of  these  allusions  and  sjraemeaui  be
'a  valuable  acewwion  to  the  arguments  by  .which  the
authenticity  of  a  letter  is  maintained,  yet  the  want  of
mam  oartajMy  forme  no  positive  objettfony


aimnry -a  coileetioit  of  aent]imcea-rfon>  the  cam**,
ical  epistles,  strung '  together  with  ^ery  httje  skifl.
The  second,  which  i*  a  more  vemute  ana>


forgery,  is
aona  who*  v.


introduced  with  a  list  of  nenke  of
wrote  to  Sc  Paul  from  Corinth  j  ami  si
preceded  by  an  account  sufficiently  partirnlar  of
the  manner  in  which  the  epistkwa*  sent  from
Corinth  to  St.  Pam,  and  toe  answer  returned.
But  they  .are  names.,  which  no  one  eyer  heard  of;
and  the  account  it  far  lmnoawibsi  to*  eomfjjae  yrtth
any  thms  ibund  in  the  Acts,  or'  in  the  o*her< epis-
tles, .^lifa  notTiee^ssary  forme  to  pomt  out  the
mternal  marks  of .  srjfuriousnese  and  imppstuje
which  these  compoeitidna  betray  -T  |mt  it.  was  ne-
cessary to  observe,  that  they  do  not  aflbrd  those
coincidences  which  we  propose  as  ptoofij  ofauthej>
ticity  in  the  epistle*  which  .we  defend. .

Mavihff  explained  the  general  scheme  and  lorm-
ation  of  tiM-ajrgunent,  I  mayJM  fsjsmitted  to  sub-
join a  brief  account  of  the  manner  ef  conducting  ja.
.  I  have  disponed  the  srweral  ineUnofs  of  agree-
ment, under  separate  numbere:  aaweH  to  marhr
more  sensibly  the  divisions,  of  the  subject,  ipmr
another  purpsse,  nn  that  the  reajfer  may  themls/
be  reminded  that  dm  instances  am  iiulependent  of
one  another.  I  have  advanced  nothing  wmch'l  did
not  think  probable ;  but  the  <Jegree  of  ^ffobahifity
by  which  aifferent  instances  sn  supported,  hi  un-
oVmbtedly  very  different  If  the  reader,  therefore,
meetewilha  number  which  ftsntaina  aninstanee
that  appears  to  mm  nnsss1smctoryr  or>  founded
he  will  dwniss  that  nu '


the  anrument,  but  vndxout  prejudioa  to  any  other.
He  w3l  have  occasion  also  to  observe' that  the  oa.


incidences  discoverable  in  some  epistles  ace  i
fewer  .and  weaker  than  what  am  supplied  by
others.  But-hewili  auV|to  hi»- observation  thai
important  chxnnjstai>Qo--that  whamvejr  aayfcttsiiai
the  onginaT  of  one  epusje,m  some  measure  esta-
blishes the  authority  of  the  .jest.  For,  whether
these  epistles  he  genuine  or-  apurioua,  every  thing
abQUt  tbem  indicates  that  they  name  fiam  the
same  hand.-  The  diction,  which  it'ia  extremely
difficult  to  imitato,  preserves  ha  jresembknee  and
peouliaxity^hroughottt  all  the  epsstfes.  Nummv
oos  espreWkma  and  singularities  of  style,  found  in
no  other  part  of  4he  New  Testament,  aie-repaatod
in  different  epistlejr;  and  occur  in  their  respective
places,  without  the  smallest  appearance  of  mree  or
art.  An  involved  arminmntahon,  frequent  obscu-
rities, especially  in  the  order,  and  transition  of
thought,  piety,  vefeemence,  jJectkm,  bursts  of
rarjtore,  ami  of  unparalleled^  sublimity,  are  pro-
perties, all  or  must  of  them^  discernible  in  every
letter  of  the  collection.  But  although  these  epis-
tles bear  strong  marks  of  proMsdingfiopm  the  same
hand,  I  think  5  is  stiH  more  certain  that  they  were
.originally  separate  pAibucations.  They  form  no
continued  story?  they  compose  no  regular  correal
pondenee ;  they  comprise  not  the  •  transactions  of
any  particular  period;  they  cany  on  no  connexion
ef  argument;  they  depend  not  upon  one  another;
except  tn  one  or  two  instances,  they  refer  not-
4o*on*  another*.  1  will  farther  undertake  to  amy,
that  'no  stu4y  xpr  care*  has;  been,  emploved  to
produce'  or  preserve  an  appoarnncc-of  oonsaslency
amongst  them.  All  which  obeervati6ns  show  that
theyswere  not  intended  by  the-  peoon,  whoever
he  was,  that  wiota  them,  to  oome-  forth  or  he  read
together :  that  they  appeared  at  first*  separately,
and  hmve  been  collected  since/  • x

Theprc^erpujrposeof  the  fblle^ring  work  is  to


EPISTLE  TO  THE  ROMANS.


1G9


bring  together,  from  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  and
from  the  different  epistles,  such  passages  as  fur-
nish examples  of  undesigned  coincidence;  but  I
have  so  Jar  enlarged  upon  this  plan,  as  to  take
into  it  some  circumstances  found  in  the  epistles,
which  contributed  strength  to  the  conclusion,
though  not  strictly  objects  of  comparison.

It  appeared  also  a  part  of  the  same  plan,  to
examine  the  difficulties  which  presented  them-
selves  in  the  course  of  our  inquiry.

I  do  not  know  that  the  subject  has  been  pro-
posed or  considered  in  this  view  before.  Ltidovi-
cns,  Capellus,  Bishop  Pearson,  Dr.  Benson,  and
Dr.  Lardner,  have  each  given  a  continued  history
of  St  Paul's  life,  made  up  from  the  Acts  of  the
Apostles  and  the  Epistles  joined  together.  But
this,  it  is  manifest,  is  a  different  undertaking
from  Che  present,  and  directed  to  a  different  pur-
pose.

If  what  is  here  offered  shall  add  one  thread  to
that  complication  of  probabilities  by  which  the
Christian  history  is  attested,  the  reader's  atten-
tion will  be  repaid  by  the  supreme  importance
of  the  subject;  and  my  design  will  be  rally  an-


The


The  first  .
epistle,  and  upon  wnich  a  good
will  be  founded;  is  the  following : —

"  But  now  I  go  unto  Jerusalem,  to  minister
unto  the  saints:  for  it  hath  pleased  them  of
Macedonia  and  Achaia,  to  make  a  certain  contri-
bution for  the  poor  saints  which  are  at  Jerusa-
lem."—Rom.  xv.  35,  36.

In  this  quotation  three  distinct  circumstances
are  stated — a  contribution  in  Macedonia  for  the
relief  of  the  Christians  of  Jerusalem,  a  contribu-
tion in  Achaia  for  the  same  purpose,  and  an  in-
tended journey  of  St  Paul  to  Jerusalem.  These
ciicumstances  are  stated  as  taking  place  at  the
same  time,  and  that  to  be  the  time  when  the  epis-
tle was  written,  Now  let  us  inquire  whether  we
can  find  these  circumstances  elsewhere,  and  whe-
ther, if  we  do  find  them,  they  meet  together  in
respect  of  date.  Turn  to  the  Acts  of  the  Apos-
tles, chap.  xx.  ver.  S,  3,  and  you  read  the  follow-
ing account:  "When  he  had  gone  over  those
parts,  (viz.  Macedonia,)  and  had  ffiven  them
much  exhortation,  he  came  into  Greece,  and
there  abode  three  months;  and  when  the  Jews
laid  wait  for  him,  as  he  was  about  to  sail  into  Sy-
ria, he  proposed  to  return  .through  Macedonia."
From  this  passage,  compared  with  the  account  of
St  Paul's,  travels  riven  before,  and  from  the  se-
quel of  the  chapter,  it  appears  that  upon  St.  Paul's
second  visit  to  the  peninsula  of  Greece,  his  inten-
tion was,  when  he  should  leave  the  country,  to
proceed  from  Achaia  directly  by  sea  to  Syria;
but  that  to  avoid  the  Jews,  who  were  lying  in
wait  to  intercept  him  in  his  route,  he  so  for
changed  his  purpose  as  to  go  back  through  Mace-
donia, embark  at  Philippi,  and  pursue  his  voyage
from  thence  towards  Jerusalem.  Here,  therefore,
is  a  journey  to  Jerusalem;  but  not. a  syllable  of
any  contribution.  And  as  St  Paul  had  taken
Y


several  journeys  to  Jerusalem  before,  and  one  also
immediately  after  hwjlrst  visit  into  the  peninsula
of  Greece,  (Acts  xviii,  31,)  it  cannot  from  hence
be  collected  in  which  of  these  visits  the  epistle
was  written,  or  with  certainty,  that  it  was  written
in  either.  The  silence  of  the  historian,  who  pro*
fesses  to  have  been  with  St.  Paul  at  the  tune,
(c.  xx.  v.  6,)  concerning  any  contribution,  might
lead  us  to  look  out  for  some  different  journey,  or
might  induce  us,  perhaps,  to  question  -the  con-
sistency of  the  two  records,  did  not  a  very  acci*
dental  reference,  in  another  part' of  the  mater
history,  afford  us  sufficient  ground  to  believe  that
this  silence  was  omission.  When  St.  Paul  made
his  reply  before  Felix,  to  the  accusations  of  Ter-
tullus,  he  alleged,  as  was  natural  that  neither
the  errand  which  brought  him  to  Jerusalem,  nor
his  conduct  whilst  he  remained  there,  merited  the
calumnies  with  which  the  Jews  had  aspersed*
him.  "  Now  after  many  years  (i.  e.  of  absence,)
I  came  to  bring'  alms  to  my  nation,  and.  offer'
ings;  whereupon  certain  Jews  from  Asia  found'
me  purified  in  the  temple,  neither  with  multitude,
nor  with  tumult,  who  ought  to  have  been  here
before  thee,  and  object,  if  they  had  aught  against
"  Acts  xxiv.  17— 19.  TTiis  mention  of  aim*
offerings  certainly  brings  the  narrative  in  the
'  ear  to  an  accoraancy  with  the  epistle ;  yet
,  lam  persuaded,  will  suspect  that  this
was  put  into  St.  Paul's  defence,  either  to
the  omission  in  the  preceding  narrative,  or
iy  view  to  Buch  accordancy.
all,  nothing  is  yet  said  or  hinted,  con-
o  the  vlacc  of  the  contribution;  nothing
concerning  Macedonia  and  Achaia.  Turn  there-
fore to  the  First  Epistle  to  the  Corinthians,
chap.  xvi.  ver.  1 — 4,  and  you  have  St.  Paul  de-
livering the  following  directions  r  "  Concerning
the  collection  for  the  saints,  as  I  have  given  or-
ders to  the  churches  of  Galatia,  even  so  do  ye :
upon  the  first  day  of  the  week  let  every  one -of
you  lay  by  him  in  store  as  God  hath  prospered
him.  that  there  be  no  gatherings  when  I  come.
And  when  I  come,  whomsoever  you  shall  approve
by  your  letters,  them  will  I  send  to  bring  your
liberality  unto  Jerusalem ;  and  if  it  be  meet,  that
I  go  also,  they  shall  go  with  me."  In  this  pas-
sage we  find  a  contribution  carrying  on  at -Co-
rinth, the  capital  of  Achaia.  for  the  Christians  of
Jerusalem ;  we  find  also  a  hint  given  of  the  pos-
sibility of  St.  Paul  going  up  to  Jerusalem  him*
self,  after  he  had  paid  his  visit  into  Achaia:  but
this  is  spoken  of  rather  as  a  possibility  than  as
any  settled  intention  ;  for  his  first  thought  was,
"  Whomsoever  you  shall  approve  by  your  letters,  ;
them  will  I  send  to  bring  your  liberality  to  Jeru-
salem:" and  ill  the  sixth  verse  he  adds,  "that  ye
lay  bring  me  on  my  journey  whithersoever  I
o.  This  epistle  purports  to  be  written  after  St
aul  had  been  at  Corinth :  for  it  refers  through-
out to  what  he  had  done  and  said  amongst  them
whilst  he  was  there.  The  expression,  therefore,
"when  I  come,"  must  relate  to  a  second  visit;
against  which  visit  the  contribution  spoken  of  was
desired  to  be  in  readiness.

But  though  the  contribution  in  Achaia' be  ex-
pressly mentioned,  nothing  is  here  said  concern-
ing any  contribution  in  Macedonia.  Turn,  there-
fore, in  the  third  place,  to  the  Second  Epistle  to
the  Corinthians,  chap.  viii.  wr.  1 — 4,  and  you
will  discover  the  particular  which  remains  to  be
sought  for;  "Moreover,  brethren,  we  do  you  to


TO


bORJE  PAUUNJB.


year  ago/
vaneed  ai


wk  of  the  graee  of  God  bestowed  on  the  cfcureto
AT  AfbzeeVnia;  how  that,  in  a  great  trial  of  af-
fliction, the  abundance  of  their  joy  and  their  deep
poverty  abounded  unto  the  riches  of  their  libera-
lity: for  to  their  power,  I  bear  record,  yea  and
beyond  their  power,  they  were  willing  of  them-
•elves :  praying  us  with  much  entreaty,  that  we
would  receive  the  gift,  and  take  upon  us  the  fel-
lowship of  the  ministering  to  the  saints."  To
which  add,  ehap.  ix.  ver.  2 :  "  I  know  the  forward-
of  your  mind,  for  which  I  boast  of  you  to
of  Macedonia,  that  Achaia  was  ready  a
ago."  In  this  epistle  we  find  St  Paul  ad-
n  as  far  as  Macedonia,  upon  that  second
visit  to  Corinth  which  he  promised  in  his  former
epistle ;  we  find  also,  in  the  passages  now  quoted
from  it,  that  a  contribution  was  going  on  in  Ma-
cedonia at  the-  same  time  with,  or  soon  however
sallowing,  the  contribution  which  was  made  in
Aehaia;  but  lor  whom  the  contribution  was  made
does  not  appear  in  this  epistle  at  all:  that  in-
tonation must  be  supplied  from  the  first  epistle.
Here,  therefore,  at  length,  but  fetched  from
three  different  writings,  we  have  obtained  the
several  circumstances  we  inquired  after,  and
which  the  Epistle  to  the  Romans  brings  to-
gether, viz.  a  contribution  in  Achiaia  for  the
Christians  of  Jerusalem ;  a  contribution  in  Ma-
cedonia for  the  same ;  and  an  approaching  jour-
ney of  Si.  Paul  to  Jerusalem.  We  have  these
drcumstance«--each  by  some  hint  in  the  pas-
sage in  which  it  is  mentioned,  or  by  the  date  of
the  writing  in  which  the  passage  occurs — fixed
to  a  particular  time;  and  we  have  that  time  turn-
ing out  upon  examination  to  be  in  all  the  same :
namely  towards  the  close  of  St.  Paul's  second
visit  to  the  peninsula  of  Greece.  *  This  is  an  in-
stance of  conformity  beyond  the  possibility,  I  will
venture  to  sav,%of  random  writing  to  produce.  I
also  assert,  that  it  is  in  the  highest  degree  im-
probable' that  it  should  have  been  the  effect  of
contrivance  and  design.  The  imputation  of  de-
sign amounts  to  this :  that  the  forger  of  the  Epis-
tle to  the  Romans  inserted  in  it  the  passage  upon
which  oor  observations  are  founded,  for  the  pur-
pose of  giving  colour  to  his  forgery  by  the  ap-
pearance of  conformity  with  other  writings  which
were  tnen  extant.  I  reply,  in  the  first  place,  that,
if  he  did  this  to  countenance  his  forgery,  he  did  it
fertile  pui  lose  of  an  argument  which  would  not
strike  one  reader  in  ten  thousand.  Coincidences
so  circuitous  as  this,  answer  not  the  ends  of  for-
gery ;  are  seldom,  I  believe,  attempted  by  it.  In
toe  second  place,  I  observe,  that  ne  must  have
had  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  and  the  two  epis-
tles to  the  Corinthians,  before  him  at  the  time.
In  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles  (I  mean  that  part  of
the  Acts  which  relate  to  this  period,)  he  would
have  found  the  journey  to  Jerusalem ;  but  nothing
about  the  contribution.  In  the  First  Epistle  to  the
Corinthians  he  would  have  found  a  contribution
going  on  in  Achaia  for  the  Christiana  of  Jerusa-
lem, and  a  distant  hint  of  the  possibility  of  the
journey ;  but  nothing  concerning  a  contribution
m  Macedonia.  In  the  Second  Epistle  to  the  Co-
rinthians he  would  have  found  a  contribution  in
Macedonia  accompanying  that  in  Achaia ;  but  no
intimation  for  whom  either  was  intended,  and  not
a  word  about  the  journey.  It  was  only  by  a  clo-e
and  attentive  collation  of  the  three  writings,  that
he  could  have  picked  out  the  circumstances  which
he  has  united  in  his  epistle;  and  by  a  still  more


nice  examination,  that  he  could  have  <
them  to  belone  to  the  same  period.  In  the  third
place,  I  remark,  what  diminishes  vary  much  the-
suspickm  of  fraud,  how  aptly  and  connectedly  the
mention  of  thccircumstances  in  question,  vis.  the
journey  to  Jerusalem,  and  of  the  occasion  of  that
tourney,  arises  from  the  context,  "Whensoevet
I  take  my  iourney  into  Spain,  I  will  come  to  you;
for  I  trust  to  see  you  in  my  journey,  and  te>  be
brought  on  my  way  thitherward  by  you,  if  first  I
be  somewhat  filled  with  your  company.  Bui  now
I  go  unto  Jerusalem,  to  minister  unto  the  saints  j
for  it  hath  pleased  them  of  Macedonia  and
Aehaia  to  make  a  certain  contribution  fbt  the
poor  saints  which  are  at  Jerusalem.  It  hath
pleased  them  verily,  and  their  debtors  they  are:
for  if  the  Gentiles  have  been  made  partakers  or
their  spiritual  things,  their  duty  is  also  to  minis-
ter unto  them  in  carnal  things^  When  therefore
I  have  performed  this,  and  have  sealed  them  to
this  fruit,  I  will  come  by  you  into  Spain."  Is
the  passage  in  italics  like  a  passage  foisted  in  for
an  extraneous  purpose*  Does  it  not  arise  from
what  goes  before,  oy  a  junction  as  easy  as  any
example  of  writing  upon  real  business  can -far*
nish?  Could  any  thing  be  more  natural  than
that  St.  Paul,  in  writing  to  the  Romans,  should
speak  of  the  time  when  he  hoped  to  visit  them:
should  mention  the  business  which  then  detained
him ;  and  that  he  purposed  to  set  forwards  upon
his  journey  to  them  wnen  that  business  was  com-
pleted?

No.  II. t

By  means  of  the  quotation  which  formed  the
subject  of  the  preceding  number,  we  collect  that
the  Epistle  to  the  Romans  was  written  at  the
conclusion  of  St.  Paul's  second  visit  to  the  penin-
sula of  Greece ;  but  this,  we  collect,  not  from  the
epistle  itself,  nor  from  any  thing  declared  con-
cerning the  time  and  place  m  any  part  of  the
epistle,  but  from  a  comparison  of  circumstances
referred  to  in  the  epistle,  with  the  order  of  events
recorded  in  the  Acts,  and  with  references  to  the
same  circumstances,  though  for  quite  different
purposes,  in  the  two  epistles  to  the  Corinthians.
Wow.  would  the  author  of  a  forgery,  who  sought
to  gain  credit  to  a  spurious  letter  by  congruitiee,
depending  upon  the  time  and  place  in  which  the
letter  was  supposed  to  be  written,  have  left  that
time  and  place  to  be  made  out,  in  a  manner  so
obscure  and  indirect  as  this  is  1  If  therefore  coin-
cidences of  circumstances  can  be  pointed  out  in
this  epistle,  depending  upon  its  date^or  the  place
where  it  was  written,  whilst  that  date  and  place
are  only  ascertained  by  other  circumstances,  such
coincidences  may  fairly  be  stated  as  undesigned.
Under  this  head  I  adduce

Chap.  xvi.  21—33:  "  Timotheus,  my  work-
fellow,  and  Lucius,  and  Jasont  and  Sosipater,  mv
kinsmen,  salute  you.  I,  Tertws,  who  wrote  this
epistle,  salute  you  in  the  Lord.  Gains,  mine  host,
and  of  the  whole  church,  saluteth  you:  ana
GLuartus,  a  brother."  With  this  passage  I  com-
pare, Acts  xx.  4 :  "  And  there  accompanied  him
into  Asia,  Sopater  of  Berea ;  and,  of  the  Thessa-
lonians,  Aristarchus  and  Secundus;  and  Gaius
of  Derbe,and  Timotheus;  and,  of  Asia,  Tychicus
and  Trophimus."  The  Epistle  to  the  Romans,
we  have  seen,  was  written  just  before  St.  Paul's
departure  from  Greece,  after  his  second  visit  to
that  peninsula;  the  persons  mentioned  in  the


EPISTLE  TO  THE  ROMANS.


J7I


the  Acts  eje  those  who  accom-
rjanied  him  in  that  departure.  Of  seven  whose
names  are  joined  in  the  salutation  of  the  church
of  Rome,  three,  vfc.  Soeipater,  Gains,  and  Timo-
thy, are  proved,  by  this  pannage  in  Che  Acts,  to
hare  been  with  St  Paul  at  the  time.  And  this  is
perhaps  as  much  coincidence  as  could  be  expected,
from  reality,  though  less,  I  am  apt  to  think,  than
would  have  been  produced  by  design.  Four  are
mentioned  in  the  Acts  who  are  not  joined  in  the
salutation:  and  it  is  in  the  nature  of  the  case
probable  that  there  should  be  many  attending  St
Paul  in  Greece,  who  knew  nothing  of  the  con-,
verts  at  Rome,  nor  were  known  by  them.  In  like
manner,  several  are  joined  in  the  salutation  who
are  not  mentioned  in  the  passage  referred  to  in
Che  Acta.  This  also  was  to  be  expected.  The
OCffwaina  of  mentioning  them  in  the  Acts  was
their  proceeding  with  St  Paul  upon  his  journey.
But  we  may  be  sure  that  there  were  many  eminent
Christians  with  St  Paul  in  Greece,  besides  those
who  accompanied  him  into  Asia.*

But  if  any  one  shall  still  contend  that  a  forger
of  the  epistle,  with  the  Acts  of  the  Apostle*  before
him,  and  having  settled  this  scheme  of  writing  a
letter  ae  from  St  Paul,  upon  his  second  visit  into
Greece,  would  easily  think  of  the  expedient  of
potting  in  the  names  of  those  persons  who  ap-
peared to  be  with -St.  Paul  at  the  time  as  an  ob-
vious recommendation  of  the  imposture:  I  then
repeat  my  observatiqps ;  first,  that  he  would  have
made  the  catalogue  more  complete :  and.  secondly,
that  with  this  contrivance  in  his  thoughts,  it  was
certainly  his  business,  in  order  to  avail  himself  of
the  artifice,  to  have  suited  in  the  body  of  the  epis-
tle, that  Paul  was  in  Greece  when  he  wjote  it,
and  that  he  was  there  upon  his  second  visit
Neither  of  which  he  has  done,  either  directly,  or
even  so  ae  to  be  discoverable  by  any  circumstance
farad  in  the  narrative  delivered  in  the  Acts.

Under  the  same  head,  viz.  of  coincidences  de-
pending upon  date,  I  che  from  the  epistle  the  fol-
lowing salutation:  u  Greet  Priecilla  and  Aquila,
mv  helpers  in  Jesus  Christ,  who  have  for  my  life.
laid  down  their  own  necks;  unto  .whom  not  only
I  give  thanks,  but  also  all  the  churches  of  the
Gehtiles."— Chap,  xvh  3.  It  appears,  from  the
Acts  of  the  Apostles,  that  PriscUla  and  Aquila
had  originally  been  inhabitants  of  Rome ;  for  we
lead,  Acts  xvhL  2,  that  "  Paul  found  a  certain
Jew,  named  Aquila,  lately  come  from  Italy  with


mm  Jason  is  one,  whose  presence  upon  this  oe-
i  very  natarally  accounted  for.  Jason  was  an
at  or  TbessaJonka  in  Macedonia,  and  eater-


»  Of  these  Jason  is
easJea  is  v.
inhabitant

tained  8c  Paal  in  bis  boose  upon  his  first  visit  to  that
country.— Acts  xrii.  7.  Si.  Paul,  upon  this  his  second
visit,  passed  through  Macedonia  on  his  way  to  Greece,
and,  from  the  situation  of  Thessalonica,  most  likely
through  that  city.  It  appears,  from  various  instances
in  the  Acts,  to  have  been  the  practice  of  many  converts,
to  attend  St.  Paul  from  place  to  place.  It  is  therefore
manly  probable,  I  mean  that  it  is  highly  consistent  with
the  account  in  the  history,  that  Jason,  according  to  that
account  a  seeloue  disciple,  the  inhabitant  of  a  city  at
no  peat  distance  from  Greece,  and  through  which,  as
It  should  seem,  St.  Paul  had  lately  passed,  should  have
accompanied  St.  Paul  into  Greece,  and  have  Been  with
him  there  at  this  time.  Lucius  is  another  name  in  the
A  very  slight  alteration  would  convert  A«u««of


into  A«v*«f ,  Lucius  into  Luke,  which  would  produce
aa  additional  coincidence :  for,  if  Luke  was  the  author
of  the  history,  be  was  with  St.  Paul  at  the  time ;  in-
asmuch as,  describing  the  voyage  Which  took  place  soon
after  the  writing  of  this  epistle,  the  historian  uses  the
in*  atxeovw*  misaiiedaway  fromPldttppi  .'•  Aeisxx.1


bis  'wife  Prisdlla,  because  that  Claumus  had
commanded  all  Jews  to  depart  from  Rome."
They  were  connected,  therefore,  with  the  place
to  which  the  salutations  are  sent.  That  is  one
coincidence;  another  is  the  following:  St.  Paul
became  acquainted  with  these  persons  at  Corinth
during  his  first  return  into  Greece.  They  accom-
panied him  upon  his  visit  into  Asia ;  were  settled
for  some  time  at  Ephesus,  Acts  xviii.  19—26,
and  appear  to  have  been  with  St.  Paul  when  he
wrote  from  that  place  his  First  Epistle  to  the
Gorinthians,  1  Cor.  xvi  19..  Not  long  after  the
writing  of  which  epistle  St.  Paul  went  from
Ephesus  into  Macedonia,  and,  "after  he  had
gone  over  those  parts,1'  proceeded  from  thenee
upon  his  second  visit  into  Greece ;  during  which .
visit,  or  rather  at  the  conclusion  of  it,  the  Epistle
to  the  Romans,  as  hath  been  shown,  was  written.
'  We  have  therefore  the  time  of  Sl  Paul's  residence
at  Ephesus-  after  he  had  written  to  the  Corin-
thians, the  time  taken  up  bv  his  progress  through
Macedonia,  (which  is  indefinite,  and  was  probably
considerable,)  and  his  three  months'  abode  in
Greece;  wo  have  the  sum  of  those  three  periods
allowed  for  Aquila  and  Priecilla  going  back  to
Rome,  so  as  to  be  there  when-  the  epistle  before
us  was  written.  Now  what  this  quotation  leads
us  to  observe  is,  the  danger  of  scattering  names
and  circumstances  in  writings  like  the  present,
how  implicated  they  often  are  with  dates  ana
places,  and  -that  nothing  but  truth  can  preserve
consistency.  Had  the  notes  of  time  in  the  Epistle
to  the  Romans  fixed  the  writing  of  it  to  any  date
prior  to  St.  Paul's  first  residence  at  Corinth,  the
salutation  of  Aquila  and  Priecilla  would  have
contradicted  the  history,  because  it  would  have
been  prior  to  his  acquaintance  with  these  persons.
If  the  notes  of  time  had  fixed  it  to  any  period
during  thai  residence  at  Corinth,  during  his  jour-
ney to  Jerusalem  when  he  first  returned  out  of
Greece,  during  his  stay  at  Antioch,  whither  he
went  down  to  Jerusalem,  or  during  his  second
progress  through  the  Lesser  Asia,  upon  which  he
proceeded  from  Antioch,  an  equal  contradiction
would  have  been  incurred;  because  from  Acts
xviii.  2—18,  19—26.  it  appears  that  during  all
this  time  Aquila  and  PriaciUa  were  either  along
with  St  Paul,  or  were  abiding  at  Ephesus.  Lastly,
had  the  notes  of  time  in  this  epistle,  which  we
have  seen  to  be  perfectly  incidental,  compared
with  the  notes  of  time  in  the  First  Epistle  to  the
Corinthians,  which  are  equally  incidental,  fixed
this  epistle  to  be  either  contemporary  with  that,
or  prior  to  it,  a  similar  contradiction  would  have
ensued  ;•  because,  first,  when  the  Epistle  to  the
Corinthians  was  written,  Aquila  and  Priecilla
were  along  with  St.  Paul,  as  they  joined  in  the
salutation  of  that  church,  1  Cor.  xvi.  19;  and
because,  secondly,  the  history  does  not  allow  us  to
suppose,  that  between  the  time  of  their  becoming
acquainted  with  St  Paul  and  the  time  of  St
Paul's  writing  to  the  Corinthians,  Aquila  and
Priecilla  could  have  gone  to  Rome,  so  as  to  have
been  saluted  in  an  epistle  to  that  city ;  and  then
come  bdek  to  St.  Paul  at  Ephesus,  so  as  to  be
joined  with  him  in  saluting  the  church  of  Corinth.
As  it  is,  all  things  are  consistent.  The  Epistle  to
the  Romans  is  posterior  even  fcrfhe  Second  Epis-
tle to  the  Corinthians;  because  it  speaks  of  a  con-
tribution in  Achate  being  completed,  which  the
Second  Epistle  to  the  Cormtbians,  chap,  viii,  it
onlysoncinng.  U  is  snflioirintlytheieh>re posterior


m


HOfUE  PAULINA.


to  the  First  Epistle  to  the  Corinthians,  to  allow
time  in  the  interval  for  Aquila  end  Priscilla  s  re-
tarn  from  Ephesus  to  Rome.

Before  we  dismiss  these,  two  persons,  we  may
take  notice  of  the  terms*  f  commendation  in  which
St  Paul  describes  them,  and  of  the  agreement  of
that  encomium  with  the  history.  "My  helpers
in  Christ  Jesus,  who  have  for  my  life  laid  down
their  hecks ;  unto  whom  not  only  I  give  thanks,
but  also  all  the  churches  of  the  Gentiles."  In  the
eighteenth  chapter  of  the  Acts,  we  are  infomed
that  Aquila  and  Priscilk  were  Jews;  that  St.
Paul  first  met  with  them  at  Corinth;  that  for
some  time  he  abode  in  the  same  house  with  them ;
that  St.  Paul's  contention  at  Corinth  was  with
the  unbelieving  Jews,  who  at  first  "opposed  and
blasphemed,  ana  afterwards  with  one  accord  raised
an  insurrection  against  him;"  that  AquUa  and
Priscilla  adhered,  we  may  conclude,  to  St.  Paul
throughout  this  whole  contest;  for,  when  he  left
the  city,  they  went  with  him,  Acts  xviii.  18.  Un-
der these  circumstances,  k  is  highly  probable-  that
they  should  be  involved  in  the  dangers  and  per-
secutions which  St.  Paul  underwent  from  the
Jews,  being  themselves  Jews ;  and,  by  adhering  to
St  Paul  in  this  dispute,  deserters,  as  they  would
be  accounted,  of  the  Jewish  cause.  Farther,  as
they,  though  Jews,  were  assisting  to  St.  Paul  in
,  preaching  to  the'  Gentiles  at  Corinth,  they  had
taken  a  decided  part  in  the  great  controversy  of
that  day,  the  admission  of  the  Gentiles  to  a
parity  of  religious  situation  with  the  Jews.  For
this  conduct  alone,  if  there  was  no  other  reason,
they  may  seem  to  have  been  entitled  to  "  thanks
from  the  churches  of  the  Gentiles."  They  were
Jews  taking  part  with  Gentiles.  Yet  is  all  this
so  indirectly  intimated,  or  rather  so  much  of  it  left
to  inference,  in  the  account  given  in  the  Acta,
that  I  do  not  think  it  probable  that  a  forger  either
could  or  would  have  drawn  his  representation
from  thence ;  and  still-less  probable  do  I  think  it,
that,  without  having  seen  the  Acts,  ho  could,  by
mere  accident  and  without  truth  for  his  guide,
have  delivered  a  representation  so  conformable  to
the  circumstances  there  recorded.

The  two  congruiUes  last  adduced,  depended
upon  the  time,  the  two  following  regard  the  place,
of  the  epistle.

1.  Chap.  xvj.  23.  "  Erastus,1  the  chamberlain
of  the  city,  saluteth  you1'— of  what  city  ?  We  have
seen,  that  is,  we  have  inferred  from  circumstances
found  in  the  epistle,  compared  with  circumstances
found  in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  and  in  the  two
epistles  to  the  Corinthians,  that  our  epistle  was
written  during  St.  Paul's  second  visit  to  the
peninsula  of  Greece.  Again,  as  St.  Paul,  in  his
epistle  to  the  church  of  Corinth,  1  Cor.  zvi.  3,
speaks  of  a  collection  going  on  in  that  city,  and  of
his  desire  that  it  might  be  ready  against  he  came
thither;  and  as  in  this  epistle  he  speaks  of  that
collection  being  ready,  it  follows  that  the  epistle
was  written  either  whilst  he  was  at  Corinth,  or
after  he  had  been  there.  Thirdly,  since  St.  Paul
speaks  in  this  epistle  of  his  ioumey  to  Jerusalem,
as  about  instantly  to  take  place ;  and  as  we  learn,
Acts  xx.  3,  that  to.  design  and  attempt  was  to
sail  upon  that  ioumey  immediately  from  Greece,
properly  so  .called,  t.  e,  as  distinguished  from
Macedonia;  it  is  probable  that  he  was  in  this
country  when  he  wrote  the  epistle,  in  which  he
speaks  of  himself  as  upon  the  eve  of  setting  out.
tf  in  Greece,  he  was  most  likely  at  .Corinth;  for


the  two  Epistles  to  the  Corinthians  show  that  the
principal  end  of  his  coming  into  Greece,  was  to
visit  that  city,  where  he  had  founded  a  church.
Certainly  we  know  no  place4n  Greece  in  which
his  presence  was  so  probable ;  at  least,  the  placing
of  him  at  Corinth  satisfies  every  circumstance.
Now  that  Erastus  was  an  inhabitant  of  Corinth,
or  had  some  connexion  with  Corinth,  is  rendered
a  fair  subject  of  presumption,  by  that  which  is  ac-
cidentally said  of  him  in  the  Second  Epistle  to
Timothy,  chap.  iii.  20.  I'  Erastus  abode  at  Co-
rinth" St  Paul  complains  of  his  solitude,  and
is  telling  Timothy  what  was  become  of  his  com-
panions: "Erastus  abode  at  Corinth;  but  Tro-
phimus  have  I  left  at  Miletum  sick."  Erastus  was
one  of  those  who  had  attended  St  Paul  in  his
travels,  Aeta  xix.  22:  and  when  those  travels
had,  upon  some  occasion,  brought  our  sposde  and
his  train-to-  Corinth,  Erastus  staid  there,  for  no
reason  so  probable,  as  that  it  was  his  home.  I
allow  that  this  coincidence,  is  not  so  precise  as
some  others,  yet  I  think  it  too  clear  to  be  pro-
duced by  accident :  for,  of  the  manypiaces,  which.
£his  same  epistle  has  assigned  to  different  persons,
and  the  innumerable  others  which  it  might  hove
mentioned,  how.  came  it  to  fix  upon  Corinth  for
Erastus?  And,  as  far  as  it  is  a  coincidence,  it  is
certainly  undesigned  on  the  part  of  the  author  of  the
Epistle  to  the  Romans :  because  he  has  not  told
us  of  what  city  Erastus  was  the  chamberlain ;  or,
which  is  the  same  thing,  from  what  city  the  epistle
was  written,  the  setting  forth  of  which  was  ab-
solutely necessary  to  the  display  of  the  coinci-
dence, if  any  such  display  had  been  thought*  of:
nor  could  the  author  of  the  Epistle  to  Timothy
leave  Erastus  at  Corinth,  from  any  thing  he  might
have  read  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Romans,  because
Corinth  is  nowhere  in  that  epistle  mentioned
either  by-name  or  description.

2.  Chap.  xvi.  1—3.  "I  commend  unto  yon
Phoebe,  our  sister,  which  is  a  servant  of  the
charch  which  is  at  Cenchrea,  that  ye  receive  her
in  the  Lord,  as  beeometh  saints,  ana  that  ye  as-
sist her  in  whatsoever  business  she  hath  need  of
you ;  for  she  hath  been  a  succourer  of  many?  and
of  myself  also."  Cenchrea  adjoined  to  Corinth ;
St.  Paul  therefore,  at  the  time  of  writing  the  let-
ter, was  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  woman
whom  he  thus  recommends.  But,  farther,  that
St  Paul  had  before  this  been  at  Cenchrea  itself,
appears  from  the  eighteenth  chapter  of  the  Acts:
and  appears  by  a  circumstance  as  incidental,  ana
as  unlike  design,  as  any  that  can  be  imagined.
"  Paul  after  this  tarried  there  (viz.  at  Cormthj)
yet  a  good  while,  and  then  took  his  leave  of  his
brethren,  and  sailed  thence  into  Syria,  and  with
him  Priscilla  and  Aquila,  having  shorn  his  head
in  Cenchrea,  for  he  had  a.  vow."  xviii.  18.  The
shaving  of  the  head  denoted  the  expiration  of  the
Nazaritic  vow.  The  historian,  therefore,  by  the
mention  of  this  circumstance,  virtually  tella  us
that  St.  Paul's  vow  was  expired  before  he  set  tor-
ward  upon  his  voyage,  having  deferred  probably
his  departure  until  he  should  be  released  from  the
restrictions  under  which  his  vow  laid  him.  Shall
we  say  that  the  author  of  the  Acts  of  the  Apos-
tles feigned  this  anecdote  of  St.  Paul  at  Cenchrea,.
because  he  had  read  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Romans
that  "  Phoebe,  a  servant  of  the  church  of  Cenchrea,
had  been  a  succourer  of  many,  and  of  him  also  V*
or  shall  wc  say  that  the  author  of  the  Epistle  to
the  Romans,  out  of  his  own  imagination,  created


EPISTLE  TO  THE  ROMANS.


ra


Phctibe  *a  teredn*  of  the  cKurch  at  Cenchrea,"
because  he  read  in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles  that
Paul  had  "  shorn  his  head"  in  that  place  1
No.  III.

Chap,  i  13.  "  Now  I  would  not  have  you  ig-
norant, brethren,  that  oftentrmee  I  purposed  to
come  unto  you,  but  was  let  hitherto,  that  I  might
have  some  fruit  among' you  also,  even  as  among
other  Gentiles."  Again,  xv.  23, 94 :  "  But  now,
having  no  more  place  in  these  parts,  and  having
a  great  desire  these  many  years  (»«xx»,  often-
times,) to  come  unto  you,  whensoever  1  take  my
journey  into  Spain  I  will  come  to  you;  fori  trust
tp  see  you  in  my  journey,  and  |o  be  brought  on
my  way  thitherward  by  you:  but  now  I  go  up
unto  Jerusalem  to  minister  to  the  saints.  When,
therefore,  I  have  performed  this,  and  have  seal-
ed to  them  this  fruit,  I  will  come  by  you  into
Spain."  *

With  these  passages  compare  Acts-  xiz.  21.
"  After  these  things  were  ended,  (viz.  at  E^he-
sus,)  Paul  purposed  in  the  spirit,  when  he  had
pulsed  through  Macedonia  and  Achaia,  to  go  to
Jerusalem;  saying,  After  I  have  been  there,  I
must  also  see  Rome.1'

Let  it  be  observed  that  our  epistle  purports  to
have  been  written  at  the  conclusion  of  St.  Paul's
second  journey  into  Greece:  that  the  quotation
from  the  Acts  contains  words  said  to  have  been
spoken  by  St  Paul  at*  Ephesus,  some  time  before
he  set  forwards  upon  that  journey.  Now  I  con-
tend that  it  is  impossible  that  two  independent
fictions  should  have  attributed  to  St  Paul  the
same  purpose,  especially  a  purpose  sdt  specific  and
Particular  as  this,  which  was  not  merely  a  general
design  of  visiting  Rome  after  he  had  passed
through  Macedonia  and  Achaia,  and  after  he  had
performed  a  voyage  from  these  countries  to  Jeru-
salem. The  conformity  between  the  history  and
the  epistle  is  perfect  In  the  first  quotation  from
the  epistle,  we  find  that  a  design  of  visiting  Rome
had  Jong  dwelt  in  the  apostle's  mind :  in  the  quo-
tation from  the  Acts,  we  find  that  design  ex-
pressed a  considerable  time  before  the  epistle  was
written.  In  the  history,  we  find  that  the  plan
which  St'  Paul  had  formed  was,  to  pass  through
Macedonia  and  Achaia;  after  that  to  go  to  Jeru-
salem; and  when  he  had  finished  his  visit  there,
to  sail  for  Rome.  When  the-epistle  was  written,
he  had  executed  so  much  of  his  plan,  as  to  have
passed  through  Macedonia  and  Achaia;  and  was
preparing  to  pursue  the  remainder  of  it,  by  speed-
ily setting  out  towards  Jerusalem:  and  in  this
point  of  his  travels  he  te&Vhis  friends  at  Rome,
that,  when  he  had  completed  the  business  which
carried  him  to  Jerusalem,  he  would  come  to  them.
Secondly,  I  say,  that  the  very  inspection  of  the
passages  wfll  satisfy  us  that  they  were  not  made
up  from  one  another.

u  Whensoever  I  take-  my  journey  into  Spain,
I  will  come  to  you;  for  I  trust  to  see  you  in  my
journey,  and  to  be  brought  on  my  way  thither-
ward by  you;  but  now  Tgo  up  to  Jerusalem  to
nrimster  to  the  saints.  Wnen,  therefore,  I  have
performed  this,  and  have  sealed  to  them  this  fruit,
I  will  come  by  you  into  Spain." — This  from  the
epistle.

"Pud  purposed  in  the  spirit,  when  he  had
passed  through  Macedonia  and  Achaia,  to  go  to
Jerusalem:  saying;  After  I  have  been  there,  I
must  also  see  Rome."— This  from  the  Acta.


If  the  passage  in  the  epistle  was  taken  from
that  in  the  Acts,  why  was  Spain  put  in  1  If  the
passage  in  the  Acts  was  taken  from  that  in  the
epistle,  why  was  Spain  left  out?  If  the  two
passages  were  unknown  to  each  other,  nothing
can  account  for  their  conformity  but  truth.  Whe-
ther we  suppose  the  history  and.  the  epistle  to
be  alike  fictitious,  or  the  history  to  be  true  but
the.  letter  spurious,  or  the  letter  to  be  genuine  but
the  history  a  fable,  the  meeting  with  this  circum-
stance in  both,  if  neither  borrowed  it  from  the
other,  is  upon  all  these  suppositions  equally  in-
explicable.

'  No.  IV.

Th*  following  quotation  I  offer  for  the  purpose
of  pointing  out  a  geographical  coincidence,  of  so
much  importance,  that  Dr.  Lardner  considered  it
as'  a  confirmation  of  the  whole  history  of  St
Paul's  travels.

Chap.  zv.  19.  "So  that  from  Jerusalem,  and
round  about  unto  Illyricum,  I  have  fully  preached
the  Gospel  of  Christ?' , . .

I  do  not  think  that  these  words  necessarily  im-
port that  St.  Paul  had  penetrated  into  Illyricum,
or  preached  the  Gospel  in  that  province ;  but  ra*
ther  that  he  had  come  to  the  confines  of  Illyricum,
(*•%<<  ts  ixxvf  «*•,)  and  that  these  confines  were
the  external  boundary  of  hia  travels.  St  Paul
considers  Jerusalem  as  the  centre,  and  is  here
viewing  the  circumference  to  which  his  travels
extended.  The  form  of  expression  in  the  original
conveys  this  idea— •«-•  i«fs«-«xn/*  »««  *»*x-  r*x**
t*  in** «x*.  Illyricum  was  the  part  of  this  cir-
cle which  he  mentions  in  an  epistle  to  the  Ro-
mans, because  it  lay  in  a  direction  from  Jerusa-
lem towards  that  city,  and  pointed  out  to  the  Ro-
man readers  the.  nearest  place  to  them,  to  which
his  travels  from  Jerusalem  had  brought  Mm.  The
name  of  Illyricum  nowhere  occurs"  in  the  Acta
of  the  Apostles ;  no  suspicion,  therefore  can  be
received  that  the  mention  of  it  was  borrowed  from
thence.  Yet  I  think  it  appears,  from  these  same
Aete,  that  St  Paul,  before  the'  time  when  he
wrote  his  Epistle  to  the  Romans,  had  reached  the
confines  of  Illyricum ;  or,  however,  that  he  might
have  done  so,  in  perfect  consistency  with  the  ac-
count, there  delivered.  Illyrkum  adjoins  upon
Macedonia;  ineeBuring  from  Jerusalem  towards
Rome,  it  lies  close  behind  it.  If,  therefore,  St
Paul  traversed  the  whole  country  of  Macedonia,
the  route  would  necessarily  bring  him  to  the  con-
fines of  Illyricum,  and  these  confines  would  be
described  as  the  extremity  of  his  journey.  -Now
the  account  of  St  Paul's  second  visit  to  the
peninsula  of  Greece,  is  contained  in  these  words:
"He  departed  for  to  go  into  Macedonia;  and
when  he  had  gone  oter  these  farts,  and  had
given  them  much  exhortation,  he  came  into
Greece."  Acts  xx.  2.  This  account  allows,  or
rather  leads  us  to  suppose,  that  St  Paul,  ingoing
over  Macedonia  (*«iaJ«v  t«  ph*  imiiij  had  passed
so  for  to  the  west,  as  to  come  into  those  parts  of
the  country  which  were  contiguous  to  Ufyricum,
if  he  did  not  enter  into  Illyricum  itself.  The  his-
tory, therefore,  and.  the  epistle  so  far  agree,  and
the  .agreement  is  much  strengthened  by  a  coin-
cidence of  rime.  At  the  time  the  epistle  was  writ-
ten, St.  Paul  might  say,  in  conformity  with  the
history,  that  he  had  "  come  into  Illyricum ;"  much
before  that  time,  he  could  not  have  said  so;  for,
upon  his  former  journev  to  Macedonia,  his  route


174


BORM  PAULINA.


if  Isjd  down  from  the  time  of  his  landing  at  Phi-
Mppl  to  his  sailing  from  Corinth.  We  trace  him
from  Philippi  to  Amphipoli»  ami  Apollonia  j  from
thence  to  Tbesselonica ;  from  Thejssaloiuca  to
Berea  j  from  Berea  tfi  Athens;  and  from  Athena
ta  Corinth:  which  tract  confines  him  to  the  eaat-
m  aide  of  the  peninsula,  and  therefore  keeps  him
all  the  while  at  a  considerable  distance  from  IUv-
Upon  his  second  visit  to  Macedonia,  the


▼isitj  we  know,  almost  immediately  .preceded  the
writing  of  the  epistle..  It  was  natural  that  the
apostle  should  refer  to  a  journey  which  was  fresh
in  his  thoughts.

NaV..

Chap,  xr.  90.  "  Now  I  beseech  yon,  brethren,
for  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ's  sake,  and  for  the  lore
of  the  Spirit,  that  ye  strive  together  with  me  in
your  prayers  to  God  for  me,  that  I  may  be  de-
livered from  them  thaldonot-beJkve,4nJudaa." —
With  this  compare  Acts' xz.  22,  23 :
.  "And  now,  behold,  I  go  bound  in  the  spirit
unto  Jerusalem,  not  knowing  the  things  that  shall
befall  me  there,  save  that  the  Holy  Ghost  witnes-
seth  in  every  city,  saying  tjiat  bonds  and  afflic-
tions abide  me."

Let  it  be  remarked,  that  it  is  the  same  journey
to  Jerusalem  which  is  spoken  of  in  these  two  pas-
sages j  that  the  epistle  was  written  immediately
more  St.  Paul  set  forwards  upon  this  journey
from  Achaia;  that  Jhe  words  in  the  Acts  were
uttered  by  him  when  he  had  proceeded  in  that
journey  as  Jar  as  Miletus,  in  Lesser  Asia.  This
being  remembered,  1  observe  that  the  two  pas-
sages, without  any  resemblance  between  them
that*  could  induee  us  to  suspect  that  they  were
borrowed  from  one  another,  represent  the  state
of  St  Paul's  mind,  with,  respect  to  the  event  of
the  journey,  in  terms  of  substantial  agreement
They  both  express  his  sense  of  danger  in  the  ap-
proaching visit  to  Jerusalem :  they  both  express
the  doubt  which  dwek  upon  his  thoughts  con-
cerning what  might  there  befall  him.  When,  in
his  epistle,  he  entreats  the  Roman  Christians,
"  for  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ's  sake,  and  for  the  love
of  tile  Spirit,  to  strive  together  with  him  in  their
prayers  to  God  for  him,  that  he  might  be  delivered
from  them  which  do  not  believe,  in  Judsa;"  he
sufficiently  confesses  his  fears.  In  the  Acts  of  the'
Apostles  we  see  in  him  the  same  apprehensions,
and  the  same  uncertainty :  "  I  go  bound  in  the
spirit  to  Jerusalem,  not  knowing  the.  things  that
ahall  befall  me  there."  The  only  difference,  is.
that  in  the  history  his  thoughts  are  more  inclined
to  despondency  than  in  the  epistle..  In  the.  epis-
tle he  retains  his  hope  "that  he  should  come
unto  them  with  joy  by  the  will  of  God :"  in  the
history,  his  mind  yields  to  the  reflection,  "  that
the  Holy  Ghost  witnesseth  in  every  city  that
bonds  and  afflictions  awaited  him."  Now  that  his
fears  should  be  greater,  and  his  hopes  less,  in  this
stage  of  bis  journey  than  when  he  wrote  his  epis-
tle, that  is,  when  he  first  set  out  upon  it,  is  no
other  alteration  than  might  well  be  expected;
since  those  prophetic  intimations  to  which  he  re-
fers, when  he  says,  "  the  Holy  Ghost  witnesseth
in  every  city,"  had  probably  been  received  by  him
In  the  course  of  his  journey,  and  were*  probably
similar  to  what  we  know  he  received  in  the  re-


maining  part  of  it  at  Tyw,  xxt  4 ;  and  afterwaxd*

from  Agabus  at  Cesarea,  xxi  1L  '

No,  VI.

There  is  another  strong  remark  arising  from
the  same  passage  in  the  epistle ;  to  make  which
understood,  it  will  be  neceasary  to  state  the  pas-
sage over  again,  and  somewhat  more  at  length.

T(  I  beseech  you,  brethren,  for  the  Lord  Jesus
Christ's  sake, -and  for  the  love  of  the  Spirit,  that
ye  strive  together  with  me  m  your  prayers  to  God
for  me,  that  1  may  be  delivered  from  them  that  do
not  believe,  in  Judoa — that  I  may  come  unto  you
with  joy  far  the  will  of  God,  and  may  with  you  be

I  desire  the  reader  to  call  to  mind  that  part  of
St  Paul's  history  which  took  place  after  his  ar-
rival at  Jerusalem,  and  which  employs  thejeven
last  chapters  of  the  Acta;  and  I  build  upon  it  this
observation— tha£  supposing  the  Epistle  to  the
Romans  to  have  been  a  forgery,  ana  the  author
of  she  forgery  to  have  had  the  Acts  of  the  Apos-
tles before  him,  and  to  have  there  seen  that  St
Paul,  in  fact,  "  waa  not  delivered  from  the  un-
believing Jews,"  but  on  the  contrary,  that  he  was
taken  into  custody  at  Jerusalem,  and  brought  to
Rome  a  prisoner— it  is  next  to  impossible  that  he
should  have  made  St  Paul  express  expectations
so  contrary  to  what  he  saw  had  been  tne  event;
and  utter  prayers,  with  apparent  hopes  of  success,
which  he  must  have  known  were  frustrated  in
the  issuer

This  single  consideration  convinces  me,  that
no  concert  or  confederacy  whatever  subsisted  be-
tween the  Epistle  and  tne  Acts  of  the  Apostles;
and  that  whatever  coincidences  have  been  or  can
be  pointed  out  between  them,  are  unsophisticated,
ana  are  the  result  of  truth  and  reality.

It  also  convinces  me  that  the  epistle  was  writ-
ten not  only  in  St  Paul's  life-time,  but  before  he
arrived  at  Jerusalem ;  for  the  important  events  re-
lating to  him  which  took  place  after  bis  arrival  at
that  city,  must  have  been  known  to  the  Chris-
tian community  soon  after  they  happened:  they
form  the  moat  public  part  of  his  history.  But
had  they  been  known  to  the  author  of  the  epis-
tle—in other  words,  had  they  then  taken  place—
the  passage  which  we  have  quoted  from  the  epis-
tle would  not  have  been  found  there.

No.  VII.

I  now  proceed  to  state  the  conformity  which
exists  between  the  argument  of  this  epistle  and
the  history  of  its  reputed  author.  It  is  enough  for
this  purpose  to  observe,  that  the  object  of  the
epistle,  that  is,  of  the  argumentative  part  o£  it
was  to  place  the  Gentile  convert  upon  a  parity  or
situation  with  the  Jewish,  in  respect  or  his  re-
ligious condition,  and  his  rank  in  the  divine  fa-
vour. The  epistle  supports  this  point  by  a  variety
of  arguments;  such  as,  that  no  man  of  either  de-
scription was  justified  by  the  works  of  the  law—
for  this  plain  reason,  that  no  man  had  performed
them;  that  it  became  therefore  necessary  to  apr
point  another  medium  or  condition  of  justification,
in  which  new  medium  the  Jewish  peculiarity  was
merged  and  lost;  that  Abraham's  own  justifica-
tion was  anterior  to  the  law,  and  independent  of
it :  that  the  Jewish  converts  were  to  consider  the
law  as  now  dead,  and  themselves  as  married  to
another  ;that  what  the  law  in  truth  could  not  do.
in  that  it  waa  weak  through  the  flash,  God  had


EPISTLE  TO  THE  ROMANS.


m


don©  by  sending  ms  Bon;  that  God  had  rejected
the  unbefteving  Jews,  and  had  substituted  in  their
place-*  society  of  believers  in  Christ,  collected  in-
differently  from  Jews  and  Gentiles.  Soon'  after
the  writing  of  this  epistle,  St  Paul,  .agreeably  to
the  intention  intimated  in  the  epistle  itsel£  took
his  journey  to  Jerusalem.  The  day  after  ne  ar-
rived there,  he  was  introduced  to  the  church.
What  passed  at  this  interview  is  thus  related,
Acts  xxi.  19 :  "  When  he  had  saluted  thorn,  he  de-


,  thou  seest,  brother,  how  many  thou-
i  of  Jews  there  are  which  believe ;  and  they
axe  aU  aealous  of  the  law ;  and  they  are  informed
of  thee,  that  thou^teachest  aU  the  Jews  which  are
among  the  Gentiles  to  forsake  ^Moses,  saving,  that
they  ought  not  to  circumcise  their  children,  nei-
ther to  walk  after  the  customs."  St.  Paul  dis-
daimed  the  charge:  but  there  must  have  been
something  to  have  led  to  it.  Now  it  is  only  to
suppose  that  St  Paul  openly  professed  the  prin-
ciples which  the  epistle  contains;  that,  in  the
course  of  his  ministry,  he  had  uttered  the  senti-
ments which  he  is  hero  made  to  write:  and  the
matter  is  accounted  for.  Concerning  the  accusa-
tion which  public  rumour  had  brought  against
him  to  Jerusalem,*!  will  not  say  that  it  was.fust;
but  I  will  say,  that  if  he  was  the  author  of  the


easy  inference,  that  if  the  Gentile  convert,  who
did  not. observe  the  law  of  Moses,  held  as  advan-
tageous a  situation  in  his  religious  interests  as  the
Jewish  convert  who  did,  there  could  be  no  strong
reason  for  observing  that  law  at  all.  The  re-
monstsance  therefore  of  the  church  of  Jerusalem,
sod  the  report  which  occasioned  it,  were  founded
in  .no  very  violent  misconstruction  of  the  apostle's
doctrine.  His  reception  at  Jerusalem  was  exactly
what  I  should  have  expected  the  author  of  this
epistle  to  have  met  with,  I  am  entitled  therefore
to.  argue,  that  a  separate  narrative  of  effect*  ex-
perienced by  St.  Paul,  similar  to  what  a  person
might  be  expected  to  experience  who  held  the
doctrines  advanced  in  this  epistle,  forms  a  proof
that  he  did  hold  these  doctrines;  and  that  the
epistle  bearing  his  name,  in  which  such  doctrines
are  laid  down,  actually  proceeded  from  him.

No.  VIIL
This  number  is  supplemental  to  the  former.  I
propose  to  point  out  in  it  two  particulars  in  the
conduct  of  the  argument,  perfectly  adapted  to  the
historical  circumstances  under  which  the  epistle
was  written;  which  yet  are  free  from  all  ap-
pearance of  contrivance,  and  which  it  would  not,
I  think,  have  entered  into  the  mind  of  a  sophist
to  contrive.  -

.  1.  The  Epistle  to  the  Gaktians  relates  to  the
same  general  question  as  the  Epistle  to  the  Ro-
mans. St.  Paul  had  founded  the  church  of  Ga-
htia;  at  Rome,  he  had  never  been.  Observe
now  a  difference  in  his  manner  of  treating  of  the
same  subject,  corresponding  with  this  difference
in  his  situation:  In  the  Epistle  to  the  Galatians
he  puts  the  point  in  a  great  measure  upon  au-
thority :  "  I  marvel  that  ye  are  so  soon  removed
from  him  thai  called  fou  into  the  grace  of  Christ,
unto  another  Gc*peL*—Qri.i.  6.  u  I  certify  you,


brethren,  that  the  gospel  which  was  pteachaj}  of
me,  is  not  after  man;  for. I  neither  received  it  of
man,  neither  was  I  taught  it  but  by  the  revelation
of  Jesus1  Christ."— chTL  11, 12.  "  I  am  afraid,
lest  I  have  bestowed  upon  you  labour  in  vain." —
iv.  1 1,  \%  "  I  desire  to  be  present  with  you  now,
for  I  stand  in  doubt  of  you/'— iv.  90.  "  Behold,  I,
Paul,  say  unto  you,  that  if  ye  be  circumcised,
Christ  shall  profit  you  nothing."— v.  2.  "  This
persuasion  cometh  not  of  him  that  called  you."—
v.  8.  This,  is  the  style  in  which  he  accosts  the
GaJatiane.  In  the  epistle  to  the  converts  of  Rome,
where  Ms  authority  was  not  established,  nor  his
person  known,  he  puts  the  same  points  entirely
upon  argument.  The  perusal  of  the  epistle  will
prove  this  to  the  satisfaction  of  every  reader :  and.
as  the  observation  relates  to  the  whole  contents  or
the  epistle,  I  forbear  adducing  separate  extracts.
I  repeat,  therefore,  that  we  have  pointed  out  a  dis-
tinction in  the  two  epistles,  suited  to  the  relation
in  which  the  author  stood  to  his  different  corres-
pondents.

Another  adaptation,  and  somewhat  of  the  same
kind,  is  the  following :

2.  The  Jews,  we  know,  were  very  numerous
at  Rome,  and  probably  formed  a  principal  part
amongst  the  new  converts;  so  much  so,  that  the
Christians  seem  to  have  been  known  at  Rome
rather  as  a  denomination  of  Jews,  than  as  any
thing  else*  In  an  epistle  consequently  to  the  Ro-
man believers,  the  point  to  be  endeavoured  after
by  St  Paul  was  to  reconcile  the  Jewish  converts
to  the  opinion,  that  the  Gentiles  were  admitted  fay
God  to  a  parity  of  religious  situation  with  then*-
selves,  and  that  without  their  being  bound  by  the
law  of  Moses.  The  Gentile  converts  would  pro-
bably accede  to  this  opinion  very  readily.  In  this
epistle,  therefore,  though  directed  to  the  Roman
church  in  general,  it  is  in  truth  a  Jew  writing  te
Jews.  Accordingly  you  will  take  notice,  that  as
often  as  bis  argument  leads  him  tp  say-  any  thing
derogatory  from  the  Jewish  institution,  he  con-
stanuy  follows  it  by  a  softening  clause.  Having
(ii.  28, 29,)  pronounced,  not  much  perhaps  to  the
satisfaction  of  the  native  Jews,  "  that  he  is  not  a
Jew  which  is  one  outwardly,  neither  that  circum-
cision which  is  outward  in  the  flesh:'1  he  adds
immediately,  "  What  advantage  then  hath  the
Jew,  or  what  profit  is  there  in  circumcision  1
Much  every  way."  Having,  in  the  third  chapter,
ver.  28,  brought  his  argument  to  this  formal  con-
clusion," that  a  man  is  justified  by  faith  without
the  deeds  of  the  law,"  he  presently  subjoins,  ver.
31,  "  Do  we  then  make  void  the  law  through
faith  1  God  forbid!  Yea,  we  establish  the  daw*
In  the  seventh  chapter,  when  in  the  sixth  verse
be  had  advanced  the  bold  assertion,  "that  now
we  are  delivered  from  the  law,  that  being  dead
wherein  we  were  held;"  in  the  "very  next  verse
he  comes  in  with  this  healing  question,  "What
shall  we  say,  then  ?  Is  the  law  sin  ?  God  forbid !
Nay,  I  had  not  known  sin  but  by  the  law.  Having
in  the  following  words  insinuated,  or  rather  more
than  insinuated,  the  inefficacy  of  the  Jewish  Javr,
viii.  3,  "  for  what  the  law  could  not  do,  in  that  it
was  weak  through  the  flesh.  God  sending  his  own
Son  in  the  likeness  of  sinful  flesh,  and  for  sin,
-condemned  sin  in  the  flesh :"  after  a  digression
indeed,  but  that  sort  of  a  digression  which  lp
could  never  resist,  a  rapturous  contemplation
of  his  Christian  hope,  and  which  occupies  the
latter  part  of  this  chapter  j  we  find  hkn  in  the


176


SOIUE  PAULINA!.


next,  a*  if  sensible  that  he  had  said  something
which  would  give  offence,  returning  to  his  Jewish
brethren  in  terms  of  the  warmest  affection  and  re-
spect: "I  say  the  truth  in  Christ  Jesus; I  lie  not;
my  conscience  also  bearing  me-  witness  in  the
Holy  Ghost,  that  I  have  great  heaviness  and  con-
tinual sorrow  in  my  heart ;  for  I  could  wish  that
myself  were  accursed  from  Christ,  for  my  bre-
thren, my  kinsmen  according  to  the  flesh,  who
are  Israelite*,  to  whom  pertaineth  the  adoption,
and  the  glory,  and  the  covenants,  and  the  giving
of  the  law,  and  the  service  of  God,  and  the  pro-
mises ;  whose  are  the  fathers  ;  and  of  whom,  as
concerning  the  flesh,  Christ  came"  When,  in
the  thirty-first  and  thirty-second  verses  of  this
ninth  chapter,  he  represented  to  the  Jews  the  er-
ror of  even  the  best  of  their  nation,  by  telling  them
that  "Israel,  which  followed  after  the  law  of
righteousness,  had  not  attained  to  the  law  of
.  righteousness,  because  they  sought  it  not  by  faith,
but  as  it  were  by  the  works  of  the  law,  for  they
•tumbled  at  that  stumbling  stone,"  he  takes  care
to  annex  to  this  declaration  these  conciliating
expressions:  "Brethren,  my  heart's  desire  and
prayer  to  God  for  Israel  is.  that  they  might  be
saved;  for  I  bear  them  record  that  they  have  a  zeal
of  God,  but  not  according  to  knowledge."  Lastly,
having  ch.  x.  90,  SI,  by  the  application  of  "a  pas-
sage in  Isaiah,  insinuated  the  most  ungrateful  of
all  propositions-  to  a  Jewish  ear,  the  rejection  of
the  Jewish  nation,  as  God's  peculiar  people ;  he
hastens,  as  it  were,  to  qualify  the  intelligence  of
their  foil  by  this  interesting  expostulation :  "  I  say,
then,  hath  God  cast  away  his  people,  (i.  e.  wholly
and  entirely?")  God  forbid!  for  I  also  am  an  Is-
raelite, of  the  seed  of  Abraham,  of  the  tribe  of
Benjamin.  God  hath  not  cast  away  his  people,
which  he  foreknew;'*  and  follows  this  thought,
throughout  the  whole  of  the  eleventh  chapter,  in
a  aeries  of  reflections  calculated  to  soothe  the  Jew-
ish converts,  as  well  as  to  procure  from  their  Gen-
tile brethren  respect  to  the  Jewish  institution.
Now  all  this  is  perfectly  natural  In  a  real  St
Paul,  writing  to  real  converts,  it  is  what  anxiety
to  bring  them  over  to  his  persuasion  would  na-
turally produce;  but  there  is  an  earnestness  and
a  personality,  if  I  may  so  caH  it,  in  the  manner,
which  a  cold  forgery,  I  apprehend!  would  neither
have  conceived  nor  supported.


CHAPTER  IU.
The  First  Epistle  to  the  Corinthians.

No.  I.

Before  we  proceed  to  compare  this  epistle
with  the  history,  or  with  any  other  epistle,  we
will  employ  one  number  in  stating  certain  re-
marks applicable  to  our  argument,  which  arise
from  a  perusal  of  the  epistle  itself.

By  an  expression  in  tbe  first  verse  of  the
seventh  chapter,  '<now  concerning  the  things
whereof  ye  wrote  unto  me,"  it  appears,  that  this
lettet  to  the  Corinthians  was  written  by  St.  Paul
in  answer  to  one  which  he  had  received  from
them  -t  and  that  the  seventh,  and  some  of  the  fol-
lowing chapters,  are  taken  up  in  resolving  certain
doubts,  and  regulating  certain  points  of  order,
concerning  which  the  Corinthians  had  in  their
letter  consulted  him. This  alone  is  a  circum-


stance considerably  in  favour  of  the  authenticity
of  the  epistle ;  for  it  must  have  been  a  fin-fetched
contrivance  in  a  forgery,  first  to  have  feigned  the
receipt  of  a  letter  from  the. Church  of  Corinth,
which  letter  does  not  appear;  and  then  to  have
drawn  up  a  fictitious  answer  to  it,  relative  to  a
great  variety  of  doubts'  and  inquiries,  purely
economical  and  domestic;  and  which,  tnough
likely  enough  to  have  occurred  to  an  infant  so-
ciety, in  a  situation  and  under  an  institution  so
novel  as  that  of  a  Christian  Church  then  was.  it
must  have  very  much  exercised  the' author's  in-
vention, and  could  have  answered  no  imaginable
purpose  of  forgery,  to  introduce  the  mention  of  at
alL  Particulars  of  the  kind  we  refer  to,  are  such
as  the  following :  the  rule  of  duty  and  prudence
relative  to  entering  into  marriage,  as  appucaUe  to
virgins,  to  widows ;  the  case  of  husbands  married
to  unconverted  wives;  of  wives  having  uncon-
verted husbands ;  that  case  where  the  unconverted
party  chooses  to  separate,  where  he  chooses  to
continue  the  union ;  the  effect  which  their  conver-
sion produced  upon  their  prior  state,  of  circumci-
sion, of  slavery  ^  the  eating  of  things  offered  to
idols,  as  it  was  in  itself,  as  others  were  affected  by
to;  the  joining  in  idolatrous  sacrifices;  the  deco-
rum to  be  observed  in  their  religious  assemblies,
the  older  of  speaking,  the  silence  of  women,  the
covering  or  uncovering  of  the  head,  as  it  became
men,  as  it  became  women.  These  subjects,  with
their  several  subdivisions,  are  so  particular,  minute,


and  numerous,  that  though  they  be  exactly  agree-
able to  thetHrcumatances  of  the  persona  to  whom
the  letter  was  written,  nothing,  I  believe,  but  the
existence  and  reality  of  those  circumstancos  could
have  suggested  to  the  writer's  thoughts.

But  tins  is -not  the  only  nor  the  principal  observa-
tion upon  the  correspondence  between  the  church
of  Corinth  and  then*  apostle,  which  I  wish  to
point  out  It  appears,  I  think,  in  tins  correspond-
ence, that  although  the  Corinthians  had  written
to  St  Paul,  requesting  his  answer  and  his  direc-
tions in  the  several  points  above  enumerated,  yet
that  they  had  not  said  one.  syllable  about  ib»
enormities  and  disorders  which  had  crept  in
amongst  them,  and  in  the  blame*  of  which  they  all
shared;  but  that  St  Paul's  information  concern-
ing the  irregularities  then  prevailing  at  Corinth
had  come  round  to  him  from  other  quarters.  The
quarrels  and  disputes  excited  by  their  contentious
adherence  to  their  different  teachers,  and  by  their
placing -of  them  in  competition  with  one  another,
were  not  mentioned  in  their  letter,  but  communi-
cated to  St.  Paul  by  more  private  intelligence:  "  It
hath  been  declared  unto  me,  my  brethren,  by
them  which  are  of  the  house  of  Chloe,  that  there
are  contentions  among  you.  Now  this  I  say,
that  every  one  of  you  saith,  I  am  of  Paul,  and  I
of  Apollos,  and  I  of  Cephas,  and  I  of  Christ."
(ill,  12.)  The  incestuous  marriage  "  of  a  man
with  his  father's  wife,"  which  St.  Paul  reprehends
with  ao  much  severity  in  the  fifth  chapter  of  our
epistle,  and  which  was  not  the  crime  of  an  indi-
vidual only,  but  a  crime  in  which  the  whole
church,  by  tolerating  and  conniving  t\  it,  had
rendered  themselves  partakers,  did  not  come  to  St.
Paul's  knowledge  by  the  letter,  but  by  a  rumour
which  had  reached  his  ears  :^' .ft  is  reported
common!*/  that  there  is  fornication  among  you.
and  such  fornication  as  is  not  so.  much  as  named
among  the  Gentiles,  that  one  should  have  his
fathers  wife ;  and  ye  are  puffed  up,  and  have  net


FIRST  fcPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.


177


father  mourned  that  he  that  hath  done  this  deed
might  be  taken  away  from  among  you."  (v.  1,  2.)
Their  going  to  Jaw  before  the  judicature  of  the
country,  rawer  than  arbitrate  and  adjust  their
disputes  among  themselves,  which  St.  Paul  ani-
madverts upon  with  his  usual  plainness,  was  not
intimated  to  him  in  the  letter,  because  he  tells  them
bis  opinion  of  this  conduct  before  he  comes  to  the
contents  of  the  letter.  Their  litigiousness  is  cen-
sored by  St.  Paul  in  the  sixth  chapter  of  his  epis-
tfe,  and  it  is  only  at^he  beginning  of  the  seventh
chapter  that  he  proceeds  upon  the  articles  which
he  found  in  their  letter;  and  he  proceeds  upon
them  with  this  preface:  "  Now  concerning  the
things  whereof  ye  wrote  unto  me,"  (vii.  1,)  which
introduction  he  would  not  have  used  If  he  had
been  already  discussing  any  of  the  subjects  con-
cerning which  they  had  written.  Their  irregu-
larities in  celebrating  the  Lord's  supper,  and  the
utter  perversion  of  the  institution  which  ensued,
were  not  in  the  letter,  as  is  evident  from  the  terms
in  which  St.  Paul  mentions  the  notice  he  had  re-
ceived of  it :  "  Now  in  this  that  I  declare  unto  you,
I  praise  you  not,  that  ye  come  together  not  for
the  better,  but  for  the  worse ;  for  first  of  all,  when

Kcome  together  in  the  church,  /  Ixear  that  there
divisions  among  you,  and  /  partly  believe  it"
Now  that  the  Corinthians  should,  in  their  own
letter,  exhibit  the  fair  side  of  their  conduct  to  the
apostle,  and  conceal  from  him  the  faults  of  their
behaviour,  was  extremely  natural,  and  extremely
probable:  but  it  was  a  distinction  which  would
not,  I  think,  have  easily  occurred  to  the  author  of
a  forgery ;  and  much  less  likely  is  it,  that  it  should
have  entered  into  his  thoughts  to  make  the  dis-
tinction appear  in  the  way  in  which  it  does  ap-
pear, viz:  not  by  the  original  letter,  not  by  any
express  observation  upon  it  in  the  answer,  but
distantly  by  marks  perceivable  in  the  manner,  or
in  the  order,  in  which  St.  Paul  takes  notice  of
their  faults.  ^

No.  II.

Our  epistle  purports  to  have  been  written  after
St.  Paul  had  already  been  at  Corinth :  "  I,  bre-
thren, token  I  came  uhto  you.  came  not  with  excel-
lency of  speech  or  of  wisdom,"  (ii.  1,)  and  in
many  other  places  to  the  same  effect.  It  purports
also  to  have  been  written  upon  the  eve  of  another
visit  to  that  church :  "  I  will  come  to  you  shortly,

n,  "  I  will  come


if  the  Lord  wilL"  f  iv.  19 ;)  and  again,
to  you  when  I  snail  pass  through  Macedonia,"
(xvl  5.)  Now  the  history  relates  that  St.  Paul
did  in  net  visit  Corinth  twice :  once  as  recorded
at  length  in  the  eighteenth,  and  a  second  time  as
mentioned  briefly  in  the  twentieth  chapter  of  the
Acts.  The  same  history  also  informs  us,  (Acts
xx.  1.)  that  it  was  from  Ephesus  St.  Paul  pro- ,
cecded  upon  his  second  journey  into  Greece. —
Therefore,  as  the  epistle  purports  to  have  been  |
written  a  short  time  preceding  that  journey ;  and
as  St.  Paul,  the  history  tells  us,  had  resided  more
than  two  years  at  Ephesus,  before  he  set  out  upon
it,  it  follows  that  it  must  have  been  from  Ephesus,
to  be  consistent  with  the  history,  that  the  epihtle
was  written ;  and  every  note  of  place  in  the  epis-
tle agrees  with  this  supposition.  "  Ifj  after  the
manner  of  men,  I  have  fought  with  beasts  at
Epltesus,  what  advantageth  it  me,  if  the  dead  rise
not  1"  ( xv.  32.)  I  allow  that  the  apostle  might  say
this,  wnerever  he  was;  but  it  was  more  natural
and  move  to  tins  purpose  to  say  it,  if  he  was  at !
Z


Ephesus  at  the  time,  and  in >  the  midst  of  those
conflicts  to  which  the  expression  relates.  "  The
churches  of  Asia  salute  you,"  (xvi.  19.)  As*,
throughout  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles  and  the
epistles  of  St.  Paul,  does  not  mean  the  whole  of
Asia  Minor  or  Anatolia,  nor  even  the  whole  of
the  proconsular  Asia,  but  a  district  in  the  ante-
rior part  of  that  country,  called  Lydian  Asia,  di-
vided from  the  rest,  much  as  Portugal  is  from
Spain,  and  of  which  district  Ephesus  was  the
capital.  "Auuila  and  Priscilla  salute  you,"
f  xvi.  19.)  Aquila  and  Priscilla  were  at  Ephesus
during  the  period  within  which  this  epistle  wan
written,  Acts  (xviii.  18.  26.)  "  I  will  tarry  at
Ephesus  until  Pentecost,"  (xvi  8.)  This,  I
apprehend,  is  in  terms  almost  asserting  that' he
was  at  Ephesus  at  the  time  of  writing  the  epistle.
— "  A  great  and  effectual  door  is  opened  unto  ine,M
(xvi.  9.)  How  well  this  declaration  corresponded
with  the  state  of  things  at  Ephesus,  and  the  pro-
gress of  the  Gospel  in  these  parts,  we  learn  from
the  reflection  with  which  fhe  historian  concludes
the  account  of  certain  transactions  which  passed
there:  "  So  mightily  grew  the  word  of  God  and
prevailed,"  (Acts  xix.  20 ;)  as  well  as  from  the
complaint  of  Demctriuri,  "  that  not  only  at  Ephe-
sus, but  also  throughout  all  Asia,  this  Paul  hath
persuaded,  and  turned  away  much  people,"
(xix.  26.)  "  And  there  are  many  adversaries/'
says  the  epistle,  Qxvi.  9.)  Look  into  the'  history
of  this  period :  "When  divers  were  hardened  and
believecrnot,  but  spake  evil  of  that  way  before  the
multitude,  he  departed  from  them,  and  separated
the  disciples."  The  conformity,  therefore,  upon
this  head  of  comparison,  is  circumstantial  and
perfect.  If  any  one  think  that  this  is,  a  conform-
ity so  obvious,  that  any  forger  of  tolerable  caution
and  sagacity  would  have  taken  care  to  preserve  it,
I  must  desire  such  a  one  to  read  the  epistle  for
himself;  and.  when  he  has'  done  so,  to  declare
whether  he  nas  discovered  one  mark  of  art  or
design ;  whether  the  notes  of  time  and  place  ap-
pear to  him  to  be  inserted  with  any  reference  to
each  other,  with  any  view  of  their  being  compared
with  each  other,  or  for  the  purpose  of  establishing
a  visible  agreement  with  the  history,  in  respect  of
them.

No.  III.

Chap.  iv.  17—19.  "  For  this  cause  I  have  sent
unto  you  Timotheus,  who  is  my  beloved  son  and
faithful  in  the  Lord,  who  shall  bring  you  into  re-
membrance of  my  ways  which  be  in  Christ,  as  I
teach  every  where  in  every  church.  Now  some
are  puffed  up,  as  though  i  would  not  come  unto
you;  but  I  will  come  unto  you  shortly,  if  the
Lord  will." -

With  tliis  I  compare  Acts  xix.  21,  22:  "  Alter
these  things"  were  ended,  Paul  purposed  in  the
spirit,  when  he  had  passed  through  Macedonia
and  Achaia,  to  go  to  Jerusalem;  wiving,  After  I
have  lieen  there,  1  must  also  see  Rome ;  so  he  s*nt
unto  Macedonia  two  of  them  that  minwtered  unto
him,  Timotheus  and  Kni*tus."

Though  it  lie  not  said,  it  apiieurs,  I  think,  with
sufflt-ient  certainty,  1  mean  troin  the  history,  in-
dependently  of  the  epistle,  that  Timothy  was  sent
upon  thw  otvaaion  into  Arhaio,  of  which  Corinth
was  the  capital  citv,  as  well  as  into  Macedonia :
for  the  sending  of  Timothy  and  Erastus  is,  in  the
passage  where  it  is  mentioned,  plainly  connected
with  St.  Paul's  own  journey :  he  tent  them  before


178


HORjE  PAULINA.


him.  As  he  therefore  purposed  to  go  into  Achate
himself,  it  is  highly  probable  that,  they  were  to  go
thither  also.  Nevertheless,  they  are  said  only  to
have  been  sent  into  Macedonia,  because  Mace-
donia was  in  truth  the  country  to  which  they
went  immediately  from  Ephesus;  being  directed,
as  we  suppose,  to  proceed  afterwards  from  thence
into  Achaia.  If  this  be  so,  the  narrative  agrees
with  the  epistle;  and  the  agreement  is  attended
with  very  little  appearance  of  design.  One  thing
at  least  concerning  it  is  certain :  that  if  this  pas-
sage of  St  Paul's  History  had  been  taken  from  his
fetter,  it  would  have  sent  Timothy  to  Corinth  by
name,  or  expressly  however  into  Achaia.

But  there  is  another  circumstance  in  these  two
passages  much  less  obvious,  in  which  an  agree-
ment holds  without  any  room  for  suspicion  that  it
was  produced  by  design.  We  have  observed  that
the  sending  of  Timothy  into  the  peninsula  of
Greece  was  connected  in  the  narrative  with  St.
Paul's  own  journey  thither ;  it  is  stated  as  the
efceet  of  the  same  resolution.  Paul  purposed  to
go  into  Macedonia  *f  "  so  he  sent  two  of  them  that
ministered  unto  him,  Timotheus  and  Erastus."
Now  m  the  epistle  also  you  remark,  that,  when
the  apostle  mentions  his  having  sent  Timothy
unto  them,  in  the  very  next  sentence  he  speaks
of  his  own  visit;  Mfor  this  cause  have  I  sent  unto
you  Timotheus  who  is  my  beloved  son,  cYc.  Now
some  are  puffed  up,  as  though  I  would  not  come  to
you;  but  1  will  come  to  you  shortly,  if  God  will."
Timothy's,  journey,  we  see,  is  mentioned  in  the
history  and  m  the  epistle,  in  close  connexion  with
St  Paul's  own.  Here  is  the  same  order  of
thought  and  intention;  yet  conveyed  under  such
diversity  of  circumstance  and  expression,  and  the
mention  of  them  in  the  epistle  so  allied  to  the  oc-
casion which  introduces  it,  viz.  the  insinuation  of
his  adversaries  that  he  would  come  to  Corinth  no
more,  that  I  am  persuaded  no  attentive  reader
will  believe,  that  these  passages  were  written  in
concert  with  one  another,  or  will  doubt  but  that
the  agreement  is  unsought  anduncontrived.

Bat,  in  the  Acts.  Erastus  accompanied  Timothy
in  this  Journey,  of  whom  no  mention  is  made  in
the  epistle.  Prom  what  has, been  said  in  our  ob-
servations upon  the  Epistle  to  the  Romans,  it  ap-
pears probable  that  Erastus  was  a  Corinthian.  If
so,  though  he  accompanied  Timothy  to  Corinth,
he  was  only  returning  home,  and  Timothy  was
the  messenger  charged  with  St  Paul's  orders. —
At  any  rate  this  discrepancy  shows  that  the  pas-
sages were  not  taken  from  one  another.

No.  IV.

Chap,  xvi  10, 11.  "  Now  if  Timotheus  come,
see  that  he  may  be  with  you  without  fear;  for  he
worketh  the  work  of  the  Lord,  as  I  also  do:  let  no
nun  therefore  despise  him,  but  conduct  him  forth
in  peace,  that  he  may  come  unto  me,  for  I  look
for  him  with  the  brethren.

From  the  passage  considered  in  the  preceding
number,  it  appears  that  Timothy  was  sent  to
Corinth  either  with  the  epistle,  or  before  it :  "  for
this  cause  have  I  sent  unto  you  Timotheus."
From  the  passage  now  quoted,  we  infer  that
Timothy  was  not  sent  with  the  epistle ;  for  had
he  been  the  bearer  of  the  letter,  or  accompanied  it,
would  St  Paul  in  that  letter  have  said,  "  jjT  Timo-
thy cornel"  Nor  is  the  sequel  consistent  witti*
the  supposition  of  his  carrying  the  letter;  for  if
Timothy  was  with  the  apostle  when  he  wrote  the


letter,  could  he  say,  as  he  does,  "I  look  for  him
with  the  brethren  V  I  conclude,  therefore,  that
Timothy  had  left  St  Paul  to  proceed  upon  his
journey  before  the  letter  was  written.  Farther,
the  passage  before  us  seems  to  imply,  that  Timo-
thy was  not  expected  by  St  Paul  to  arrive  at
Corinth,  till  after  they  had  received  the  letter.
He  gives  them  directions  in  the  letter  how  to
treat  him  when  he  should  arrive  :  "  If  he  come."
act  towards  him  so  and  so.  Lastly,  the  whole
form  of  expression  is  most  naturally  applicable  to
the  supposition  of  Timothy's  coining  to  Corinth,
not  directly  from  St.  Paul,  bat  from  some  other
quarter ;  and  that  his  instructions  had  been,  when .
he  should  reach  Corinth,  to  return.  Now,  how
stands  this  matter  in  the  history  1  Turn  to  the
nineteenth  chapter  and  twenty-first  verse  of  the
Acts,  and  you  will  find  that  Timothy  did  not,
when  sent  from  Ephesus,  where  he  left  St.  Paulr
and  where  the  present  epistle  was  written,  pro-
ceed by  a  straight  course  to  Corinth,  but  that  he
went  round  through  Macedonia.  This  clears  up
every  thing;  for,  although  Timothy  was  sent
forth  upon  liis  journey  before  the  letter  was  writ-
ten, yet  he  might  not  reach  Corinth  till  after  the
letter  arrived  there ;  and  he  would  come  to  Co-
rinth, when  he  did  come,  not  directly  from  St
Paul  at  Ephesus,  but  from  some  part  of  Mace-
donia. Here,  therefore,  is  a  circumstantial  and
critical  agreement,  and  unquestionably  without
design-;  for  neither  of  the  two  passages  in  the
epistle  mentions  Timothy's  journey  into  Mace-
donia at  all,  though  nothing  but  a  circuit  of  that
kind  can  explain  and  reconcile  the  expressions
which  the  writer  uses.

No.V.

Chap,  i  12.  "  Now  this  I  say,  that  every  one
of  you  saith,  I  am  of  Paul,  and  I  of  Apollos,  and
I  of  Cephas,  and  I  of  Christ."

Also,  iii.  6.  "  I  have  planted,  Apollos  watered,
but  God  gave  the  increase."

This  expression,  "I  have  planted,  Apollos
watered,"  imports  two  things ;  first,  that  Paul  had
been  at  Corinth  before  Apollos;  secondly,  that
Apollos  had  been  at  Corinth  after  Paul,  but  before
the  writing  of  thjs  epistle.  This  implied  account
of  the  several  events,  and  of  the  order  in  which
they  took  place,  corresponds  exactly  with  the
history.  St  Paul,  after  his  first  visit  into  Greece,
returned  from  Corinth  into  Syria  by  the  way  oi
Ephesus ;  and,  dropping  his  companions  Aquila
and  Priscilla  at  Ephesus,  he  proceeded  forwards
to  Jerusalem ;  from  Jerusalem  he  descended  to
Antioch;  and  from  thence  made  a  progress
through  some  of  the  upper  or  northernprovinces
of  the  Lesser  Asia,  Acts  xviii.  19.  23:  during
which  progress,  and  consequently  in  the  interval
between  St.  Paul's  first  and  second  visit  to  Co-
rinth, and  consequently  also  before  the  writing  of
this  epistle,  which  was  at  Ephesus  two  years  at
least  after  the  apostle's  return  from  his  progress,
we  hear  of  Apollos,  and  we  hear  of  him  at  Corinth.
Whilst  St.  Paul  was  engaged,  as  hath  been  said,
in  Phrygia  and  Galatia,  Apollos  came  down  to
Ephesus ;  and  being,  in  St.  Paul's  absence,  in-
structed by  Aquila  and  Priscilla,  and  having  ob-
tained letters  of  recommendation  from  the  church
at  Ephesus,  he  passed  over  to  Achaia ;  and  when
he  was  there,  we  read  that  he  "  helped  them  much
which  had  believed  through  grace,  for  he  mightily
convinced  the  Jews,  and  that  publicly."— Acts


FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.


17*


xvttL  97,  28.  To  have  brought  Apollos  into
Achaia,  of  which  Corinth  was  the  capital  city,  as
well  as  the  principal  Christian  church;  and  to
have  shown  tnat  he  preached  the  Gospel  in  that
country,  would  have  been  sufficient  for  our  pur-
pose. But  the  history  happens  also  to  mention
Corinth  by  name,  as  the  place  in  which  Apollos,
after  his  arrival  at  Achaia,  fixed  his  residence :  for,
proceeding  with  the  account  of  St  Paul's  travels,
it  tells  us;  that  while  Apollos  was  at  Corinth,
Paul,  having  passed  through  the  upper  coasts,
came  down  to  Ephesus,  xix.  1.  What  is  said  there-
fore of  Apollos  in  the  epistle,  coincides  exactly,
and  especially  in  the  point  of  chronology,  with
what  is  delivered  concerning  him  in  the  history.
The  only  question  bow  is,  whether  the  allusions
were  made  with  a  regard  to  this  coincidence.
Now,  the  occasions  and  purposes  for  which  the
name  of  Apollos  is  introduced  in  the  Acts  and  in
the  Epistles',  are  so  independent  and  so  remote,
that  it  is  impossible  to  discover  the  smallest  refer-
ence from  one  to  the  other.  Apollos  is  mentioned
in  the  Acts,  in  immediate  connexion  with  the
history  of  Aquila  and  Priscilla,  'and  for  the  very
singular  circumstance  of  his  "  knowing  only  the
baptism  of  John."

In  the  epistle,  where  none  of  these  circum-
stances are  taken  notice  of,  his  name  first  occurs,
for  the  purpose  of  reproving  the  contentious  spirit
of  the  Corinthians ;  and  it  occurs  only  in  conjunc-
tion with  that  of  some  others :  "  Every  one  of  you
saith,  I  am  of  Paul,  and  I  of  Apollos,  and  f  of
Cephas,  and  I  of  Christ,"  The  second  passage
in  which  Apollos  appears,  "I  have  planted,
Apollos  watered/'  fixes,  as  we  have  observed,  the
order  of  time  amongst  tnree  distinct  events :  but  it
fixes  this,  I  will  venture  to  pronounce,  without
the  writer  perceiving  that  he  was  doing  any  such
thine.  The  sentence  fixes  this  order  in  exact
conformity  with  the  history :  but  it  i&  itself  intro-
duced solely  for  the  sake  of  the  reflection  which
follows:  "Neither  is  he  that  planteth  any  thing,

"" r  he  that  watereth,  but  God  that  giveth  the


No.  VI.

Chap.  iv.  11,  12.  "Even  unto  this'  present
hour  we  both  hunger  and  thirst,  and  are  naked,
and  are  buffeted,  and  have  no  certain  dwelling-
place  ;  and  labour,  working  with  our  own  hands."

We  are  expressly  told  m  the  history,  that  at
Corinth  St  Paul  laboured  with  his  own  hands :
"  Ho  found  Aquila  and  Priscilla;  and,  because  he
was  of  the  same  craft,  he  abode  with  them,  and
wrought ;  for  by  their  occupation  they  were  tent-
makers.1'  But,  in  the  text  Wore  us,  he  is  made
to  say,  that  "  he  laboured  even  unto  the  present
hour,  that  is,  to  the  time  of  writing  the  epistle  at
Ephesus.  Now,  in  the  narration  of  St.  Paul's
transactions  at  Ephesus,*  delivered  in  the  nine-
teenth chapter  of  the  Acts,  nothing  is  said  of  his
working  with  bis  own  hands ;  but  in  the  twentieth
chapter  we  read  that  upon  his  return  from
Greece,  he  sent  for  the  elders  of  the  Church  of
to  meet  him  at  Miletus ;  and  in  the  dis-
he  there  addressed  to  them,  amidst
other  reflections  which  he  calls  to  their  re-
membrance, we  find  the  following:  "I  have
coveted  no  man's  silver,  or  gold,  or  apparel;  yea,
yourselves  also  know,  that  these  hands  have  mi-
nistered unto  niy  necessities,  and  to  them  that  were
with  me." The  reader  will  not  forget  to  remark,


that  though  St.  Paul  be  now  at  Miletus,  it  is  to
the  eiders  of  the  church  of  Ephesus  he  is  speaking,
when  he  says,  "Ye  yourselves  know  that  these
hands  have  ministered  to  my  necessities;"  and
that  the  whole  discourse  relates  to  his  conduct
during  his  last  preceding  residence  at  Ephesus.
That  manual  labour,  therefore,  which  he  had  ex-
ercised at  Corinth-,  he  continued  at  Ephesus,  and
not  onry  so,  but  continued  it  during  that  parti-
cular residence  at  Ephesus,  near  the  conclusion  of .
which  this  epistle  was  written ;  so  that  he  might
with  the  strictest  truth  say  at  the  time  of  writing
the  epistle,  "Even  unto  this^present  hour  we
labour,  working  with  our  own  hand's."  The
correspondency  is  sufficient,  then,  as  to  the  unde-
signedness  of  it.  It  is  manifest  to  my  judgment,
that  if  the  history,  in  this  article,  had  been  taken
from  the  epistle/ this  circumstance,  if  it  appeared
at  allj  would  have  appeared  in  its  place,  that  is,  in
the  direct  account  of  St.  Paul's  transactions  at
Ephesus. — The  correspondency  would  not  have
been  effected,  as  it  is,  by  a  kind  of  reflected  stroke,
that  is,  by  a  reference  m  a  subsequent  speech,  to
what  in  the  narrative  was  omitted.  Nor  is  it
likely,  on  the  other  hand,  that  a  circumstance
which  is  not  extant  in  the  history  of  St.  Paul  at
Ephesus,  should  have  been  made  the  subject  of  a
factitious  allusion,  in  an  epistle  purporting  to  be
written  by  him  from  that  place;  not  to  mention
that  the  allusion  itself,  especially  as  to  time,  is  too
oblique  and  general  to  answer  any  purpose  of  for-
gery whatever.  ^

No.  VII.

Chap.  ix.  20.  "  And  unto  the  Jews,  I  became*
as  a  Jew,  that  I  might  gain  the  Jews;  to  them
that  are  under  the  law,  as  under  the  law'."

We  have  the  disposition  here  described,  ex-
emplified in  two  instances  which  the  history  re-
cords: one,  Acts  xvi.  3,  "  Him  (Timothy)  would
Paul  have  to  go  forth  with  him,  and  took  and  cir-
cumcised him,  because  of  the  Jews  in  those  quar-
tersi  for  they  knew  all  that  his  father  was  a
Greek."  This  was  before  the  writing  of  the  epis-
tle. The  other,  Acts  xxi.  23, 26,  and  after  the
writing  of  the  epistle :  "  Do  this  that  we  say  to
thee :  we  have  four  men  which  have  a  vow  on
them ;  them  take,  and  purify  thyself  with  them,
that  they  may  shave  their  -heads ;  and  all  may-
know  that  those  things,  whereof  they  were  in-
formed concerning  thee,  are  nothing ;  but  that
thou  thyself  also  walkest  orderly,  and  Keepest  the
law. — Then  Paul  took  the. men,  and  the.  next
day,  purifying  himself  usith  them,  entered  into
the  temple*  Nor  does  this  concurrence  between
the  character  and  the  instances  look  like  the  result
of  contrivance.  St.  Paul,  in  the  epistle,  describes,
or  is  made  -to  describe,  his  own  accommodating
conduct  towards  Jews  and  towards  Gentiles,  to-
wards the  weak  and  over-scrupulous,  towards
men  indeed  of  every  variety  of  character;  "to
them  that  are  without  law  as  without  law,  being
not  without  law  to  God,  but  under  the  law  to
Christ,  that  I  might  gain  them  that  are  without
law ;  to  the  weak  became  I  as  weak,  that  I  might
gain  the  weak;  I  am  made  all  things  to  all  men,
that  I  inight  gain  some."  This  is  the  sequel  of
the  text  which  stands  at  the  head  of  the  present
number.  Taking  therefore  the  whole  passage  to-
gether, the  apostle's  condescension  to  the  Jews  is

mentioned  only  as  a  part  of  his  general  dii tAl—

towards  all. It  is  not  probable  that  this  c


180


HOILfi  PAUUNJE.


should  have  been  made  op  from  the  instances  in
the  Acts,  which  relate  solely  to  his  dealings  with
the  Jewa.  It  is  not  probable  that  a  sophist  should
take  his  hint  from  those  instances,  and  then  ex-
tend it  bo  much  beyond  them ;  and  it  is  still  more
incredible  that  the  two  instances,  in  the  Arts,  cir-
cumstantially related  end  interwoven  with  the  his-
tory, should  have  been  fabricated  in  order  to  suit
the  character  which  St.  Paul  gives  of  himself  in
the  epistle.

No.  VIII.

Chap.  i.  14—17.  "I  thank  God  that  I  bap-
tised none  of  you  but  Gr'ispus  and  Gaius,  lest  any
should  say  that  I  baptized  in  my  own  name ;  and
I  baptized  also  the  household  of  Stephanas:  be-
sides, I  know  not  whether  I  baptized  any  other :
for  Christ  sent  me  not  to  baptize,  but  to  preach
the  Gospel."

It  may  be  expected,  that  those  whom  the  apos-
tle baptized  with  his  own  hands,  were  converts
distinguished  from  the  rest  by  some  circumstance,
either  of  eminence  or  of  connexion  with  him.
Accordingly,  of  the  three  names  here  mentioned,
Crispus,  we  .find,  from  Acts  xviii.  H,  was  a  "chief
ruler  of  the  Jewish  synagogue  at  Corinth,  who
believed  in  the  Lord  with  all  his  house."  Gaius,
it  appears  from  Romans  xvi.  23,  wns  St.  Paul's
host  at  Corinth,  «ind  the  host,  he  tells  us,  "  of  the
whole  church."  The  household  of  Stephanas,
we  read  in  the  sixteenth  chapter  of  tliis  epistle,
"  were  the  first  fruits  of  Achaia."  Here,  there-
fore, is  the  propriety  we  expected:  and  it  is  a
proof  of  reality  not  to  be  contemned  ;  for  their
aames  appearing  in  the  several  places  in  which
they  occur,  with  a  mark  of  distinction  belonging
to  each,  could  hardly  be  the  effect  of  chance,  with-
out any  truth  to  direct  it :  and  on  the  other  hand,
to  suppose  that  they  were  picked  out  from  these
passages,  and  brought  together  in  the  text  before
us,  in  order  to  display  a  conformity  of  names,  is
both  improbable  in  itself,  and  is  rendered  more  so,
by  the  purpose  for  which  they  see  introduced.
They  come  in  to  assist  St.  Paul's  exculpation  of
himself,  against  the  possible  charge  of  having  as-
sumed the  character  of  the  founder  of  a  separate
religion,  and  with  no  other  visible,  or,  as  I  think,
imaginable  design.*


*  Chap.  i.  1.  "  Paul  called  to  be  an  apostle  of  Jesus
Christ,  through  the  will  of  God,  and  Sosthenes,  our  bro-
ther, unto  the  Church  of  God  which  js  at  Corinth."  The
only  account  we  have  of  any  person  who  bore  the  name
of  Boslhenes,  is  found  in  the  eighteenth  chapter  of  the
Acts.  When  the  Jews  at  Corinth  had  brought  Paul  he-
fore  Gallio,  and  Gallio  had  dismissed  their  complaint  as
unworthy  of  bis  interference,  and  had  driven  them  from
the  Judgment-seat;  "  then  all  the  Greeks,"  says  the  his-
torian,. "  took  Sosthenes.  the  chief  ruler  of  the  syna-
rogue,  "  and  beat  him  before  the  judgment-seat."  The
Sosthenes  here  spoken  of,  was  a  Corinthian ;  and,  if  he
was  a  Christian,  and  with  St.  Paul  when  he  wrote  this
•pistle,  was  likely  enough  to  be  joined  with  him  in  the
salutation  of  the  Corinthian  church.  But  here  occurs
a  difficulty.  If  Sosthenes  was  a  Christian  at  the  time
of  this  uproar,  why  should  the  Greeks  beat  him?  The
assault  upon  the  Christians  was  made  by  the  Jews.  It
was  the  Jews  who  had  brought  Paul  before  the  magis-
trate. If  it  had  been  the  Jews  also  who  had  beaten
Sosthenes,  I  should  not  have  doubted  but  that  ho  had
been  a  favourer  of  St.  Paul,  and  the  same  person  who
is  joined  with  him  in  the  epistle.  Let  us  see  therefore
whether  there  be  not  some  error  in  our  present  text.
The  Alexandrian  manuscript  gives  warn;  alone,  with-
out o«  X*.M«f,  and  in  followed  in  this  reading  by  the


No.  IX.


Chap.xvii.  10,  II.  "  Now,  if  Timotheus  c
let  no  man  despise  him."  Why  despise  him  1
This  charge  is  not  given  concerning  any  other-
messenger  whom  St.  Paul  sent,  and,  in  the  dif-
ferent epistles,  many  such  messengers  are  men-
tioned. Turn  to  1  Tim.  chap.  iv.  lk2,  and  you  will
find  that  Timothy  was  a  young  man,  younger  pro-
bably than  those  who  were  usually  employed  in  the
Christian  mission ;  and  that  St.  Paul,  apprehending
lest  he  should,  on  that  account,  be  exposed  to  con-
tempt, urges  upon  him  the  caution  which  is  there
inserted  — "  Let  no  man  despise  thy  youth.'1

No.X.

Chap.  xvi.  1 .  "  Now,  concerning  the  collection
for  the  saints,  as  l^have  given  order  to  the  churches
of  Galatia,  even  so  do  ye."

The  churches  of  Galatia  and  Phrvgiawere  the
last  churches  which  St.  Paul  had  visited  before  the
writing  of  this  epistle.  He  was  now  at  Ephesus,
and  he  came  thither  immediately  from  visiting  these
churches :  "  He  went  over  all  the  .country  of  Gala-
tia and  Phrvgia,  in  order,  strengthening  all  the  dis-  -
ciples.  And  it  came  to  pass  that  Paul  having  passed
through  the  upwr  coasts,  (viz.  the  above-named
countries,  called  the  upper  coasts,  as  being  the
northern  part  of  Asia  Minor,)  came  to  Ephesus,"
Acts  xviii.  23 ;  xix.  1.  These  therefore,  probably,
were  the  last  churches  at  which  he  left  directions
for  their  public  conduct  during  his  absence.  Al-
though two  years  intervened  between  his  journey
to  Ephesus  and  his  writing  this  epistle,  yet  it  does
not  appear  that  during  that  time  he  visited  any
other  church.  That  he  had  not  been  silent  when
he  was  in  Galatia,  upon  this  subject  of  contribu-
tion for  the  poor,  is  farther  made  out  from  a  hint
which  he  lets  fall  in  his  epistle  to  that  church:
"  Only  they  (viz.  the  other  apostles,)  would  that
we  should  remember  the  poor,  the  same  also  which
I  was  forward  to  do."

No.  XL

Chap.  iv.  18.  "  Now  some  are  puffed  up,  as
though  I  would  not  come  unto  you."


Coptic  version,  by  the  Arabian  version,  published  by
Arpenius,  by  the  Vulgate,  and  by  Bede's  Latin  version.
The  Greek  manuscripts  again,  as  well  as  Chrysostom,
give  oi  i3v3*«oi,  in  the  place  of  «•  Exxit»*f .  A  great  plu-
raHty  of  manuscripts  authorize  the  reading  which  is
retained  in  our  copies.  In  this  variety  it  appears  to  me
extremely  probable  that  the  historian  origiually  wrote
srsr-rrc  alone,  and  that  si  Ea^h^s,  and  o<  UvSmttt  have
been  respectively  added  as  explanatory  of  what  the
word  s-atvTf;  was  supposed  to  mean.  The  sentence,
without  the  addition  of  either  name,  would  ran  very  per-

spicuously,  thus,  "  **«  »sri»X.y«-iir  sutov;  mvt  tov  £^i»rof .
$xtKuZopl*Qi i$ srxvrif £a>«-5ivnv r»v  uexirvv»yvy«99

fTvjrrov  f^s-^oo-Siv  tow  SijAtaTBj.  and  he  drove  them
away  from  the  Judgment-seat;  and  they  all,**  vis.
the  crowds  of  Jews  -whom  the  judge  bad  bid  begone*
"  took  Sosthenes  and  beat  him  before  the  judgment-
seat."  It  is  certain  that,  as  the  whole  body  of  the  peo-
ple were  Greeks,  the  application  of  all  to  them  was
unusual  and  hard.  If  I  was  describing  an  insurrection
at  Paris,  I  might  say  all  the  Jews,  all  the  Protestants,
or  all  the  English  acted  so  and  so ;  but  I  should  scarcely
say  all  the  French,  when  the  whole  mass  of  the  com-
munity were  of  that  description.  As  what  is  here  of-
fered is  founded  upon  a  various  reading,  and  that  in
opposition  to  the  greater  part  of  the  manuscripts  thai
arc  extant  I  have  not  given  it  a  place  in  the  text.


SECOND  EPISTLE- TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.


181


Why  should  they  suppose  that  he  would  not
cornel  Turn  to  the  first  chapter  of  the  Second
Epistle  to  the  Corinthians,  and  you  will  find  that
he  had  already  disappointed  them : '"  I  was  minded
to  come  unto  you  before,  that  you  might  have  a
second  benefit;  and  to  pass  by  you  into  Mace-
donia, and  to  come  again  out  of  Macedonia  unto
J ou,  and  of  you  to  be  brought  on  my  way  toward
odea.  When  I,  therefore,  was  thus  minded  did  I
use  lightness  1  Or  the  things  that  I  purpose  do,
I  purpose  according  to  the  flesh,  that  with  me
there  should  be  yea,  yea,  and  nay,  nay?  But,  as
God  is  true,  our  word  toward  you  was  not  yea  and
nay."  It  appears  from  this  quotation,  that  he  had
not  only  intended,  but  that  he  had  promised  them
a  visit  before ;  for,  otherwise,  why  should  he  apo-
logize for  the  change  of  his  purpose,  or  express  so
much  anxietv  lest  this  change  should  be  imputed
to  any  culpable  fickleness  in  his  temper;  and  lest
be  should  thereby  seem  to  them,  as  one  whose
word  was  not,  in  any  sort,  ta he  depended  upon?
Besides  which,  the  terms  made  use  of,  plainly  re-
fer to  a  promise,  "  Our  word- toward  you  was  not~
yea  and  nay."  St.  Paul,  therefore,  had  signified
an  intention  which  he  had  not  been  able  to  exe-
cute ;  and  this  seeming  breach  of  his  word,  and
the  delay  of  his  visit,  had,  with  some  who  were
evil  affected  towards  him,  given  birth  to  a  sugges-
tion that  he  would  come  no  more  to  Corinth.

No.  XII.

Chap.  ▼.  7, 8.  "  For  even  Christ/our  passover,
is  sacrificed  for  us ;  therefore  let  us  keep  the  feast,
not  with  old  leaven,  neither  with  the  leaven  of
malice  and  wickedness,  but  with  the  unleavened
bread  of  sincerity  and  truth."

Dr.  Benson  tells  us,  that  from  this  passage,
compared  with  chapter  xvi.  8,  it  has  been  con-
jectured that  this  epistle  was  written  about  the
time  of  the  Jewish  passover;  and  to  me  the  con-
jecture appears  to  be  very  well  founded.  The
passage  to  which  Dr.  Benson  refers  us  is  this :
*  I  wfll  tarry  at  Ephesus  until  Pentecost."  With
this  passage  he  ought  to  have  joined  another  in
the  same  context:  "  And  it  may  be  that  I  will
abide,  yea,  and  winter  with  you ;"  for  from  the
two  passages  laid  together,  it  follows  that  the
epistle  was  written  before  Pentecost,  yet  after
winter;  which  necessarily  determines  the  date  to
the  part  of  the  year  within  which  the  passover
falls.  It  was  written  before  Pentecost,  because
be  says,  "  I  will  tarry  at  Ephesus  until  Pentecost."
It  was  written  after  winter,  because  he  tells  them,
"It  may  be  that  I  may  abide,  yea,  and  winter
with  you."  The  winter  which  the  apostlojpur-
posed  to  pass  at  Corinth  was  undoubtedly  the
winter  next  ensuing  to  the  date  of  the  epistle :  yet
it  was  a  winter  subsequent  to  the  ensuing  Pen-
tecost because  he  did  not  intend  to  set  forwards
upon  his  journey  till  after  that  feast.  The  words,
u>t  us  keep  the  feast,  not  with  old  leaven,  nei-
ther with  the  leaven  of  malice  and  wickedness,  but
with  the  unleavened  bread  of  sincerity  and  truth,"
look  very  like  words  suggested  by  the  season ;  at
least  they  have,  upon  that  supposition,  a  force  and
signincancy  which  do  not  belong  to  them  upon
any  other ;  and  it  is  not  a  little  remarkable,  that
the  hints  casually  dropped  in  the  epistle  concern-
ing particular  parts  of  the  year,  should  coincide
with  this  supposition.


CHAPTER  IV.

Second  Epistle. to  the  Corinthian*.

No.  L

I  will  not  say  that  it  is  impossible,  having  seen
the  First  Epistle  to  the  Corinthians,  to  construct
a  second  with  ostensible  allusions  to  the  first;  or
that  it  is  impossible  that  both  should  be  fabricated,
so  as  to  carry  on  an  order-  and  continuation  of
story,  by  successive  references  to  the  same  events.
But  I  say  that  this,  in  either  case,  must  be  the  effect
of  craft  and  design.  Whereas,  whoever  examinee
the  allusions  to  the  former  epistle  which  he  finds
in  this,  whilst  he  will  acknowledge  them  to  be
such  as  would  rise  spontaneously  to  the  hand  of
the  writer,  from  the  very  subject  oi  the  corres-
pondence, and  the  situation  -  of  the  corresponding
parties,  supposing  these  to  be  real,  will  see  no
particle  of  reason  to  suspect,  either  thai  the  clauses
containing  these  allusions  were  insertions  for  the
puroose,  or  that  the  several  transactions  of  the  Co-
rintnian  church  were  feigned,  in  order  toTonn  a
train  of  narrative,  or  to  support  the  appearance  of
connexion  between  the  two  epistles.

I.  In  the  First  E[ristle,  St.  Paul  announces  hfe
intention  of  passing  through  Macedonia,  in  his
way  to  Corinth :  **  I  will  come  to  you  when  I  shall
pass  through  Macedonia."  In  the  Second  Epistle,
we  find  him  arrived  in  Macedonia,  and  about  to
pursue  his  journey  to  Corinth.  But  observe  the
manner  in  which  this  is  made  to  appear  "  I  know
the  forwardness  of  your  mind,  for  which  I  boast
of  you  to  them  of  Macedonia,  that  Achaia  was
ready  a  year  ago,  and  your  zeal  hath  provoked
very  many :  yet  have  I  sent  the  brethren,  lest  ouf
boasting  of  you  should,  be  in  vain  in  this  behalf:
that,  as  I  said,  ye-  may  be  ready  $  lest,  haply,  if
they  of  Macedonia  come  with  me,  and  find  yon
unprepared,  we  (that  we  say  not  you  J  be  asham-
ed in  this  same  confident  boasting,"  chap.  ix.
2,  3,  4.  St  Paul's  being  in  Macedonia  at  the
time  of  writing  the  epistle,  is;  in  this  passage,  in-
ferred only  irom  his  saying  that  he  had  boasted
to  the  Macedonians  of  the  alacrity  of  his  Achaian
converts;  and  the  fear  which  he  expresses,  lest,  if
any  of  the  Macedonian  Christians  should  come
with  him  unto  Achaia,  they  should  find  his  boast-
ing unwarranted  by  the  event.  The  business  of
the  contribution  is  the  sole  cause  of  mentioning
Macedonia  at  all.  Will  it  be  insinuated  that  this
passage  was  framed  merely  to  state  that  St.  Paul
was  now  in  Macedonia ;  and,  by  that  statement,  to
produce  an  apparent  agreement  with  the  purpose
of  visiting  Macedonia,  notified  in  the  First  Epistle?
Or  will  it  be  thought  probable,  that,  if  a  sophist
had  meant  to  place  St.  Paul  in  Macedonia,  for  the
sake  of  giving  countenance  to  his  forgery,  he
would  have  done  it  in  so  obKque  a  manner  as
through  the  medium  of  a  contribution?  The  same
thing  may  be  observed  of  another  text  in  the  epis-
tle, in  which  the  name  of  Macedonia  occun:
"  Furthermore,  when  I  came  to  Troas  to  preach
the  Gospel,  and  a  door  was  opened  unto  me  of  the
Lord,  I  had  no  rest  in  niy  spirit,  because  I  found
not  Titus,  my  brother;  but  taking  my  leave  of
them,  I  went  from  thence  into  Macedonia."  I
mean,  that  it  may  be  observed  of  this  passage  also,
that  mere  is  a  reason  for  mentioning  Macedonia,
16


m


BORM  PAULINJk


entirely  distinct  horn -the  PVpow  of  showing  8t
Paul  to  be  there.  Indeed,  if  the  passage  before
us  show  thai  point  at  ail,  it  shows  it  so  obscurely,
that  Gtotius,  though  he  did  not  doubt  that  Paul,
was  now  in  Macedonia,  refers  this  text  to  a  dif-
ferent journey.  Is  this  the  hand  of  a  forger,  me-
ditating  to  establish  a  false  conformity!  The  text,
however,  in  which  it  is  most  strongly  implied  that
Qt-  Paul  wrote  the  present  epistle  from  Mace-
donia, is  found  in  the  fourth,  fifth,  and  sixth  verses
of  the  seventh  chapter:  "  I  am  filled  with  comfort,
I  am  exceeding  joyful  in  all  our  tribulation :  for.
when  we  were  come  into  Macedonia,  our  flesh  had
no  rest ;  without  were  fightings,  within  were  fears:
nevertheless,  God,  that  comforteth  those  that  are
cast  down,  comforted  us  by  the  coming  of  Titus."
Yet  even  here,  I  think,  no  one  will  contend,  that
St.  Paul's  coming  to  Macedonia,  or  being  in  Ma-
cedonia, was  the  principal  thing  intended  to  be
told;  or  that  the  telling  of  it,  indeed,  was  any  part
of  the  intention  with  which  the  text  was  written;
or  that  the  mention  even  of  .the  name  of  Mace-
donia was  not  purely  incidental,  in  the  description
of  those  tumultuous  sorrows  with  which  the
writer's  mind  hath  been  lately  agitated,  and  from
which  he  was  relieved  by  the  coming  of  Titus.
The  first  five  verses  of  the  eighth  chapter,  which
cemmend  the  liberality  or  the  Macedonian
churches,  do  not,  in  my  opinion,  by  themselves,
pfove  St  Paul  to  have  been  at  M«A»A«ii«  at  the
time  of  writing  the  epistle.

3.  In  theFirst  Epistle,  St  Paul  denounces  a
sjevere  censure  against  an  incestuous  marriage,
which  had  taken  place  amongst  the  Corinthian
converts,  with  the  connivance,  not  to  say  with  the
approbation,  of  the  church ;  and  enjoins  the  church
to  purge  itself  of  this  scandal,  by  expelling  the  of-
fender from  its  society:  "It  is  reported  commonly,
that  there  is  fornication  among  you,  and  such  for-
nication, as  is  not  so  mochas  named  amongst  die
Gentiles,  that  one  should  have  his  father's  wife;
and  ye  are  puffed  up,  and  have  not  rather  mourn-
ed, that  he  that  hath  done  this  deed  might  be  taken
away  from  among  you;  for  I,  verily,  as  absent  in
body,  but  present  in  spirit,  have  judged  already,
as  though  I  were  present,  concerning  him  that
fcath  done  this  deed:  in  the  name  of  our  Lord
Jesus  Christ,  when  ye  are  gathered  together,  and
my  spirit,  with  the  power  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,
to  deliver  such  a  one  unto  Satan  for  the  destruc-
tion of  the  flesh,  that  the  spirit  may  be  saved  in
the  day  of  the  Lord,"  chap.  v.  1—5.  In  the
Second  Epistle,  we  find  this  sentence  executed,
and  the  offender  jo  be  so  affected  with  the  punish-
ment, that  St  Paul  now  intercedes  for  his  resto-
ration; "  Sufficient  to  such  a  man  is  this  punish-
ment, which  was  inflicted  of  many ;  so  that,  con-
trariwise, ye  ought  rather  to  forgive  him  and
comfort  him,  lest  perhaps  such  a  one  should  be
swallowed  up  with  over-much  sorrow;  wherefore,
I  beseech  you  that  ye  would  confirm  your  love
towards  him,"  2  Cor.  chap.  ii.  7,  8.  Is  this
whole  business  feigned  for  the  sake  of  carrying  on
a  continuation  of  story  through  the  two  epistles!
The  churdh  also,  no  less  than  the  offender,  was
brought  by  St  Paul's  reproof  to  a  deep  sense  of
the  impropriety  of  their  conduct  Their  penitence,
and  their  respect  to  his  authority,  were,  as  might
be  expected,  exceeding  grateful  to  St.  Paul :  "  We
were  comforted  not  by  Titus'  coming  only,  but  by
the  consolation  wherewith  he  was  comforted  in
you,  when  he  told  us  your  earnest  desire,  jour


mourning,  your  fervent  Bund  towards  me,  ao  that
I  rejoiced  the  more;  for,  though  I  made  you  sorry
with  a  letter,  I  do  not  repent,  though  1  did  repent;
for  I  perceive  that  the  same  epistle  made  you  sorry,
though  it  were  but  for  a  season.  Now  I  rejoice,
not  that  ye.  were  made  sorry,  but  that  ye  sor-
rowed to  repentance;  for  ye  were  made  sorry, af-
ter a  godly  manner,  that  ye  might  receive  damage
by  us  in  nothing,"  chap.  vii.  7—9.  Thai  tSe
passage  is  to  be  referred  to  the  Incestuous  mar-
riage, is  proved  by  the  twelfth  verse  of  the  same
chapter:  "  Though  I  wrote  unto  you,  I  did  it  not
for  his  cause  that  had  done  the  wrong,  nor  for
his  cause  that  suffered  wrong ;  but  that  our  care
for  you,  in  the  sight  of  God^  might  appear  unto
you."  There  were,  it  is  true,  various  topics  of
blame  noticed  in  the  First  Epistle ;  but  there  was
none,  except  this  of  the  incestuous  marriage,
whkn  could  be  called  a  transaction  between  pri-
vate parties,  or  of  which  it  could  be  said  that  one
particular  person  had  done  the  "wrong,"  and  an-
other particular  person  had  "  suffered  it"  Could
all  this  be  without  foundation  1  or  could  it  be  put
into  the  Second  Epistle,  merely  to  furnish  an  ob-
scure sequel  to  what  had  been  said  about  an  in-
cestuous marriage  in  the  first  1

3.  In  the  sixteenth  chapter  of  the  First  Epistle,
a  collection  for  the  saints  is  lecommendedto  be
set  forwards  at  Corinth:  "Now,  concerning  the
collection  for  the  saints,  as  I  have  given  order  to
the  churches  of  Galatia,  so  do  ye,  chap.  xvi.  1.
In  the  ninth  chapter  of  the  Second  Epistle,  such
a  collection  is  spoken  of,  as  in  readiness  to  be  re-
ceived: "As  touching  the  ministering  to  the
saints,  it  is  superfluous  for  me  to  write  to  you.  for
I  know  the  forwardness  of  your  mind,  for  which
I  boast  of  you  to  them  of  Macedonia,  that  Achaia
was  ready  a  year  ago,  and  your  seal  hath  provoked
very  many,"  chap.  ix.  1,  2.  This  is  such  a  con-
tinuation of  the  transaction  as  might  be  expect-
ed; or,  possibly  it  will  be  said,  as  might  easily  be
counterfeited ;  but  there  is  a  circumstance  of  nicety
in  the  agreement  between  the  two  epistles,  which,
Tam  convinced,  the  author  of  a  foreery  would  not
have  hit  upon,  or  which,  if  he  had  hit  upon  ithe
would  have  set  forth  with  more  clearness.  The
Second  Epistle  speaks  of  the  Corinthians  as  hav-
ing begun  this  eleemosynary  business  a  year  be-
fore :  "Tins  is  expedient  for  you  who  have  begun
before,  not  only  to  do,  but  also  to  be  forward  a  year
ago,"  chap.  viiL  x.  "I  boast  of  you  to  them
of  Macedonia,  that  Achaia  was  ready  a  year  ago,"
chap.  ix.  2.  From  these,  texts  it  is  evident,  that
something  had  been  done  in  the  business  a  year
before.  It  appears,  however,  from  other  texts
in  the  epistle,  that  the  contribution  was  not  yet
collected  or  paid;  for  brethren  were  sent  from
St  Paul  to  Corinth,  "to  make  up  their  boun-
ty," chap.  ix.  5.  They  are  urged  to  "perform
the  doing  of  it,"  chap.  viii.  11.  "And  every
man  was  exhorted  to  give  as  he  purposed  isj  his
heart,"  chap.  ix.  7.  The  contribution,  there-
fore, aa  represented  in  our  present  epistle,  was  in
readiness,  yet  not  received  from  the  contributors ;
was  begun,  was  forward  long  before,  yet  not
hitherto  collected.  Now  this  representation  agrees
with  6ne,  and  only  with  one,  supposition,  namely,
that  every  man  had  laid  by  in  store,  had  already
provided  the  fund,  from  which  he  was  afterwards
to  contribute— the  very  case  which  the  First  Epis-
tle authorises  us  to  suppose  to  have  existed ;  for  in
that  epistle  St.  Paul  had  charged  theCorinthiana,


SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.


i8a


"npcmtbtffiirt  day  of  the  week,  every  one  of  them,
to  lay  by  in  store  as  God  had  prospered  him,"*
I  Cor.  char*  xvi  flL


No.  II.


j  the  Second  Epistle  to  the  Corin-
t  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  we  axe  soon
brought  to  observe,  not  only  that  there  exists  no
-vestige  either  of  the  epistle  having  been  taken
from  the  history,  or  the  history  from  the  epistle;
bat  also  that  there  appears  in  the  contents  of  the
epistle  positive  evidence,  that  neitherwatf  borrowed
from  the  other.  Titus,  who  bears  a  conspicuous
part  in  the  epistle,  is  not  mentioned  in  the  Acts
of  the  Apostles  at  all.  St  Paul's  sufferings  enu-
merated, chap,  xi  34.  "  of  the  Jews  five  tunes  re-
ceived I  forty  stripes  save  one ;  thrice  was  I  beaten
with  rods;  once  was  I  stoned:  thrice  I  suffered
shipwreck;  a  night  and  a  day  I  have  been  in  the
deep,"  cannot  be  made  out  from  bis  history  as  de-
livered in  the  Acts;  nor  would  this  account  have
been  given  by  a  writer,  who  either  drew  his  know-
ledge of  St  Paul  from  that  history,  or  who  was
careful  to  preserve  a  conformity  with  it  The
account  in  the  ensile  of  St  Paul's  escape  from
Damascus,  though  agreeing  in  the  main  fact  with
the  account  of  the  same  transaction  in  the  Acts,
is  related  with  such  difference  of  circumstance,  as
Tenders  it  utterly  improbable  that  one  should  be
derived  from  the  other.  The  two  accounts,  placed
by  the  side  of  each  other,  stand  as  follows:


*  Tbs  following  observations  will  satisfy  us  concern-
ing the  parity  of  oar  apostle's  conduct  in  the  suspicious
business  of  a  pecuniary  contribution.

1.  Be  disclaims  the  having  received  any  inspired
authority  for  the  directions  which  be  is  giving;  "I
apeak  not  by  commandment,  but  by  occasion  of  the  for-
wardness of  others,  and  to  prove  the  sincerity  of  your
love/  2  Cor.  chap.  viii.  8.  Who,  that  had  a  sinister
purpose  to  answer  by  the  recommending  of  subscrip-
tions, would  thus  distinguish,  and  thus  lower  the  credit
of  his  own  recommendation  ?

2.  Although  be  asserts  the  general  right  of  Christian
ministers  to  a  maintenance  from  their  miniitry,  yet  he
protests  against  the  making  use  of  this  right  in  bis  own
person :  "Even  so  hath  the  Lord  ordained,  that  they
which  preach  the  Gospel  should  live  of  the  Gospel  •,  but
I  have  used  none  of  these  things,  neither  have  I  written
these  things  that  it  should  be  so  done  unto  me ;  for  it
were  better  for  me  to  die  than  that  any  man  should
make  my  glorying,  i.  s.  my  professions  of  disinterested-
ness, void,"  l  Cor.  chap,  is.  14, 15.

SL  He  repeatedly  proposes  that  there  should  be  asso-
ciates with  himself  in  the  management  of  the  public


bounty;  not  colleagues  of  bis  own  appointment,  but
persons  elected  for  that  purpose  by  the  contributors
themselves. "  And  when  I  come,  whomsoever  ye  shall


Hawaii


►ve  by  your  tetters,  them  will  I  send  to  bring  your
lity  onto  Jerusalem ;  and  if  it  be  meet  that  I
go  also,  they  shall  go  with  me,*1  J  Cor.  chap.  xvi.  3, 4.
And  in  the  Second  Epistle,  what  is  here  proposed,  we
Had  actually  done,  and  done  for  the  very  purpose  of
guarding  his  character  against  any  imputation  that
might  be  brought  upon  it,  in  the  discbarge  of  a  pecu-
niary trust :  "And  we  have  sent  with  bim  the  brother,
whose  praise  is  in  the  Gospel  throughout  all  the
churches ;  and  not  that  only,  but  who  was  also  chosen
of  the  churches  to  travel  with  us  with  this  grace  (gift)
which  is  administered  by  us  to  the  glory  of  the  same
Lord,  and  the  declaration  of  your  ready  mind :  avoid-
ing this,  that  no  man  should  blame  us  in  this  abund-
ance which  is  administered  by  ui ;  providiug  for  things
honest,  not  only  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord,  but  also  in  the
sight  of  men  fW.  #.  not  resting  in  the  consciousness  of
oar  own  integrity,  but,  in  such  a  subject,  careful  also
to  approve  our  integrity  to  tliepublfe  judgment  8  Cor.
eaap.  viii.  18-tL


S  Cor.  chap.  xi.  SB,  33.
In  Damascus,  the  governor
under  Aretas  the  king,  kept
the  city  of  the  Damascenes
with  a  garrison,  desirous  to
apprehend  me ;  and  through
a  window  in  a  basket  was  I
let  down  by  the  wall,  and
escaped  his  hands.


Acts,  chap.  tx.  !
And  after  many  days  i
fulfilled,  the  Jews  took
counsel  to  kill  him;  but
their  laying  in  wait  was
known  of  Saul,  and  they
watched  the  gates  day  ana
night  to  kill  him?  then  the
disciples  took  him  by  night,
and  let  him  down  by  the
wall  in  a  basket.

Now  if  we  be  satisfied  in  general  concerning
these  two  ancient  writings,  that  the  one  was  not
known  to  the  writer  of  the  other,  or  not  consulted
by  him;  Hhen  the  accordances  which  may  be
pointed  out  between  them,  will  admit  of  no  solu-
tion so  probable,  as  the  attributing  of  them  to
truth  and  reality,  as  their  common  foundation.

No.  IBL

The  opening  of  this  epistle  exhibits  a  conneikn
with  the  history j  wjiich  alone  would  satisfy  my
mind  that  the  epistle  was  written  by  St.  Paul,  and
by  St  Paul  in  the  situation  in  which  the  history
places  him.  Let  it  be  remembered,  that  in  the
nineteenth  chapter  of  the  Acts.  St  Paul  is  repre-
sented as  driven  away  from  Epnesus.  or  as  leaving
however  Ephesus,  in  consequence  ot  an  uproar  nt
that  city,  excited  by  some  interested  adversaries]
of  the  new  religion.  The  account  of  the  tumult
is  as  follows :  "When  they  heard  these  sayings,1'
viz.  Demetrius's  complaint  of  the  danger  to  be
apprehended  from  St  Paul's  ministry  to  the

tablished  worship -•*"■•  •

were  full  of  wrath.

Diana  of  the  Ephesians.  And  the  whole  city  was
filled  with  confusion;  and  having  caught  Gains
and  Aristarchus,  Paul's  companions  in  travel,
they  rushed  with  one  accord  into  the  theatre;  and
when  Paul  would  have  entered  in  unto  the  people,
the  disciples  suffered  him  not;  and  certain  of  the
chief  of  Asia,  which  were  his  friends,  sent  unto
him,  desiring  that  he  would  not  adventure  him-
self into  the  theatre.  Some,  therefore,  cried  one
thing,  and  some  another;  for  the  assembly  wag
confused,  and  the  more  part  knew  not  wherefore
they  were  come  together.  And  they  drew  Alex-
ander out  of  the  multitude,  the  Jews  putting  hinv.
forward ;  and  Alexander  beckoned  with  his  hand,
and  would  have  made  his  defence  unto  the  people;
but,  when  they  knew  that  he  was  a  Jew,  all  with
one  voice,  about  the  space  of  two  hours,  cried  out,
Great  is  Diana  of  the  Ephesians. — And  after  the
uproar  was  ceased,  Paul  called  unto  him  the  dis-
ciples, and  embraced  them,  and  departed  for  to  go
into  Macedonia,"  When  he  was  arrived  in  Ma-
cedonia, he  wrote  the  Second  Epistle  to  the  Co-
rinthians which  is  now  before  us:  and  he  begins
bis  epistle  in  this  wise:  "  Blessed  be  God,  even
the  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  Father
of  mercies,  and  the  God  of  all  comfort,  who  com-
forteth  us  in  all  our  tribulation,  that  we  may  be
able  to  comfort  them  which  are  in  any  trouble,  by
the  comfort  wherewith  we  ourselves  are  comforted
of  God.  For,  as  the  sufferings  of  Christ  abound
in  us,  so  our  consolation  also  aboundeth  by  Christ;
and  whether  we  be  afflicted,  it  is  for  your  conso-
lation and  salvation,  which  is  effectual  in  the  en-
during of  the  same  sufferings  which  we  also  suffer ;
or  whether  we  be  comforted,  it  is  foryour  consola-
tion and  salvation :  and  our  hope  of  you  is  stead-
fast, knowing  that,  as  ye  are  partakers  of  the  suf-
ferings, so  shall  ye  be  also  of  the  conaojation.  For


184


H0R2E  PAULINA.


we  would  not,  brethren,  have  yon  ignorant  of  our
trouble  which  came  to  us  in  Abia,  that  we  were
pressed  oat  of  measure,  above'  strength,  insomuch
that  we  despaifted  even  of  life ;  but  we  had  the
sentence  or  death  m  ourselves,  that  we  should
not  trust  in  ourselves,  but  in  God,  which  raiseth
the  dead,  who  delivered  us  from  so  great  a
death,  and  doth  deliver;  in  whom  we  trust  that  he
will  yet  deliver  us."  Nothing  could  be  more  ex-
pressive of  the  circumstances  in  which  the  history
describes  St.  Paul  to  have  been  at  the  time  when
the  epistle  purports  to  be  written;  or  rather,
nothing  could  be  more  expressive  of  the  sensa


i  arising  from  these  circumstances,  than  this
passage.  U  is  the  calm  recollection  of  a  mind
emerjpd  from  the  confusion  of  instant  danger.  It
is  that  devotion  and  solemnity  of  thought,  which
follows  a  recent  deliverance*  There  is  just  enough
of  particularity  in  the  passage  to  show  that  it  is
to  be  referred  to  the  tumult  at  Ephesus:  "  We
would  notj  brethren,  have  you  ignorant  of  our
trouble  which  came  to  us  in  Asia."  And  there  is
nothing  more:  no  mention  of  Demetrius,  of  the
seizure  of  St.  Paul's  friends,  of  the  interference  of
the  town-clerk,  of  the  occasion  or  nature  of  the
danger  which  St.  Paul  had  escaped,  or  even  of
the  city  where  it  happened ;  in  a  word,  no  recital
from  which  a  suspicion  could  be  conceived,  either
that  the  author  ot  the  epistle  had  made  use  of  the
narrative  in  the  Acts ;  or,  on  the  other  hand,  that
he  had  sketched  the  outline,  which  the  narrative
in  the  Acts  only  filled  up.  That  the  forger  of  an
epistle,  under  the  name  of  St.  Paul,  should  borrow
circumstances  from  a  history  of  St.  Paul  then  ex-
tant ;  or,  that  the  author  of  a  history  of  St  Paul
should  gather  materials  from  letters  bearing  St.
Paul's  name,  may  be  credited;  but  I  cannot  believe
that  any  forger  whatever,  should  fall  upon  an  ex-
pedient so  refined,  as  to  exhibit  sentiments  adapted
to  a  situation,  and  to  leave  his  readers  to  seek  out
that  situation  from  the  history;  still  less  that  the
author  of  a  history  should  go  about  to  frame  facts
and  circumstances,  fitted  to  supply  the  sentiments
which  he  found  in  the  letter,  it  may  be  said,  per-
haps, that  it  does  not  appear  from  the  history,  that
any  danger  threatened  St.  Paul's  life  in  the  up-
roar at  Ephesus,  so  imminent  as  that  from  which
in  the  epistle  he  represents  himself  to  have  been
delivered.  This  matter,  it  is  true,  is  not  stated  by
the  historian  in  form ;  but  the  personal  danger  of
the  apostle,  we  cannot  doubt,  must  have  been  ex-
treme, when  the  "  whole  city  was  filled  with  con-
fusion ;"  when  the  populace  had  -"  seized  his  com-
panions;" when,  in  the  distraction  of  his  mind,  he
insisted  upon  "coming  forth  amongst  them;"
when  the  Christians  who  were  about  him  "would
not  suffer  him ;"  when  "  his  friends,  certain  of  the
chief  of  Asia,  sent  to  him,  desiring  that  he  would
.not  adventure  himself  in  the  tumult;"  when,  last-
ly, he  was  obliged  to  quit  immediately  the  place
and  the  country,  "and  when  the  tumult  was
ceased,  to  depart  into  Macedonia." '  All  which
particulars  are  found  in  the  narration,  and  justify
St.  Paul's  own  account,  "  that  he  was  pressed  out
of  measure,  above  strength,  insomuch  that  he
despaired  even  of  life ;  that  he  had  the  sentence
of  death  in  himself;"  i.  e.  that  he  looked  upon
himself  as  a  man  condemned  to  die.

No.  IV.

ft  rias  already  been  remarked,  that.  St.  Paul's
original  intention  was  to  have  visited  Corinth  in .


his  way  to  Macedonia:  "  I  was  minded  to  came
unto  you  before,' and  to  pass:  by  you  into  Macedo-
nia," 2  Cor.  chap.  i.  15,  16.  It  has  also  been  re-
marked that  he  changed  his  intention,  and  ulti-
mately resolved  upon  going  through  Macedonia
first.  Now  upon  this  nead there  'exists  a  circum-
stance of  correspondency  between  our  epistle  and
the  history,  which  is  not  very  obvious  to  the  read-
ers observation ;  but  which,  when  observed,  will
be  found,  I  think,  close  and  exact.  Which  cir-
cumstance is  this :  that  though  the  change  of  St.
Paul's  intention  be  expressly  mentioned  only  in
the  second  epistle,  yet  it  appears,  both  from  the
history  and  from  this  second,  epistle,  that  the
change  had  taken  place  before  the  writing  of  the
first  epistle ;  that  it  appears  however  from  neither,
otherwise  than  by  an  inference,  unnoticed  per-
haps by  almost  every  one  who  does  not  ait  down
professedly  to  the  examination.

First,  then,  how  does  this  point  appear  from
the  history  1  In  the  nineteenth'  chapter  of  the
Acts,  and  the  twenty-first  verse,  we  are  told,  that
"  Paul  purposed  in  the  spirit  when  he  had  passed
through  Macedonia  and  Achaia,  to  go  to  Jerusa-
lem. So  he  sent  into  Macedonia  two  of  them
that  ministered  unto  him,  Timothcus  and  Erastus ;
but  he  himself  stayed  in  Asia  for,  a  season,"  A
short  time  oiler  this,  and  evidently  in  pursuance
of  the  same  intention,  we  find  (chap.  xx.  1,  2.)
that  Paul  departed  from  Ephesus  for  to  go  into
Macedonia:  and  that  when  ho  had  gone  over
those  parts,  he  came  into  Greece."  The  resolu-
tion therefore  of  passing  first  through  Macedonia,
and  from  thence  into  Greece,  was  formed  by  fit.
Paul  previously  to  the  sending  away  of  Timothy.
The  -order  in  which  the  two  countries  are  men-
tioned shows  the  direction  pf  his  intended  route,
"when  he  had  passed  through  Macedonia  and
Achaia."  Timothy  and  Erastus,  who  were  to
precede  him  in  his  progress,  were  sent  by  him
from  Ephesus  into  Macedonia.  He  himself  a
short  time  afterwards,  and,  as  hath  been  ob-
served, evidently  in  continuation  and  pursuance
of  the  same  design,  "  departed  for  to  go  into  Ma-
cedonia." If  he'  had  ever,  therefore,  entertained
a  different  plan  of  his  journey,  which  is  not
hinted  in  the  history,  he  must  have  changed  that
plan  before  this  time.  But,  from  the  17th  verse
of  the  fourth  chapter  of  the  First  Epistle  to  the
Corinthians,  we  discover,  that  Timothy  had  been
sent  away  from  Ephesus  before  that  epistle  was
written :  "  For  this'  cause  have  I  sent  unto  yon
Timotlieus,  who  is  my  beloved  son."  The
change,  therefore,  of  St.  raid's  resolution,  which
was  prior  to  the  sending  away  of  Timothy,  was
necessarily  prior  to  the  writing  of  the  First  Epistle
to  the  Corinthians.

Thus  stands  the  order  of  dates,  as  collected  from
the  history,  compared  with  the  First  Epistfe.  Now
let  us  inquire,  secondly,  how  this  matter  is  repre-
sented in  the  epistle  before  us.  In  the  sixteenth
verse  of  the  first  chapter  of  this  epistle,  St.  Paul
speaks  of  the  intention  which  he  had  once  enter-
tained of  visiting  Achaia,  in  his  way  to  Macedo-
nia:  "  In  this  confidence  I  was  minded  to  come
unto  you  before,  that  ye  might  have  a  second  bene-
fit :  and  fo  pass  by  you  into  Macedonia."  After
protesting,  in  the  seventeenth  verse,  against  any
evil  construction  that  might  be  put  ujxm  his  lay-
ing aside  of  this  intention,  in  the  twenty-third
verse  he  discloses  the  cause  of  it:  "  Moreover  I
call  God  for  a  record  upon  my  soul,  that,  to  spare


SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.


185


m  1  came  not  at  yet  onto  Corinth."  And  then
be  proceeds  as  follows:  "Bat  I  determined  this
witn  myself  that  I  would  not  come  again  to  you
in  heaviness :  for,  if  I  make  you  sorry,  who  is  he
then  that  maketh  me  glad,  but  the  same  which  is
made  sorry  by  me  1  And  I  wrote  this  same  unto
you,  lest  when  1  came  I  should  have  sorrow  from
them  of  whom  I  ought  to  rejoice ;  having  confi-
dence in  you  all;  that  my  joy  is  thejoy  of  you  all;
for,  out  of  much  affliction  and  anguish  of  heart,  /
wrote  unto  you  with  many  tears;  not  that  ye
should  be  grieved,  but  that  ve  might  know  the
love  which!  have  more  abundantly  unto  you :  but
if  anyliave  caused  grief,  he  bath  not  grieved  me
but  in  part,  that  I  may.  not  overcharge  you  all.
Sufficient  to  such  a  man  is  this  punishment)  which
was  inflicted  of  many."  rh  this  quotation,  let  the
leader  first  direct  his  attention  td  the  clause  marked
by  Italics,  "  and  I  wrote  this  same  unto  you;1'  and
let  him  consider,  whether  from  the  context,  and
from  the  structure  of  the  whole  passage,  it  be  not
evident  that  this  writing  was  alter  St.  Paul  had
u  determined  with  himself,  that  he  would  not  come
again  to  them  in  heaviness  ?"  whether,  indeed,  it
was  not  in  consequence  of  this  determination,  or
at  least  with  this  determination  upon  his  mind  7
And,  in  the  next  place,  let  him  consider  whether
the  sentence,  "  I  determined  this  with  myself,  that
I  would  not  come  again  to  you  in  heaviness,"  do
net  plainly  refer  to  that  postponing  of  his  visit,  to
which  he  had  alluded  m  the  verse  but  one  before,
when  heboid,  "I  call  God  for  a  record  upon  my
soul,  that,  to  spare  you,- 1  came  not  as  yet  unto
Corinth:"  and  whether  this  be  not  the  visit  of
which  he  speaks  in  the  sixteenth  verse,  wherein
he  informs  the  Corinthians,  "that  he  had  been
minded  to  pass  by  them  into  Macedonia ;"  but  that,
for  reasons/ which  argued  no  levity  or  fickleness
in  his  disposition,  he  had  been  compelled  to  change
his  purpose.  If  this,  be  sd,  then  it  follows  that  the
writing  here  mentioned  was  posterior  to  the
change  of  his  intention.  The  only  question,  there-
fore, that  remains,  will  be,  whether  this  writing
relate  to  the  letter  which  we  now  have  under  the
title  of  the  First  Epistle  to  the  Corinthians,  or  to
some  other  letter  not 'extant?  And  uwm  this
question,  I  think  Mr.  Locke's  observation  decisive ;
namely,  that  the  second  clause  marked  in-the  quo-
tation by  Italics,  "I  wrote  unto  you  with  many
tears,"  and  the  first  clause  so  marked,  "  I  wrote
this  same  unto  you,"  belong  to  one  writing,  what-
ever that  was;  and  that  the  second  clause  goes  on
to  advert  to  a  circumstance  which  is  found  in  our
present  First  Epistle  to  the  Corinthians ;  namely,
the  case  and  punishment  of  the  incestuous  person.
Upon  the  whole,  then,  we  see,  that  it  is  capable  of .
being  inferred  from  St.  Pauls  own  words,  in  the
long  extract  which  we  have  quoted,  that  the  First
Epistle  to  the  Corinthians  was  written  after  St.
Paul  had  determined  to  postpone  his  journey  to
Corinth;  in  other  words,  that' the  change  of  his
purpose  with  respect  to  the  course  of  his  journey.
though  expressly  mentioned  only  in-  the  Second
Epistle,  had  taken  place  before  the  writing  of  the
Fust;  the  point  which  we  made  out  to  be  inifilied
in  the  history,  by  the  order  of  the  events  there  re-
corded, and  the  allusions  to  fhose  events  in  the
First  Epistle.  Now  this  is  a  species  of  congruily
of  all  others  the  most  to  be  relied  upon.  It  is  not
an  agreement  between  two  accounts  of  the  same
transaction,  or  between  different  statements  of  the

^i***.^;.**!,  .SMS*


can  be  called  an  account  is- given;  hot  it  is  the
junction  of  two  conclusions,  deduced  from  inde-
pendent sources,  and  deducible  only  by  iaaestiga-
tion  and  comparison.

.This  point,  viz.  the  change  of  the  route,  being
prior  to  the  writing  of  the  First  Epistle,  also  fells
in  with,  and  accounts  for,  the  manner  in  which  he
speaks  in  that  epistle  of  his  journey.'  His  first
intention  had.  been,  as  he  here  declares,  to  "  pass
by  them  into  Macedonia:"  that  intention  having
been  previously  given  up,  he  writes,  in  his  First
Epistle,  "  that  he  would  not  Bee  them  now  by  the
way,"  i.  e.  as  he*  must  have  done  upon  his  first
plan ;  "but  that  he  trusted  to  tarry  awhile  with  them,
and  possibly  to  abide,  yea  and  winter  with  them,1'
1  Corin.  chap.  xvi.  5,-6,  It  also  accounts  for  a
singularity  in  the  text  referred  to,  which-  must
strike  every  reader :  u  I  will  como  to  you  when  1
oass  through  Macedonia;  for  1  do  pass  "through
Macedonia."  The  supplemental  sentence,  "  for  I
do  pass  through  Macedonia,"  imports  that  there
had  been  some  previous  communication  upon  the
subject  of  the  journey ;  and  also  that  there  had
been  some  vacillation  and  indecisiveness  in  the
apostle's  plan^:  both  which  we  ncn%  perceive  to
have  been  the  case.  The  sentence  is  as  much  as
to  say,  M  This  is  what  I  at  last  resolve  upon."
The  expression,  "  ot«v  m»xi?ov«»»  ?if\fa,"  is  ambi-

fuous ;  it  may  denote  either  "  when  I  pass,  or  when
shall  have  passed,  through  Macedonia:"  the  con-


siderations offered  above  fix  it  to  the  latter  t
Lastly,  the  point  we  have  endeavoured  to  make
out,  confirms,  or  rather,  indeed,  is  necessary  to  the
support  of  a  conjecture,  which  forms  .the  suhject
of  a  number  in  our  observations  upon  the  First
Epistle,  that  the  insinuation  of  certain  of  the  church
of  Corinth,  that  he  would  come  no  more  amongst
them,  was  founded  on  some  previous  disappoint-
ment of  their  expectations.

NoiV.

But  if  St.  Paul  had  changed  his  purpose  before
the  writing  of  the  First  Epistle,  why  did  he  defer
explaining  himself  to  the  Corinthians,  concerning
the  reason  of  that  change,  until  he  wrote  the  Se-
cond 1  This  is  a  very  fair  question ;  arid  we  are
able,.  I  think,  to  return  to  H  a  satisfactory  answer.
The  real  cause,  and  the  cause  at  length  assigned
by  St.  Paul  for  postponing  his  visit  to-  Corinth,
and.  not  travelling  by  the  route  which  he  had  at
first  designed,  was  the  disorderly  state  of  the  Co-
rinthian church  at  the  time,  and'the  painrulseveri-
ties  which  he  should  have  found  himself  obliged  to
exercise,  if  he  tad  come  amongst  them  during  the
existence  of  these  irregularities.  He  was  Willing
therefore  to  try,  before  he  came  in  person,  what  a
letter  of  authoritative  objurgation  would  do  amongst
them,  and  to  leave  time  lor  the  operation  of  too
experiment.  That  was  his  scheme  in  writing  the
First  Epistle.  But  it  was  not  for  him  to  acquaint
them  with  the  scheme.  Aftor  the  epistle  had  pro-
duced its  eflcet  (and  to  the  utmost  extent,  as  it
should  HQrm,  of  the  apostle's  hopes;)  when  he  had
wrought -in  them  a  deep  sense  of  their  fault,  and
an  almost  passionate  solicitude  to  restore  them-
selves to  the  approbation  of  their  teacher;  when
Titus  (chap.  vii.  6,  .7,  11.)  had  brought  him  intel-
ligence ."of  their  earnest  desire,  their  mourning,
their  fervent  mind  towanl*  him,  of  their  sorrow
and  their  penitence;  what  carefulness,  what  clear-
ing of  themselves,  what  indignation,  what'  fear,
what  vehement  desire,  what  zeal,  what  revenge,'*
16*


186


HORJB  PAUUNJS.


fail  letter,  and  the  general  concern  occasioned  by
Ijk,  liad  excited  amongst  them:  he  then  opens  him-
■elf  fully  upon  the  subject.  The  affectionate  mind
of  the  apostle  is  touched  by  this  return  of  zeal  and
doty.  He  tells  them  that  he  did  not  visit  them  at
the  time  proposed,  lest  their  meeting  should  have
been  attended  with  mutual  grief;  and  with  grief  to
kirn  embittered  by  the  reflection,  that  he  was  giving
pain  to  those,  from  whom  alone  he  could  receive
comfort  :  "  I  determined  this  with  myself,  that  I
would  not  come  again  to  you  in  heaviness ;  for,  if
I  make-  you  sorry,  who  is  he  that  maketh  me  glad
but  the  same  which  is  made  sorry  by  me?'  chap.
al  1, 9 :  that  he  had  written  has  former  epistle  to
want  them  beforehand  of  their  fault,  "  lest  when
ha  came  he  should  have  sorrow  of  them  of  whom
be  ought  to  rejoice ;"  chap,  ii  3:  that  he  had  the
farther  view,  though  perhaps  unperceived  by  them,
of  making  an  experiment  of  their  fidelity,  "  to
knew  the  proof  of  them,  whether  they  are  obedi-
ent in  all  things,"  chap.  ii.  9.  This  full  discovery
of  his  motive  came  very  naturally  from  the  apostle,
after  he  had  seen  the  success  of  his  measures,  but
would  not  have  been  a  seasonable  communication
before.  The  whole  composes  a  train  of  sentiment
and  of  conduct  resulting  from  real  situation,  and
from  real  circumstance,  and  aa  remote  as  possible
tram  fiction  or  imposture.

No»VL  '

Chap.  xL  9.  "When  1  was  present  with  you
and  wanted,  I  waa  chargeable  to  no  man:  for  that
which  .was  lacking  to  me,  the  brethren  which
came  from  Macedonia  supplied."  The  principal
fret  set  forth  in  this  passage,  the  arrival  at  Corinth
of  brethren  from  Macedonia  during  St.  Paul's  first
residence  in  that  city,  is  explicitly  recorded,  Acts,
chap.  xviiL  1.  5.  "  After  these  things  Paul  de-
parted from  Athena,  and  came  to  Corinth.  And
when  Silas  and  Timotheus  were  come  from  Mace-
donJa^PauI  waa  pressed  in  spirit,  and  testified  to
the  Jews  that  Jesus  was  Christ."

No.  VII. .

•  The  above  quotation  from  the  Acts  proves  that
Silas  and  Timotheus  were  assisting  to  St.  Paul  in
preaching  the  Gospel  at  Corinth.  With  which,
correspond  the  words  of  the  epistle,  (chap;L  19,)
"For  the  Son  of  God,  Jesus  Christ,  who  was
preached  among  you  by  us,  even  by  me,  and  Sil-
vanus,  and  Timotheus,  was  not  yea  and  nay,  but
in  him  was  yea."  I  do  admit,  that  the  correspond-
ency, considered  by  itself,  is  too  direct  and  obvious ;
and  that  an  impostor  with  the  history  before  him
might,  and  probably  would,  produce  agreements  of
'  the  same  kind.  But  let  it  be  remembered,  that
this  reference  is  found, in  a  writing,  which,  from
many  discrepancies,  and  especially  from  those
noted  No.  II.,  we  may  conclude,  was  not  composed
by  any  one  who  had  consulted,  and  who  pursued
the  history.  Some  observation  also  arises  upon
the  variation  of  the  name.  We  read  Silas  in  the
Acts,  Silvanus  in  the  epistle.  The  similitude  of
these  two  names,  if  they  were  the  names  of  differ-
ent persons,  is  greater  than  could  easily  ha.ve  pro-
ceeded from  accident ;  I  mean  that  it  is.not  probable,
that  two  persons,  placed  in  situations  so  much
alike,  should  bear  names  so  nearly  resembling  each
other.* On  the  other  hand,  the  difference  of  the


byl


*  That  they  wen  the  same  person  is  farther  confirmed
■.chap.'  *


i  i.  1.  compared  with  Acts,  chap*  xvii.  10.


name  in  the  two  passages  negatives  the  timpoaman
of  the  .passages,  or  the  account  contained  in  them,
being  transcribed  either  from  the  other.

• No.  VIII.

Chap.  ii.  12,  13.  "  When  I  came  to  Troaa
to  preach  Christ's  Gospel,  and  a  door  was  opened
unto  me  of  the  Lord,  I  had  no  rest  in  my  spirit,
because  I  found  not  Titus  my  bsother;  but  taking
my  leave  of  them,  I  went  from  thence  into  Ma-
cedonia."

To  establish  a  conformity  between  this  passage
and. the  history,  nothing  more  is  necessary  to  be
presumed,  than  that  St.  Paul  proceeded  from  Ephe-
sus  to  Macedonia,  upon  the  same  course  by  which
he  came  back  from  Macedonia  to  Ephesus,  or
rather  to  Miletus  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Ephe-
sus j  in  other  words,  that  in  his  journey  to  the
peninsula  of  Greece,  he  went  and  returned  the
seme  way.  St.  Paul  is  now  in  Macedonia,  where
he  had  lately  arrived  from  Ephesus.  Our  quota-
tion imports  that  in  his  journey  he  had  stopped  at
Troas.  Of -thjs,  the  history  says  nothing,  leaving
us  only  the  short  account  that  "  Paul  departed
from  Ephesus,  for  to  go  into  Macedonia."  But
the  history  says,  that  in  his  return  from  Macedo-
nia to  Ephesus,  "Paul  sailed  from  Philippi  to
Troas;  and  that,  when  the  disciples  came  to-
gether on  the  first  day  of  the  week  to  break  bread,
Paul  preached  unto  tbem  all  night;  that  from
Troas  he  went  by  land  to  Assos;  from  Aseos,
taking  ship  and  coasting  along  the  front  of  Asia
Minor,  he  came  by  Mitylene  to  Miletus."  Which
account  proves,  first,  that  Trees  lay  in  the  way
by  which  St.  Paul  passed  between  Ephesus  and
Macedonia ;  secondly,  that  he  had  disciples  there.
In  one  journey  between  these  •  two  places,  the
epistle,  and  in  another  journey  between  the  same
places,  the  history,  makes  him  stop  at  this  city.
Of  the  first  journey  he  is  made  to  say,  "  that  a
door,  was  in  that  city  opened  unto  me  of  the  Lord;
in  the  second,  we  find  disciples  there  collected
around  him,  and  the  apostle  exercising  his  minis-
try, with,  what  was  even  in  him,  more  than  ordi-
nary zeal  and  labour.  The  epistle,  therefore,  is  in
this  instance  confirmed,  if  not  by  the  terms,  at
least  by  the  probability  of  the  history;  a  species
of  confirmation  by  no  means  to  be  despised,  be-
cause, as  for  as  it  reaches,  it  is  evidently  unoon-
trived.

Grotius,  I  know,  refers  the  arrival  at  Troas.  to
which  the  epistle  alludes,  to  a  different  period,  but
I  think  very  improbably ;  for  nothing  appears  to
me  more  certain,  than  that  the  meeting  with  Ti-
tus, which  St.  Paul  expected  at  Troas,  was  the
same  meeting  which  took  place  in  Macedonia,
viz.  upon  Titus's  coming  out  of  Greece.  In  the
quotation  before  us,  he  tells  the  Corinthians,
"  When  I  came  to  Troas,  I  had  no  rest  in  my
spirit,  because  I  found  not  Titus  my  brother;  but
taking  my  leave  of  them,  1  went  from  thence  into
Macedonia."  Then  in  the  seventh  chapter  he
writes,  "  When  we  were  come  into  Macedonia,
our  flesh  had  no  rest,  but  we  were  troubled  on
every  Bide ;  without  were  fightings,  within  were
fears;  nevertheless  God,  that  comforteth  them
that  are  cast  down,  comforted  us  by  the  corning  of
Titus."  These  two  passages,  plainly  relate  to  the
same  journey  of  Titus,  in  meetmg  with  whom  St
Paul  Had  been  disappointed  at  Troas,  and  rejoiced
in  Macedonia.  And  amongst  other  reasons  which
fix  the  former  passage  to  the  coming  of  Titus  out


SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.


167


tfCGteeee,  ie  the  consideration,  that  it  was  nothing
to  the  Corinthians  that  St  Paul  did  not  meet  with.
Titos  at  Trow,  were  it  not  that  he  was  to  bring
intelligence  from  Corinth.  The  mention  oC  the
disappointment  in  this  place,  Upon  any  otheteup-
poatioBjiiUnelative.

No.  IX.

Chap.  zi.  24,  25.  "  Of  the  Jews  Ave  times  re-
ceived I  forty  stripes  save  one ;  thrice  was  I  beaten
with-  rods ;  once  was  I  stoned :  thrice  I  suffered
shipwreck ;  a  night  and  a  day  "I  have  been  in  the


i  particulars  cannot  he-extracted  out  of  the
Acts  of  the  Apostles ;  which  proves,  as  hath  been
already  observed,  that  the  epistle  was  not  framed
from  the  history :  yet  they  are  consistent  with  it,
which,  considering  how  numerically  circumstan-
tial the  account  is,  is  more  than  could  happen  to
arbitrary  and  independent  fictions.  When  I  say
that  these  particulars  are  consistent  with  the  his-
tory, I  mean,  first,  that  there  is  no  article  in  the
enumeration  which  is  contradicted  by  the  history ;
secondly,  that  the  history,  though  silent  with  re-
spect to  many  of  the  facts  here  enumerated,  has
left  space  for  the  existence  of  these  facts,  con-
sistent with  the  fidelity  of  its  own  narration.

First,  no  contradiction  is  discoverable  between
the  epistle  and  the  history;  When  St.  Paul  says,
thrice  was  I  beaten  with  rods,  although  the  his-
tory record  only  one  beating  with  .rods,  viz.  at
Phihppi,  Acts  rvi  22,  yet  is  there  no  contradic-
tion. It  b  only  the  omission  in  one  book  of  what
is  related  in  another.  But  had  the  history  con-
tained accounts  of  four  beatings  with  rods,  at  the
time  of  writing  this  epistle,  w  which  St.  Pau|
says  that  he  had  only  suffered  three,  there  would
have  been  a  contradiction  properly  so  called.  The
same  observation  applies  generally  to  the  other
parts  of  the  enumeration,  concerning  which  the
nistory  is  silent:  but  there  is  one  clause  in  the
quotation  particularly  deserving  of  remark;  be-
cause, when  confronted  with  the  history,  it  fur-
nishes the  nearest  approach  to  a  contradiction,
without  a  contradiction  being  actually  incurred,
of  any  I  remember  to  have  met  with.  "  Once,"
saith  St.  Paul,  "  was  I  storied."  Does  the  history
relate  that  St.  Paul,  prior  to  the  writing  of  this
epistle,  had  been  stoned  more  than  once  1  The
history  mentions  distinctly  one  occasion  upon
which  St.  Paul  was  stoned,  viz.  at  Lystra  in  Ly-
caonia.  "  Then  came  thither  certain  Jews  from
Antioch  and  iconium,  who  persuaded  the  peo-
ple; and  having  stoned  Paul,  drew  him  out  or  the
city,  supposing  he  had  been  dead,'1  chap.  ziv.  19.
And  it  mentions  also  another  occasion  in  which
"an  assault  was  made  both  of  the  Gentiles,  and
also  of  the  Jews,  with  their  rulers,  to  use  them
despitefully  and  to  stone  them;  but  they  were
aware  of  it,"  the  history  proceeds  to  tell  us,  "  and
fled  into  Lystra  and  Derbe."  This  happened  at
Iconium,  prior  to  the  date  of  the  epistle.  r»  ew  had
the  assault  been  completed;  had  the  history  re-
lated that  a  stone  was  thrown,  as  it'  relates  that
preparations  were  made  both  by  Jews  and  Gen-
tiles to  stone  Paul  and  his  companions;  or  even
had  the  account  of  this  transaction  stopped,  with-
out going  on  to  inform  us  that  Paul  ana  his  com-
panions were  "  aware  of  their  danger  and  fled,"
a  contradiction  between  the  history  and  the  epis-
tle would  have  ensued.  Truth  is  necessarily  con*
but  it  is  scarcely  possible  thai  indepeiident


accounts,  not  having  truth  to  guide'them,  should
thus  advance  to  the  very  brink  of  contradiction
without  falling  into  it,

Secondly,  I  say,  that  If  the  Acts  of  the  Apos-
tles be  silent  concerning  many  of  the  instances)
enumerated  in  the  epistle,  this  silence  may  be
accounted  for,  from  t ne  plan  and  fabric  of  the
history.  The  date  of  the  epistle  synchronizes
with  the  beginning  of  the  twentieth  chapter  of
the  Acts.  The  part,  therefore,  of  the  history,
which  precedes  the  twentieth  chapter,  is  the  only
part  in  which  can  be  found  any  notice  of  the  pen*
seditions,  to  which  St.  Paul'  refers.  Now  it  does
not'  appear  that  the  author  of  the  history  was  with
St.  Paul  until  his  departure  from  Troas,  on  his  '
way  to  Macedonia,  as  related,  chap.  xvL  10;  or'
rather,  indeed,  the  contrary  appears.  It  is  in  this
point  of  the  history  that  the  language  changes.  In
the  seventh  and  eighth  verses  of  this  chapter  the
third  person  is.  used.  (<  After  they  were  come  to
Mysia,  they  essayed  to  go  into  Bithynia,  but  the)
Spirit  suffered  them  not;  and  they  passing  by
Mysia  came  to  Troas ;"  and  the  third  person  is  in
like  manner  constantly  used  throughout  the  fore-
going part  of  the  history.  In  the  tenth  verse  of
this  chapter,  the  first  person  conies'* in:  "After
Paul  had  seen  the  vision,  immediately  ve  en-
deavoured to  go  into  Macedonia;  assuredly  ga-
thering that  the  Lord  had  called  us  to  preach  toe
Gospel  unto  -them."  -  JNow,  from  this  tune  to  the
writing  of  the  epistle,  the  history  occupies  four
chapters;  yet  it  is  in  these,  if  in  any,  that  a  regu-
lar or  continued  account  of  the  apostle's  life  is  to
be  expected ;  for  how  succinctly  his  history  is  de-
livered in  the  preceding  part  of  the  book,  that  is
to  say,  from  the  time  of  his  conversion  to  the  time
when  the  historian  joined  him  at  Troas,  except  -
the  particular  of  his  conversion  itself,  which  are  •
related  circumstantially,  may  be  understood  from
the  following  observations  >—

The  history  of  a  period  of  sixteen  years  is.cojn-
.prised  in  less  than  three  chapters ;  and  of  these,  a
material  part  is  taken  up  with  discourses.  After
his  conversion,  he  continued  in  the  neighbourhood
of  Damascus,  according  to  the  history,  for  a  cer-
tain considerable,  though  indefinite,  length  of  time,
according  to  bis  own  words,  (Gal.  i.  18,)  for  three
years :  of  which  no  other  account  is  given  than
this  short  one,  that  "straightway  he  pleached
-Christ  in  the  synagogues,  that  he  is  the  Son  of
God ;  that  all  that  heard  him  were  amazed,  and
said,  Is  not  this  he  that  destroyed  them  which
called  on  .this  name,  in  Jerusalem  1.  that  he  in-
creased the  more  in.  strength,  and  confounded^  the
Jews  which  dwelt  at  Damascus;  and  that,  alter
many  days  were  fulfilled,  the  Jews  took  counsel
to  kill  him."  From  Damascus  he  proceeded  to
Jerusalem:  and  of  his  residence  there  nothing
more  particular  is  jecordedj  than  that  "  he  was
with  the  apostles;  coming  in  and  going  out*,  that
ne  spake  boldly  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus,
and  disputed  against  the  Grecians,  who  went
about  to  kill  him."  From  Jerusalem,  the  history
semis  him  to  his  native  city  of  Tarsus.*  It  seems
probable,  from  the  order  and  disposition  of  the  his-
tory,, that  St.  Paul's  stay  at  Tarsus  was  of  some
continuance;  for  we  hear  nothing  of  him,  until,
after  a  long  apparent  intrrval{  and  much  inter-
jacent narrative.  Barnabas  desirous  of  Paul's  as-
sistance upon  the  enlargement  of  the  Christian

i  *Actsix.».


188


HORjE  PAUUNiE.


. .  .  .  "went  to  Tanas  for  to  seek  him."*  We
cannot  'doubt  but  that  the  new  apostle  had  been
busted  in  his  ministry ;  yet  of  what  he  did,  or*
what  he  suffered,  during  this  period, "which  may
include  throe  or  four  years,  the  history  professes
not  to  deliver  any- information.  A*  Tarsus  was
situated  upon  the  sea-coast,  and  as,  though  Tarsus
was  his  home,  yet  it  is  probable  he  visited  from
thence  many  other,  places,  for  the  purpose  of
preaching  the  Gospel,  it  is  not  unlikely,  that,  in
the  course  of  three  or  four  years,  he  might  under-
take many  short  voyages  to  neighbouring  coun-
tries, in  the  navigating  of  which  we  may  be  al-
lowed to-  suppose  that  some  of  those  disasters  and
shipwrecks  befell  him,  to  which  he  -  refers  in  the
quotation  before  us,  "thnce  I  suffered  shipwreck,
a  night  and  a  day  I  have  been  in  the  deep/'  This
Last  olause  lam  inclined  to  interpret  of  nis  being
obliged  to  take  to  an  open  boat,  upon  the  loss  of
the  ship,  and  his  continuing  out  at  sea,  in  that
dangerous  situation,  a  night  and  a  day.  St.  Paul
is  here  recounting  his  sufferings,  not  relating  mi-
racles. From  Tarsus,  Barnabas  brought  Paul  to
Antioch,  and  there  he  remained  a  year :  but  of  the
transactions  of  that  year  no  other  description  is
given  than  what  is  contained  in  the  last  four
verses  of  the  eleventh  chapter.  Alter  a  more
solemn  dedication  to-  the  ministry.  Barnabas  and
Paul  proceeded  from  Antioch  to  Cilicia,  and  from
thence  they*  sailed  to  pyprus,  of  which  voyage  no
particulars  are  mentioned.  Upon  their-'  return
From  Cyprus,  they  made  a  progress  together
through  the  Lesser  Asia;  and  though  two  re-
markable speeches  be  preserved,  and  a  few  in-
cidents in  the  course  of  their  travels  circumstan-
tially related,  yet  is  the  account  of  this  progress,
upon  the  whole,  given  professedly  with  concise-
ness ;  for  instance,  at  roonium  k  is  said  that  they
abode  a  long  time ;  r  yet  of  this  long  abode,  except
concerning  the  manner  in  which  they  were  driven
away,  no  memoir  is  inserted  in  tne  history.  The.
whole  is  wrapped  up  in  one  short  summary,
"  They  spake  boldly  in  the  Lord,  which  gave  tes-
timony unto  the  word  of  his  grace,  and  granted,
signs  and  wonders  to  be  done  by  their  hands."
Having  completed  their  progress,  the  two  apos-
tles returned  to  Antiochj  "  and  there  they  abode
long  time  with  the  disciples."  Here  we  have
another  large  portion  of  time  passed  over*  in  si-
lence. ~To  this  succeeded  a  journey  to  Jerusalem,
,  Upon  a  dispute  which  then  much  agitated  the
Christian  church,  concerning  the  obligation  of  the
law  of  Moses*.  When  the  object  of  that  journey
was  completed,  Paul  proposed  to  Barnabas  to  go
again  and  vUit-their  brethren  in  every  city  where
they  had  preached  the  word  of  the  Lord.  The
execution  of  this  plan  carried  our  apostle  through
Syria,  Cilicia,  and  many  provinces  of  the  Lesser
Ask;  yet  is  the  account  of  the  whole  journey
dispatched  in  four  verses  of  the  sixteenth  chapter.
Ef  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles  had  undertaken  to
exhibit  regular  annals  of  St.  Paul's  ministry,  or,
crcn  any  continued  account  of  his  life,  from  his
conversion  at  Damascus  to  his  imprisonment  at
Rome,  I  should  have  thought  the  omission  of  the
circumstances  referred  to  in  our  epistle,  a  matter
of  reasonable  objection.  But  when  it  appears,
from  the  history  itself,  that  large  portions  of  St.
Raul's  lite  were  either  passed  over  in  silence,  or
only  slightly  touched  upon,  and  that  nothing  more


*Actsxi.25.


t  Chap.  xiv.  3.


than  certain  detached  incidents  and  discourses  is
related ;  when  we  observe  also,  that  the  author  of
the  history  did- not  join  our  apostle's  society  till  a
few  years  before  the  writing  of  the  epistle,  at  least
that  there  is  no  proof  in  the  history  that  he  did  so.
in  comparing  the  lustory  with  the  epistle,  we  shaH
not  be  surprised  by  the  discover v  of  omissions ;  we
shall  ascribe  it  to  truth  that  there  is  no  contra-
diction.

No.  X.

Chap.  iii.  1.  "  Do  we  begin  again  to  commend
ourselves]  or  need  we,  as  some  others,  epistles  of
commendation  to  you?"

"As  some  others."'  Turn  to  Acts  xviii.  27,
and  you  will  find  that,  a  short  time  before  the
writing  of  that  epistle,  Apollos- had  gone  to  Corinth
with  letters  of  commendation  from  the  Ephesian
Christians;  "and  when  Apollos  was  disposed
to  pass  into  Achaia,  the  brethren  wrote,  exhorting
the  disciples  to  receive  him."  Here  the  words  of
the  epistle  bear  the  appearance  of  alluding  to  some
specific  instance,  and  the  history  supplies  that  in-
stance ;  it  supplies  at  least  an  instance  as  apposite
as  possible  to  the  terms  which  the  apostle  uses,
and  to  the  date  and  direction  of  the  epistle,  In
which  they  are  found.  -  The  letter  which  Apollos
carried  from  Ephesus,  was  precisely  the  letter  of
commendation  which  St.  Paul  meant;  and  it  was
to.  Achaia,  of  which'  Corinth  was  the  capital,  and
indeed  to  Corinth  itself,  (Acts,  chap.  xix.  1,)  that
Apollos  carried  it;  and  it  was  about  two  years
before  the  writing  of  this  epistle.  If  St.  Paul's
words  be  rather  thought  to  refer  to  some  general
usage,  which  then  obtained  among  Christian
churches,  the  case  of  Apollos  exemplifies  that
usage;  and  affords  that  species  of  confirmation  to
the  epistle,  which  arises  from  seeing  the  manners
of  the  age,  in  which  it  purports;  to  be  written,  faith-
fully preserved.

No.  XI.

Chap  xiii.  1.  "This  is  the  third  time  I  am
coming  to  you:"-  r^tm  t»t»  ifxo/u«*.

Do  not  these  words  import  that  the  Writer  had
been  at  Corinth  twice'  bet  ore  1  Yet,  if  they  im-
port this,  they  overset  every  congruity  we  have
been  endeavouring  to  establish.  The  Acts  of  the
Apostles  record  only  two  journeys  of  St.  Paul  to
Corinth.  We  have  all  along  supposed,  what  every
mark  of  time  except  this  expression  indicates,  that
this  epistle  was  written  between  the  first  and  se-
cond of  these  journeys.  If  St.  Pacd  had  been
already  twice  at  Corinth,  this  supposition  must  be
given  up;  and  every  argument  or  observation
which  depends  upon  it  falls  to  the  ground.  Again,
the  Acts  of  the  Apostles  not  only  record  no  more
than  two  journeys  of  St.  Paid  to  Corinth,  but  do
not  -allow  us  to  suppose  that  more  than  two  such
journeys  could  be  made  or  intended  by  him  within
the  period  wliich  the  history  comprises ;  for  from
his  first  journey  into  Greece  to  his  first  imprison-
ment at  Rome,  with  which  the  history  concludes,
the  apostle's  time  is  accounted  for.-  If  therefore
the  epistle  was  written  after  the  second  journey  to
Corinth,  and  upon  the  view  and  expectation  of  a
third,  it  must  have  been  Written  after  his  first  im-
prisonment at  Rome.  i.  e.  after  the  time  to  which
the  history  extends.  When  I  first  read  over  this
epistle  with  the  particular  view  of  comparing  it
with  the  history,  which  I  chose  to  do  without  con-
sulting any  commentary  whatever,  I  own  that  I


SECOND  EPIStfLE  *TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.


189


felt  myself  confounded  By  this  text. .  It  appeared
to  contradict  the  opinion,  which  I  had  been  led  by
a- great  variety  of  circumstances  to  form,  concern-
ing the  date  and  occasion  of  the  epistle:  At
length,  however,  it  occurred  to  iny  thoughts  to  in-
quire, whether  the  passage  did  necessarily  imply*
that  St  Paul  had  been  at  Corinth  twice;  or,
whether,  when  he  says,  <rthis  is  the  third  time  I
am  coming  to  you,"  he' might  mean  only  that  this
was  the  third  time  that  he  was  ready,  that  he  was
prepared,  that  he  intended  to  set  out  upon  his  jour-
ney to  Corinth.  I  recollected  that  he  had.  once
heron  this  purposed  to  visit  Corinth,  and  had  been
disappointed  in  this  purpose;  which  disappoint-
ment forma  the  subject  of  much  apology  and  pro-
testation, in  the  first  and  second  chapters  of  the
epistle.  Now,  if  the  journey  iri  which-  he  had
been  disappointed  was  reckoned  by  him  one  of  the
times  in  wnicli  "  he  was  coming  to  them,"  then
the  present  would  be  the  third  time,-  i.  e.  ef  hte
being  ready  and  prepared  to  come;  although  he
had  oeen  actually  at  Corinth  only  once  before.
This  conjecture  being  taken  up,  a  farther  exami-
nation of  the  nassage  and  the  epistle,  produced
proofs  which  placed  it  beyond  doubt.  "  This  is
the  third  time  I  am  coming  to  you:"  in  the  verse
following  these  words,  he  adds,  "  I  told  you  before,
and  foretell  you,~as  if  I  were  present  the  second-
times  and  being  absent,  now  I  write  to  them
which  heretofore  nave  sinned,  and  to  all  other,  that,
if  I  come  again,  I  will  not  spare."  In  this  verse,
the  apostle  is  declaring  beforehand  what  he  would
do  in  his  intended  visit ;  his  expression  therefore,
u  as  if  I  were  present  the  second  time,0  relates  to
that  visit.  But,  if  his  future  visit  would  only  make
nun  present  among  them  a  second  time,  it  follows
that  he  had  been  already  there  but  once.  Again,  in
the  fifteenth  verse  of  the  first  chapter,  he  tells  them,
"  In  this  confidence,  I  was  minded  to  come  unto
you  before,  that  ye  might  have  a  second  benefit :"
Why  a  second,  and  not  a  third  benefit  1  why
$4vT$(*r.  and  not  r^trnv  %«( ",  if  the  1-411-4*  rj%o/»«j
in  the  fifteenth  chapter,  meant  a  third  visit  ?  for;
though  the  visit  in  the  first  chapter  be  that  visit  in
which  he  was  disappointed,  yet,  as  it  is  evident
from  the  epistle  that  he  had  never  been  at  Corinth
from  the  tune  of  the  disappointment  to  the  time  of


writing  the  epistle,  it  follows,  that  if  it  was  only
a  second  visit  in  which  he  was  disappointed  then,
it  could  only  be  a  second  visit  which  he  proposed
now.  But  the  text  which  1  think  is  decisive  of
the  question,  if  any  question  remain  upon  the  sub-
ject, is  the  fourteenth  verse  of  the  twelfth  chapter :
"Behold  the  third  time  I  am  ready  to  come  to
yon ;"  lit  f fixer  iT«f/i»«  !%«■  ixSur.  It  is  very  clear
that  the  r^i-or  ito^j  •%«  tKiuv  of  the  twelfth
chapter,  and  the  i-fiior  urs  if%e^«*  of  the  thir-
teenth chapter,  are  equivalent  expressions,  were
intended  to  convey  the  same  meaning,  and  to  re-
late to  the  same  journey.  The.  comparison  of  these
phrases  gives  us  St  Paul's  own  explanation  of  his
own  words ;  and  it  is  that  very  explanation  which
we  are  contending  for,  viz.  that  t^to  t«*o  >tx*M»'
does  not  mean  that  he  was  coming  a  third  time,
hot  that  this  was  the  third  time  he  was  in  readi-
ness to  come,  rf  it*v  itoi/«w«  j%«v.  I  do  not  appre-
hend, that  after  this  it  can  be  necessary  to  call  to
ont  aid  the  reading  of  the  Alexandrian  manuscript,
which  gives  •t««*m*  »%*  ix5i»v  in  the  thirteenth
chapter  as  well  as  in  the  twelfth ;  of  of  the  Syriac
and  Coptic  versions,  which  follow  that  reading,
because  I  alkrw,  that  the  reading,  besides  not  being


sufficiently  supported  by  ancient  copies,  is  proba-
bly paraphrastical,  and  has  been  inserted  tor  the
purpose  of  expressing  more  unequivocally  the
sense,  which  the  shorter  expression  t^.toftito
ttzw*  was  supposed  to  carry.  Upon,  the  whole,
the  matter  is  sufficiently  certain :  Tier  do  I  propose  it
as  a  new  interpretation  of  the  text  which  contains
the  difficulty,  for  the  same  was  given  by  Gfotius
long  ago :  but  I  thought  it  the  clearest  way  of  ex-
plaining the  subject,  to  describe  the  manner  in
which  the  difficulty,  the  volution*'  and.  tifts  proofs
of  that  solution,  successively  presented  themselves
to  my  inquiries.  Now,  in  historical  researches,  a
reconciled  inconsistency  becomes  a  positive  argu-
ment. First,  because  an  impostor  generally  guards
against  the  appearance  of  inconsistency ;  •  and  se-
condly, because,  when  apparent  inconsistencies  .
are  found,  it  is  seldom  that  any  thing  but  truth
renders  them  capable  of  reconciliation.  The  ex-
istence of  the  difficulty  proves  the  want  or  absence
of  that  caution,  which  usually  accompanies  the
consciousness  of  fraud;  and  the  solution  proves,
that  it  is  not  the  collusion  of  fortuitous 'proposi-
tions which  we  have  to  deal' with,  but  that -a
thread  of  truth  winds  through  the  whole,  whkfo
preserves  every  circumstance  In  its  place.

No.  XII.

Chap.  x.  14—16.  "  We  are  .came  as  fat  as  to
you  also,  in  preaching  the-  Gospel  of  Christ ;  not
boasting  of  things  without  our  measure,  that  is,
of  other  men's  labours ;  but  having  hope,  when
your  faith  is  increased,  that  we  shall  be  enlarged
by  yon,  according  to  our  rule,  abundantly  to  preach
the  Gospel  in  ther  regions  beyond  you."

This  quotation  affords  an  indirect,  and  there*
fore  unsuspicious,  but  at  the  same  time  a  distinct
and  indubitable  recognition  of  the  truth  and  ex-
actness of  the  history.  I  consider  it  to  be  implied
by  the  words  of  the .  quotation,  that  Corinth  was
the  extremity  of  St.  Paul's  travels  hitherto.  He
expresses  to  the  Corinthians  his  hope:  that  in  some
future  visit  he  might "  preach  the  Gospel  to  the
regions  beyond  them ;"  which  imports  that  he  had
not  hitherto  proceeded  "beyond  them,"  but  that
Corinth  was.  as  yet  the  farthest  point  or  boundary
of  his  travels.  Now,  how  is  St.  Paul's  first  jour-
ney into  Europe,  which  was  the  only  one  he  had
taken  before  the  writing  of  the  epistle,  traced  out  in
the  history  V  Sailing  from  Asia,  he  landed  at  Phi-
lippi :  from  Philippi,  traversing  the  eastern  coast  ef
the  peninsula,  he  passed  through  Ampnipohs  and
Apollonia  to  Thessalonica ;  from  hence  through  Be-
rea  to  Athens,  and  from  Athens  to  Corinth,  where'
he  stopped:  &nd  from  whence,  after  a  residence  of
a  year  and  a  half,  he  sailed  back  into  Syria.  So
that  Corinth  was  the  lastplace  which  he  visited  in
the  peninsula j  was  the  place  from  which  he  return-
ed into  Asia ;  and  was,  as  such,  the  boundary  and
limit  of  his  progress.  He  could  not  have  said  the
same  thing,  viz.  "  I  hope  hereafter  to  visit  the  re-
gions beyond  you,"  in  an  epistle  to  the  Philippians.
or  in  an  epistle  to  the  Theesalonians.  inasmuch  as
he  must  be  deemed  to  have  already  visited  the
regions  beyond  them,  having  proceeded  from  those
cities  to  other  parts  of  Greece.  But  from.  Corinth
he  returned  home :  every  part  therefore  beyond
that  city,  might  properly  be  said,  as  it  is  said  in  •
the  passage  before-  us,  to  be  unvisited.  Yet  is  this
propriety  the  spontaneous  effect  of  truth,  and  pre*  '
duced  without  meditation  or  design,


w


HOKM  PAULINJE.


CHAPTER  V.

The  Epistle  to  the  dotation:

No.  I. .

Tbb  argument  of  this  epistle  in  some  measure
proves  its  antiquity.  It  will  hardly  be  doubted,
but  that  it  was  written  whilst  the  dispute  concern-
ing the  circumcision  of  Gentile  converts  was  fresh
in  men's  minds  *  for,  even  supposing  it  to  have
been  a  forgery,  Ufe  only  credible  motive  that  can
be  assigned  for  the  forgery,,  was  to  bring  the  name
and  -authority  of  the  apostle  into  this- controversy.
No  design  could  be  so  insipid,  or  so  unlikely  to
enter  into  the  thoughts  of  any  man,  as  to  produce
an  epistle  written  earnestly  and  pointedly  upon
one  aide  of  a  controversy,  when  the  controversy
itself  was  dead,  and  the  question  no  longer  inte-
resting to  any  description  of  readers  whatever.
Now  the  controversy  concerning  the  circmncision
of  th&Oentile  Christians  was  of  such  a  nature,
that,  if  it  arose  at  all{  it  must  have  arisen  in  the
beginning  of  Christianity.  As  Judea  was  the
scene  of  the  Christian  history ;  as  the  Author  and
preachers  of  Christianity  were  Jews.;  as  the  reli-

ri  itself  acknowledged  and  was  founded  upon
Jewish' religion,  in  contra-distinction  to  every
other  religion  Chen  professed  amongst  mankind ;
it  was  not  to  be  wondered  at.  that  some  of  its
teachers  should  carry  it  out  in  the  world  rather  as
a  sect  and  modification  of  Judaism,  than  as  a
separate  original  revelation ;  or  that  they  should
invite  their  proselytes  to  those  observances  in
which  thev  lived  themselves. — This  was  likely  to
happen :  out  if  it  did  not  happen  at  first ;  if,
whilst  the  religion  was.  in  the  hands  of  Jewish
teachers,  no  such  claim  was  advanced,  no  such
condition  was  attempted  to  be  imposed,  it  is  not
probable  that  the  doctrine -would  be  started,  much
less  that  it  should  prevail,  in  any  future  period.
I  likewise  think,  that  those  pretensions  of  Juda-
ism were  much  more  likely  to  be  insisted  upon,
whilst  the  Jews  continued  a  nation,  -than  after
their  fall  and  dispersion;  whilst  Jerusalem -and
the  temple  stood,  tthan  after  ..the  destruction
brought  upon  them  by  the  Roman  arms,  the  fatal
cessation  of  the  sacrifice  and  the  priesthood,  the
humiliating  lose  of  their  country,  .and,  with  it;  of
the  great  rites  and  symbols' of  their  institution.
It  should  seem  therefore,  from  the  nature  of  the
subject,  and  Ihe/situation  of  the  parties,  that  this
controversy  was  carried  on  in  the  interval  between
the  preaching  of  Christianity  to  the  Gentiles,  and
the  invasion  of  Titus ;  and  that  our  present  epistle,
which  was  undoubtedly  intended  to  bear  apart  in
this  controversy,  must  be  referred  to  the  same
period.  .

But,  again,  the  epistle  supposes  that  certain
designing  adherents  of  the  Jewish  law  had  crept
into  the  churches  of  Galatia;  and  had  been  en-
deavouring, and  but  too  successfully,  to  persuade
the  Galatic  converts,  that  they  had  been  taught
the  new  religion  imperfectly  and  at  second  hand  j
that -the  founder  of  their  church  himself  pos-
sessed only  an  inferior  and  deputed  commission,
the  seat  of  truth  and  authority  being  in  Ihe  apos-
tles and  elders  of  Jerusalem;  moreover,  that  what-
ever he  might  profess  amongst  them,  .he  had  him-
self at  other  times,  and  in  other  places,  given  way
to  the  doctrine  of  circumcision.  The  epistle  is
unintelligible  without  supposing  all  this.  Refer-
ring therefore  to  this,  as  to  what  had  actually


passed,  we  find  St,  Paul  treating  jo  unjust  an  at-
tempt}  to  undermine  his.  credit,  and  to  introduce
amongst  his  converts  a  doctrine  which  he  had
uniformly  reprobated,  in  terms  of  great  asperity
and  indignation.-  And  in  order  to  refute  the  sus-
picions which  bad  been  raised  concerning  the
fidelity  of  his  teaching,  as  well  as  to  assert  the  in-
dependency and  divine  original  of  his  mission,  we
find  him  appealing  to  the  history  of  his  conversion,
to  his  conduct  under  it,  to  the  manner  in  winch
he  had  conferred  with  the  apostles  when  he  met
with  them  at  Jerusalem;  alleging,  that  so  far  was
his,  doctrine  from  being  derived  from  them,  or
they  from  exercising  any  superiority  over  him,  that
they  had  simply  assented  to  what  he  had  already
preached  amongst  the  Gentiles,  and  which  preach-
*ing  was  communicated  not  by  them  to  nun  but
by  himself  to  them ;  that  he  had  maintained  the
liberty  of  the  Gentile -church,  by  opposing,  upon
one  occasion,  an  apostle  to  the  face,  when  the
timidity  of  his  behaviour  seemed  to  endanger  it;
that  from  the  first,  that  all  along,  that  to  that  hour,
he  had  constantly  resisted  the  claims  of  Judaism ;
and  that  the  persecutions -which  he  daily  under-
went, at  the  hands  or  by  the  instigation  of  the
Jews,  and  of  which  he  bore  in  his  person  the
marks  and  scars,  might  have  been  avoided  by  him,
if  he  had  consented  to  employ  his  labours  in  bring-
ing, through  the  medium  of  Christianity,  converts
over. to  the  Jewish  institution,  for  then  "would
the  offence  of  the  cross  have  ceased."  Now  an
impostor  who  had  forged  the  epistle*  for  the  pur-  .
pose  of  producing  St  Paul's  authority  in  the  dis-
pute^ which,  as  hath  been  observed,  is  the  only
credible  motive  that  can  be  assigned  for  the  for-
gery ?  might  have  made  the  apostle  deliver  his
opinion  upon  the  -subject,  in  strong  and  decisive
terms,  or  might  have  put  his  name  to  a  train  of
reasoning  and  argumentation  upon  that  aide  of
the  question  which  the  imposture  was  intended  to
recommend.  I  can  allow  the  possibility  of  such
a  scheme  as  that.  But  for  a  writer,  with  this
purpose  in  view,  to  feign  a  series  of  transactions
supposed-Jo  have  passed  amongst  the  Christians
of  Gajatia.  and  then  to  counterfeit  expressions  of
anger  ana  resentment  excited  by  these  transac-
tions; to  make  the  apostle  travel  back  into  his
own  history,  and  into  a  recital  of  various  passages
of  his  life,  some  indeed  directly,  but  others  ob-
liquely ?  and  others  even  obscurely  bearing  upon
the  point  in  question;  in  a  word,  to  substitute
narrative  for  argument,  expostulation  and  com-
plaint for  dogmatic  positions  and  controversial
reasoning,  in  a  writing  properly  controversial,  and
of  which  the  aim  and  de&jgn  was  to  support  one
side  of  a  much  agitated  question — is  a  method  so
intricate,  and  so  unlike  the  methods  pursued  by  all
other  impostors,  as  to  require  very  flagrant  proofs
of  imposition  to.  induce  us  to  believe  it  to  be  one,

,  No.  II.

In  this  number  I  shall  endeavour  to  prove,

1.  That  the  Epistle  to  the  iGalatians.  and  the
Acts  of  the  Apostles,  were  written  without  any
communication  with  each  other.

2.  That  the  Epistle,  though  written  without
any  communication  with  the  history,  by  recital,
implication,  or  reference,  bears  testimony  to  many
of  the  facts  conatined  in  it

1.  The  Epistle  and  the  Acts  pf  the  Apostles
were  written  without,  any  communication  with
each  other.  -- „


EPISTLE  TO  THE  GALATIANS.


101


To  Judge  of  this  Point,  we  must  examine  those
passages  m  each,  which)  describe  the  same  trans-
action ;  for,  if  the-author  of  either  writing  derived
his  information  from  the  account  which  he  had
seen  in.  the  other,  when  he  came  to  speak  of  the
same  transaction,  he  would  follow  that  account.
The  history  of  St.  Paul,  at  Pamascus,  as  read  in
the  Acts,  and  as  referred  to  by  'the  epistle,  •forms
an  instance  of  this  sort.  According  to  the  Acts,
Paul  {after  his  con  version)  was  certain  days  with
the  "disciples  which  wete  at  Damascus.  And
straightway  he  preached  Christ  in  the  synagogues,
that  he  is  the  Son  of  God.  But  all  that  heard  him
were  amazed,  and  said,  is  not  this  he  which  des-
troyed them  which  called  on  this  name  in  Jerusa-
lem, and  came  hither  for  that  intent,  that  he  might
bring  them  bound  unto  the  chief  priests?  Jut
Sam  increased  the  more  in  strength,  confounding
the  Jews  which  were  at  Damascus,  proving  that
this  is  very  Christ.  And  after  that  many  days
were  fulfilled,  the  Jews  took  counsel  to  kill  htm.
But  their  laying  await  was  known  of  Saul ;  and
they  watched  the  gates  day  and  night  to  kill  htm.
Then  the  disciples  took  him  by  night,  and  let  him
down  by  the  watt  in  a  basket  Ana  when  Saul
was  come  to  Jerusalem,  he  assayed  to  join  him-
self to  the  tfaripfes." Acts,  chap.  ix.  19— 2a

'  According  to  the  epistle,  "  When  it  pleased
God,  who  separated  me  from  my  mother's  womb,
and  called  me  by  his  grace,  to  reveal  his  own  Son
in  me.  that  I  might  preach  him  among  the  hea-
then. Immediately  I  conferred  not  with  flesh  -  and
blood,  neither  went  I  up  to  Jerusalem  to  them
which  were  apostles  before  me;'  but  I  went  into
Arabia,  and  returned  again  to  Damascus:  then,.
after  three  years,. I  went  up  to  Jerusalem."

..Beside  the  difference  observable  in  the  terras'
and  general  complexion  of  these  two  accounts,
"the  journey  into  Arabia,"  mentioned'  in  the
epistle,  and  omitted  in  the  history,  affords  full
proof  that  there  existed  no  correspondence  be-
tween these  writers.  If  the  narrative  in  the  Acts
had  been  made  up  from  the  epistle,  it  is  impossible'
that  this  journey  should  have  been  passed  over
in  silence;  if  the  epistle  bad  been  composed  out  of
what  the  author  hpd  read  of  St.  Paul's  history  in
the  Acts,  it  is  unaccountable  that  it  should  have
been  inserted*.

The  journey  to  Jerusalem  related  in'the  second
chapter  of  the  Epistle  ("  then,  fourteen  years  after,
I  went  up  again  to  Jerusalem ;")  supplies  another
example  of  thesame  kind.  Either  this  was  the  jour-
ney described  in  the  fifteenth  chapter  of  the  Acts,
when  Paul  and  Barnabas  were  sent  from  Antioch
to  Jerusalem,  to  consult  the  apostles  and  elders
upon  the  question  of  the  Gentile  converts ;  or  it
was  some  journey  of  which  the  history  does  not
take  notice.  If  the  first  opinion  be  followed,  ihe
discrepancy  in  the  two  accounts  is  so  considerable,
that  it  is  not  without  difficulty  they  can  be  adapt-
ed to  the  same  transaction:  so  that  upon  this  sup-
position, there  is  no  place  for  suspecting  that'  the


*  N.  B.  The  Acu  of  the  Apostles  simply  inform  us
that  St.  Paul  left  Damascus  in  order  to  go  to  Jerusalem,
M  after  many  days  were  fulfilled."  If  any  one  doubt
whether  the  words  "  many  days"  cduld  be'  intended  to
express  a  period  which  included  a  term  of  three  years,
he  will  And  a  complete  instance  of  the  same  phrase  used
with  the  same  latitude  in  the  first  book  of  Kings,  chap,
li.  38,  39.  "And  Shimei  dwelt  at  Jerusalem  many
dgfg :  and  it  came  to  pass  at  the  end  of  tkrte^/ ears,  that
twocf  Uieservantrofflhimoiranaway."  -


writers  were  guided  or  assisted  by  each  other.  If
the-  latter  opinion  be  .preferred,  we  have  then  a
journey  to  Jerusalem,  and  a  conference  with  the
principal  member*  of  the  church  there,  circum-
stantially-related  in  the  epistle,  an4  entirely  omit-
ted in  the  Acta;  and  we  .are  at  liberty  to  repeat
the  observation,  which  we  .before  made,  that  the
omission  of  eo  material  a  fact  in  the  history  is  in-
explicable, If  the  historian  had  read  the  epistle ;
and  that  the  insertion  of  it  in  the  epistle,  if  the
writer  derived  hisinforniatipn  from  (hVhistery,  is
not  less  so. .

St.  Peter's  visit  to  Antioch,  during  which  the
dispute  arose  between  him  and  St.  Paul,  is  not
mentioned  in  the  Acts.  >

If  we  connect,  with  these  instances,  the  general
observation/ that  no  scrutiny  can  discover^  the
smallest  trace  of  transcription  or  imitation  either
in  things  or  words,  we  snail  be  fully  satisfied  in
this  part  of  our  base ;  namely,  that  the  two  records,
be  the  facts  contained  in  them  true  or  false,  come
to  our  hands'  from  independent  sources. '

Secondly,  I  say  that  the  epistle,  thus  proved  to
have  l>een  written  without  any  communication
with  the  history,  bears  testimony  to  a  great  variety
of  particulars  contained  in  the  history.

1.  St.  Paul  in- the  early  part  of  his  life,  had  ad-
dicted himself  to  the  study  of  the  Jewish  religion,
and  was  distinguished  by.  his  zeal  for  the  institu-
tion and  for  the  traditions  which  had  been  incor-
porated with  it.  Upon  this  part  of  his  character
the  history  makes  St  Paul  speak  thus :  /'  I  am
verily  a  man  which  am  a  Jew,  born  in  Tarsus,  a
city  of  Gilicia,  vet  brought  up  in*  this  city  at  the
feet  of  Gamaliel v  and  taught  according  to  the  per-
fect manner  of  the  law  of  the  fathers ;  and  was
zealous  towards  God,  as  ye  all  are  this  day."
Acts,  chap.  xxii.  3.

The  epistle  is  as  follows:  "I  profited. in  the
Jews'  religion  above  many  my  equals  in  mine  own
nation,  being  more  exceedingly  zealous  of  the  tra-
ditions of  my  fathers."  Chap.  i.  14.

2..  St.  Paul,  before  his  conversion,  had  been  a
fierce  persecutor  of  the  new  sect.'  "  As  for  Saul,
he  made  havoc  of  the  church :  entering  into  every
house,  and,  haling  men  and  women,  committed
them  to  prison."  Acts,  chap.  viti.  3.

This  4s  the  history  of  St.  Paul,  as  delivered  in
the  Acts:,  in  the  recital  of  his  own  history  in  the
epistle,  "  Ye  have  heard,"  says  he,  "  of  my  con-
versation in  times  past  hi  the  Jews'. religion,  how
that  beyond  measure  i  persecuted  the  church  of
God."  Chap.  i.  13.

3.  St.  Paul  was  miraculously  converted  on  his
way  to  Damascus.  "And  as  he  journeyed  he
came  near  to  Damascus:  and  suddenly  there
sHined  round  about  him  a  light  from  heaven ;  and
he  fell  to  the  earth,  and  heard  a  voice  saying  unto
him,  Saul,  Saul,  why  peraceuteet  thou  me?  And
he  said,  Who  art  thou,  Lord  1  And  the  Lord  said,
I  am  Jesus,  whom  thou  persecutest  -a  it  is  hard  for
thee  to  kick  against  the  pricks.  And  he,  trem-
bling and  astonished,  said,  Lord,  what  wilt  thou
have  me  to  do  1  Acts,  chap.  ix.  3—6.  WithJheso
compare  the  epistle,  chap;  i.  15—17:  "When  it
pleased  God,  who  separated  me  from  my  mother's
womb,  and  called  me  by  his  grace  to  reveal  his  Son
in  me,,  that  1  might  preach  him  among,  the  hea-
then ;  immediately  I  conferred  not  with  flesh  and
blood,  neither  went  I  up  to  Jerusalem,  to  them
that  were  apostles  before  ma;  but  I  went  into
Arabia,  and  returned  again  unto  Damascus." .


193


HOIUE  PAULINJE.


In  this  quotation  from  the  epistle,  I  desire  if  to
be  remarked  bow  incidentally  it  appears,  that  the
affair  passed  at  Damascus.  In  what  may  be  called
the  direct  part  of  the  account,  nd  mention  is  made
of  the  place  of  his  conversion  at  all:  a  casual  ex-
pression at  the  end,  and  an  expression  brought  in
for  a  different  purpose,  alone  fixes  it  to  have  been
at  Damascus ;  "  I  returned  again  to  Damascus  J'
Nothing  can  be  more  like  simplicity  and  unde-
signednes*  than  this  is!  It  also  draws  the  agree-
ment between  the  two  quotations  somewhat
closer,  to  observe  that  they  both  state  St.  Paul  to.
have  preached  the  gospel  immediately  upon  his
call:  "And  straightway  he  preached  Christ  in
the  synagogues,  that  he  is  the  Son  of  God,"  Acts,
chap.  ix.W.  "When  it  pleased  God  to  reveal
his  Son  in  me,  that  I  might  preach  him  among
the  heathen,  immediately  I  conferred  not  with  flesh
and  blood."  Gal.  chap.  1.  15.

4.  The  course  of  the  apostle's  travels  after  his
conversion  was  this:  he  went  from  Damascus  to
Jerusalem,  and  from  Jerusalem  into  Syria  and
Cilicia.  "  At  Damascus  the  disciples  took  him
-  by  night,  and  let  him  down  by  the  wall  in  a  bas-
ket ;  and  when  Saut  was  come  Uf  Jerusalem,  he
essayed  to  join  himself  to  the  disciples,"  Acts,
chap,  ix,  25.  Afterwards,  "  when  the  brethren
knew  the  conspiracy  formed  >against  him  at  Jeru-
salem, they  brought  him  down  to  Caasarea,  and
m  sent  him  forth  to  Tarsus,  a  cky  in  Ciltcia,"  chap.
'  he  30.  In  the  epistle,  St'  Paul  gives  the  following
brief  account  of- Ids  proceedings  within  the  same
period :  "  After  three  years  1  went  up  to  Jerusa-
lem to  see  Peter,  and  abode  with  him  fifteen  days :
afterwards  I  came  into  the  regions  of  Syria  ana
Cilicia."  The  history  hail  told  us  that  Paul  passed
from  Ccesarea  to  Tarsus:  if  he  took  his  journey
bv  land,  .it  would  carry  him  through  Syria  into
Cilicia j  and  he  would  come  after  hre  visit  at  Jero-
"  salem,  "  into  the  regions  of  Syria  and  Cilicia,"  in
the  very  order  in  which  he  mentions  them  in  the
epistle.  This  supposition  of  his  going  from  Cs>
sarea  to  Tarsus,  by  land,  clears  up  also  another
point.  It  accounts  for  what  St.  Paul  says  in  the
same  place  concerning  the  churches  of  Judea:
"  Afterwards  I  came  into  the  regions  of  Syria  and
Cilicia,  and  was  unknown  by  face  unto  the
churches  of  Judea,  which  were  in  Christ:  but
they  had  heard  only  thatvhe  which  persecuted  us
in  times  past;  now  preacheth  the  faith,  which  once
he  destroyed;  and  they  glorified  God  in  me."
Upon  which  passage  I  observe,  first,  that  what  is
here  said  of  tne  churches  of  Judea,  is  spoken  in
connexion  with,  his  journey  into  the  regions  of
Byriaand  Cilicia.  Secondly,  that  the  passage  itself
has  little  sigriificancy,  and  that  the  connexion  is
inexplicable,  unless  St.  Paul  went  through  Judea*
*  (though  probably  by  a  hasty  journey)  at  the  time
that  he  came  into  the  regions  of  Syria  and  Cilicia.
-Suppose  him  to  have  passed  by  land  from  Ciesa-
rea  to  Tarsus,  ail  this,  -as  hath  been  observed,
would  be  precisely  true.

5.  Barnabas  was  with  St.  Paul  at  Antioch.
"  Then  departed  Barnabas  to  Tarsus,  for  to  seek
Saul ;  and  when  he  had  found  him,  he  brought


*  Dr.  Doddridge  thought  that  the  Ctesarea  hare  men-
tioned was  not  the  celebrated  city  of  that  name  upon
the  Mediterranean  sea,  but  Qrsarca  Philippi,  near  the
borders  of  Syria,  which  Kes  in  a  much  more  direct  lino
from  Jerusalem  to  Tarsus  than  thcother.  The  objection
to  this.  Dr.  Benson  remarks,  is,  that  Cipsnrra  w  itbout
any  addition,  usually  denotes  Cwsarca  Paicstiae.


liim  unto  Antioch.  And  it  came  to  pass  that  a
whole  year  they  assembled  themselves  with  the
church,"  Acts,  chap.  xl.  25, 96.  Again,  and  upon
another  occasion,  "they  (Paul. and  Barnabas)
sailed  to  Antioch:  and  there  they  continued  a
long  time  with  the  disciples."  Chap.  xiv.  26.  _

Ps  ow  wl)at  says  the  epistle  ?  "  When  Peter  was
come  to  Antioch,  1  withstood  him  to  the  lace,  be-
cause he  was  to  be  blamed ;  and  the  other  Jews
dissembled  likewise  with  him ;  insomuctubat  Bar-
nabas also  was  carried  away  with  their  dissimula-
tion." Chap.  u.  11,  13.

6.  The  stated  residence  of  the  apostles  was  at
Jerusalem.  "  At  that  time  there  was  a  great  per-
secution against  the  church  which  was  at  Jerusa-
lem; and  they  were  all  scattered  abroad  through-
out the  regions  of  Judea  and  Samaria,  except  the
apostles,"  Acts,  chap.  viii.  1.  "  They  (the  Qhris-
tians-ht  Antioch)  determined  that  Paul  and  Bar-
nabas should  go  up  to  Jerusalem,  unto  the  apos-
tles and  elders,  about  this  question,"  Acts,  chap,
iv.  %  With  these  accounts  agrees  the  declara-
tion in  the  epistle :  "  Neither  went  I  up  to  Jerusa-
lem to  them  which  were  apostles  before  me,"  chop,
i.  17:  lor  this  declaration  implies,  or  rather  as-
sumes it  to  be  -known,. that  Jerusalem  was  the
place  where  the  apostles  were  to  be  met  with.

7.  There  were  at  Jerusalem  two  apostles,  or  at
least  two  eminent  members  of  the  church,  of  the
name  of  James.  This  is  directly  inferred  from
the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  which  in  the  second
verse  of  the  twelfth  chapter  relates  the  death  of
James,  the  brother  of  John?  and  yet  in  the  fif-
teenth chapter,  and  in  a'  subsequent  part  of  the
history,  records  a  speech,  delivered  by  James  in
the  assembly  of  the  apostles,  and  elders.  It  is  also
strongly  implied  by  tne  form  of  expression  used  in
the  epistle;  "Other  apostles  saw  I  none,  save
James,  the  Lord's-  brother;"  i.  e.  to  Hiarinyii«hj
him  from  James  the  brother  of  John.

To  us  who  have  been  long-conversant  in  the
Christian  history,  as  contained  in  the  Acts  of  the
Apostles,  these  points  are  obvious  and  familiar;
nor  do  we  readily  apprehend  any  greater  difficulty
in  making  them  appear  in  a  letter  purporting  to
have  been  written  try  St.-  Paul;  tfran  there  is  in
introducing  them  into  a  modern  sermon,  But,  to
judge  correctly  of  the  argument  before  us,  we  must
discharge  this  knowledge  from  our  thoughts.  We
must  propose  to  ourselvea,the  situation,  of  an  au-
thor who  sat  down  to  the  writing  of  the  epistle
without  having  seen  the  history;  and  then  the
concurrences  we  have  deduced  will  be  deemed  of
importance.  .They  will  at  feast  be,  taken  for
separate  confirmations  of  the  several' facte,  and  not
only  of  these  particular  facts,  but  of  the  general
truth  of  the  history. '

For,  what  is  the  rule  with  respect  to  corroborative
testimony  which  prevails  in  courts  of  justice,  and
wliich  prevails  only  because  experience  lias  proved
that  it  is  a  useful  guide  to  truth  ?  A  Drincipal  wit-
ness in  a  cause  delivers  his  account:  his  narrative,
in  certain  parts  of  it,  is  confirmed  by  witnesses  who
are  called  afterwards.  The  credit  derived  from  their
testimony  belongs  not  only  to  the  particular  cir-
cumstances in  which  the  auxiliary  witnesses  agree


with  the  principal  witness,  hut  in  some  measure
to  the  whole  of  hia evidence;  because  it  is  impro-
bable that  accident  or  fiction  should  draw  a  line
which  touched  upon  truth  in  so  many  points.
'  In  like  manner,  if  two  records  be  produced,
manifestly  independent,  that  is,  manifestly  written


EPISTLE  TO  THE  GALATIANS.


193


without  any  participation  of  intelligence,  an  agree-
ment between  them,  even  in  few  arid  slight  cir-
cumstances (especially  if  from  the  different  nature
and  design  of  the  writings,  few  points  only  of
agreement,  and  those  incidental,  could  be  expected
to  occur,)  would  add  a  sensible  weight  to  the  aiK
thority  of  both,  in  every  part  of  their  contents.

The  same  role  is  applicable  to  history,  with  at
least  as  much  reason  as  any  ether  species  of  evi-
dence.

No.  III.

.  But  although  the  references  to  various  particu-
lars in  the  epistle,  compared  with  the  direct  account
of  the  same  particulars  in  the  history,  afford  a
considerable  proof  of  the  truth,  not  only  of  these
particulars  but  of  the  narrative  which  contains
them;  yet  they  do  not  show,  it  will  be  said,  that
the  epistle  was  written  by  St.  Paul :  for  admitting,
(what  seems  to  have  been  proved,)  that  the  writer,
whoever  he  was,  had  no  recourse  to  the  Acts  of
the  Apostles,  yet  many  of  the  facte  referred  to,
such  as  St  Paul's  miraculous  conversion,  his
change  from  a  virulent  persecutor  to  an  indefati-
gable preacher,  his  labours  amongst  the  Gentiles,
and  his  seal  for  the  liberties  of  th*  Gentile  church,
were  so  notorious  as  to  occur  readily  to  the  mind
of  any  Christian,  who  should  choose  to  personate
his  character,  and  counterfeit  his  name ;  jt  was
only  to  write  what  every  body  knew.  Now  I
think  that  this  supposition— viz.  that  the  epistle
was  composed  upon  general  information,  and  the
(general  publicity  of  the  facts  alluded  to,  and  that
tlfcs  author  did  no  more  than  weave  into  his  work
what  the  common  fame  of  the  Christian,  church
had  reported  to  his  ears — is  repelled  by  the  parti-
cularity of  the  recitals  and  references.  This  par-
ticularity is  observable  in  the  following  instances,
in  perusing  which,  I  desire  the  reader  to  reflect,
whether  they  exhibit  the  language  of  a  man  who
had  nothing  but  general  reputation  to  proceed
upon,  or  of  a  man  actually  speaking  of  himself
and  of  his  own  history,  and  consequently  of  things
concerning  which  he  possessed  a  clear,  intimate,
and  circumstantial  knowledge.

1.  The  history,  in  giving  an  account  of  St.  Paul
after  his  conversion,  relates,  "that,  after  many
days,"  effecting,  by  the  assistance  of  the  disciples,
his  escape  from  Damascus,  "  he  proceeded  to  Jeru-
salem," Acts,  chap.  iz.  25.  The  epistle,  speaking
of  the  same  period-  makes  St.  Paul  say,  that  "  he
went  into  Arabia/'  that  he  returned  again  to  Da-
mascus, that  after  three  years  he  went  up  to  Jeru-
salem. Chap.  L  17,  18.

fi.  The  history  relates,  that  when  Saul  was
come  from  Damascus,  "  he  was  with  the  disciples
coming  in  and  going  out,"  Acts,  chap.  ix.  28.
The  epistle,  describing  the  same  journey,  tells  us,
"  that  he  went  up  to  Jerusalem  to  see  Peter,  and
abode  with  him  fifteen  days,"  chap.  i.  18.

3.  The  history  relates,  that  when  Paul  was  come
to  Jerusalem,  "  Barnabas  took  him  and  brought
him  to  the  apostles,"  Acts,  chap.  ix.  27.  The
epistle, (<  that  be  saw  Peter;  but  other  of  the  apos-
tles, saw  he  none,  save  James,  the  Lord's  brother,"
chap.  L  19.

Now  this  is  as  it  should  be.  The  historian  de-
livers his  account  in  general  term*,  as  of  facts  to
which  he  was  not  present.  The  person  who  is
the  subject  of  that  account,  whenhe  comes  to  speak
of  these  facts  himself,  particularises  time,  names,
sftdrircumsUnces.  _


4.  The  like,  notation  of  places,  persons,  and
dates,  is  met  with  in  the  account  of  St.  Paul's
journey  to  Jerusalem,  given  in.  the  second  chap-
ter of  the  epistle.  It  was  fourteen  years  after  his
conversion ;  it  was  in  company  with  Barnabas  and
Titus;  it  was  then  that  he  met  with  James,  Ce-
phas, and  John;  it  was  then  .also  that  it  was
agreed  amongst  them,  that  they  should  go  to  the
circumcision,  and  he  unto  the  Gentiles.

5.  The  dispute  with  Peter,  which  occupies  ty»
sequel  of  the  second  chapter,  is  marked  with  (he
same  particularity.  It  was  at  Antioch;  it  was
after  certain  came  from  James ;  it  was  whilst  Bar-
nabas was  there,  who  was  carried  away  by  their
.dissimulation.  These- examples  negative  the  in-
sinuation, that  the  epistle  presents  nothing  but
indefinite  allusions  to  public  iacts.

No.  IV.

Chap.  iv.  11 — 16.  "  I  am  afraid  of  you,  lest  I
have  bestowed  upon  you  labour  in  vain.  Brethren,
I  beseech  you,  be  as  I  am,  for  I  am  as  ye  are.  Ye
have  not  injured  me  at  all.  Ye  know  how,  through
infirmity  of  the  flesh,  I  preached  the  gospel,  unto
you  at  the  first;  and  mytemplatit>n,whickv>aain
thtJUsKy  ye  despised  not,  nor  rejected.;  but  re-
ceived me  as  an  angel  of  God,  even  as  Christ  Je-
sus. Where  is"  then  the  blessedness  you  spake  of!
for  I  bear  you  record,  that,  If  it  had  been  possible,
ye  would  have  plucked  out  your  own  eyes  and  have
given  them  unto  me.  Am  I  therefore  become  your
enemy,  because  I  tell  you  the  truth  V*
,  With  this  passage  compare  2  Cor.  chap.  xii.  I
— 9 :  "  It  is  not  expedient  for  me,  doubtless,  to.
glory;  I  will  come  to  visions  and  revelations  of  the
Lord.  I  knew  a. man  in  Christ  above  fourteen
years  ago,  (whether  in  the  body  I  cannot  tell,  or
whether  out  of  the  body,  I  cannot  tell ;  God  know-
eth;)  such  a  one  was  caught  up  to  the  third  hea-
ven :  and  I  knew-  such  a  man,  (whether  in  the
body,  or  out  of  the  body  I  cannot  tell,  God  know*
eth,),  how  that  he  was  caught  up  into  Paradise,
and  heard  unspeakable  words,  which  it  is  not  law-
ful for  a  man  to  utter.  Of  such  a  one  will  I  glory,
yet  of  myself  wi[l  I  not  glory,  but  in  mine  infirmi-
ties :  for,  though  I  would  desire  to  glory,  I  shall
not  be  a  fool ;  fpr  I  will  say  the  truth.  But  now
I  forbear,  lest  any  man  should  think  of  me  above
that  which  he  seeth  me  to  be,  or  that  he  heareth
of  me.  And  lest  I  should  be  exalted  above  mea-
sure, through  the  abundance,  of  the  revelations,
there  was  given  to  me  a.tliorn  in  the  Jlesh,  the
messenger  qf  Satan  to  bitfet  me,  lest  I  should  be
exalted  above  measure.  For  this  thing  I  besought
the  Lord  thrice,  that  it  might  depart  from  me.
And  he  said  unto  me,  My  grace  is  sufficient  for
thee ;  for  my  strength  is  made  perfect  in  weakness.
Most  gladly  therefore  will  I  rather  glory  in  my  in-
firmitiesi  that  the  power  of  Christ  may  rest  upon
me."

There  can  he  no  doubt  but  that  "the  tempta-
tion which  was  in  the  flesh,"  mentioned  in  the
Epistle  to  the  Galatians,  and  "  the  thorn  in  the
flesh,  the  messenger  of  Satan  to  buffet  him/*  men-
tioned in  the  Epistle  to  the  Corinthians,  were  in-
tended to  denote  the  same  thing.  Kit horr  there-
fore, it  was  what  we  pretend  it  to  have  lx>en,  the
same  person  in  both,  alluding,  as  tlte  occasion  led
him,  to.  some  bodily  infirmity  under  which  he  la-
boured ;  that  is,  we  are  Tending  the  real  letters  of  a
real  apostle ;  or,  it  was  that  a  sophist,  who  had
seen  tne  circumstance  in  one  epistle,  contrived,  for
17


194


HORjE  PAULINA.


the  sake  of  correspondency,  to  bring  it  into  an-
other ;  or,  lafltlj.  it  wan  a  circumstance  in  St.  Paul  a
personal  condition,  supposed  to  be  well  known  to
those  into  whose  hands  the  epistle  was  likely  to
fall ;  and  for  that  reason,  introduced  into  a  writing
designed  to  bear  his  name.  •  I  have  extracted  the
quotations  at  length,  in  order 'to  enable  the  reader
to  judge  accurately  of  the  manner  in  which  the
mention  of  this  particular  comes  in,  in  each;  be-
cause that  judgment,  I  think,  will  acquit  the  au-
thor of  the  epistle  of  the  charge  of  having  studiously
inserted  it,  either  with  a  view  of  producing  an  ap-
parent agreement  between,  or  for  any  other  pur-
pose whatever.

The  context,  by  which  the  circumstance  before
us  islntroduced,  is  in  the  two  places  totally  differ-
ent and  without  any  mark  of  imitation.:  yet  in
both  places  does  the  circumstance  rise  aptly  and
naturally  out  of  the  context,  and  that  context  from
the  train- of  thought  carried  on  in  the  epistle.

The  Epistle  U)  the  Galatians,  from  the  begin-
ning to  the  end,  runs  in  a  strain  of  angry  com-
plaint of  their  defection  from  the  apostle,  and  from
the  principles  which  he  had  taught  them.  It  was
very  natural  to  contrast  with  this  conduct,  the
leal  with,  which  they  had  once  received  him ;  and
H  was  not  less  so  to  mention,  as  a  proof  of  their
former  disposition  towards  him,  the  indulgence
which, 'whilst  he  was  amongst  them,  they  had
shown  to  his .  infirmity ;  "  My  temptation  which
was  in  the  flesh,  ye  despised  not,  nor  rejected,  but
received  me  as  an  angel  of  God,  even  as  Christ
Jesus.  Where  is  then  the  blessedness  you  .spake
of;"  i.  e.  the  benedictions  which  you  bestowed
upon  me?  "  for  I  bear  you  record,  that,  if  it  had
been  possible,  ye  would  have  plucked  out  your
own  eyes,  and  hsjve  given  them  to  me."  -

In  the  two  epistles  to  the  Corinthians,  especially
in  -the  second,  we  have  the  apostle  contending
with  certain  teachers  in  Corinth,  who  had  formed
a  party  in  that  church  against  him.  To  vindicate
Ins  personal  authority,  as  well  as  the  dignity  and
credit  of  his  ministry  amongst  them,  he  takes  oc-
casion (but  not  without  apologising  repeatedly  for
the  folly,  that  is,  for  the  indecorum  of  pronouncing
"to  meet  his  adversaries  in


his  own  panegyric,*
their  beestings:  "Whereinsoever  any  is  bold,  (1
■peak  foolishly,)  I  am  bold  also.  Are  they  He-
brews 1  so  ami.  Are  they  Israelites'?  so  am  I.
Are  they  the  seed  of  Abraham  1  so  am  I.  Are
they  the  ministers  of  Christ?  (I  speak  as  a  fool,)  I
am  more;  In  labours  more  abundant,  in  stripes
above  measure,  in  prisons  more  frequent,  in  deaths
oft."  Being  led  to  the  subject,  he  goes  on,  as  was
natural,  to  recount  his  trials  and  dangers,  his  in-
cessant cares  and  labours  in  the  Christian  mission.
From  the  proofs  which  he  had  given  of  his  zeal
and  activity  in  the  service  of  Christ,  he  passes  (and
that  with  the  same  view  of  establishing  his  claim
to  he  considered  as  "  not  a  whit  behind  the  very
ehiefest  of  the  apostles,")  to  the  visions  and  reve-
lations which  from  time  to  time  have  been  vouch-
safed to  him.  And  then,  by  a  close  and  easy
connexion,  comes  in  the  mention  of  his  infirmity :
"  Lest  I  should  be  exalted,"  says  he,  "  above  mea-


•  M  Would  to  God  you  would  bear  with  me  a  little  in
say  folly;  and  indeetoearwith  me!  chap.  zi.  1.

"  That  which  I  speak,  I  speak  it  not  after  the  Lord,
but  as  it  were  foolishly,  in  this  oonfidenoe  of  boasting,''
chap.  xi.  17.

"I  am  become  a  fool  in  glorying;  ye  have  compelled
a*e,"chap.xii.ll.  ^


sure,  through  the  abundance  of  revelations,  then
was  given  to  me  a  thorn  in  the  flesh,  the  messen-
ger of  Satan  to  buffet  me."

Thus  then,  in  both  epistles,  the  notice  of  his
infirmity  is  suited  to  the  place  m  which  it  is  found.
In  the  Epistle  to  the  Corinthians,  the  train  of
thought  draws  up  to  the  circumstance  by  a  regu-
lar approximation.  In  this  epistle,  it  is  suggested
by  the  subject  and  occasion  of  the  episUeitseht
Which  observation  we  offer  as  an  argument  to
prove  that  it  is  not,  in  either  epistje,  a  circumstance
industriously-  brought  forward  for  the  sake  of  pro-
curing credit  to  an  imposture.

A  reader  will  be  taught  to  perceive  the  force  of
this  argument,  who  shall  attempt  to  introduce  a
given  circumstance  into  the  body  of  a  writing.
To  do  this  without  abruptness,  or  without  betray-
ing marks  of  design  in  the  transition,  requires,  ho
will  find,  more  art  than  he  expected  to  be  neces-
sary, certainly  more  than  any  one  can  believe  to
have  been  exercised  in  the  composition  of  these
epistles.  -

No.  V.

Chap.  iv.  29.  "But  as  then  he  that  was  born
after  the  flesh  persecuted  him  that  was  born  after
the  spirit,  even  so  it  is  now."

Chap.  v.  1 1.  "  And  I,  brethren;  if  I  yet  preach
circumcision,  why  do  I  yet  suffer  persecution  %
Then  is  the  offence  of  the  cross  ceased."

Chap,  vi  17.  "  From  henceforth,  let  no  man
trouble  me,  for  I  bear  in  my  body  the  marks  of  the
Lord  Jesus."

From  these  several  texts,  H  is  apparent  that  the
persecutions  which  our  apostle  had  undergone,
were  from  the  hands  or  by  the  instigation  of  the
Jews;  that  it  was  not  for -preaching  Christianity
in  opposition  to  heathenism,  but  it  was  for  preach-
ing it  as  distinct  from  Judaism,  that  he  had  brought
upon  himself  the  sufferings  which  had  attended
his  ministry.  And  this  representation  perfectly
coincides  with  that  which  results  from  tne  detail
of  St.  Paul's  history,  as  delivered  in  the  Acts.  At
Antioch,  in  Pisidia,  the  "  word  of  the  Lord,  was
published  throughout  all  the  region :  but  the  Jew
stirred  up  the  devout  and  honourable  women  and
the  chief  men  of  the  city,  and  raised  persecution
against  Paul  and  Barnabas,  and  expelled  them
out  of  their  coasts,"  Acts,  chap.  xiri.  50.  Not
-long  after,  at  Iconium,  "  a  great  multitude  of  the
Jews  and  also  of  the  Greeks  believed ;  but  the  un-
believing Jem  stirred  up  the  Gentiles,  and  made
their  minds  evil  affected  against  the  brethren, "
chap.  xiv.  1,  2.  "  At  Lystra  there  came  certain
Jews  from  Antioch  and  Iconium,  who  persuaded
the  people;  and  having  stoned  Paul,  drew  him  out
of  the  city,  supposing  he  had  been  dead,"  chap.  xiv.
19.  The  same  enmity,  and  from  the  same  quar-
ter, our  apostle  experienced  in  Greece :  "  At  Thes-
saJonica,  some  of  them  (the  Jews)  believed,  and
consorted  with  Paul  and  Silas :  and  of  the  devout
Greeks  a  great  multitude,  and  of  the  chief  women
not  a  few :  but  the  Jew*  which  believed  not,  moved
with  envy,  took  unto  them  certain  lewd  fellows  of
the  baser  sort,  and  gathered  a  company,  and  set
all  the  city  in  an  uproar,  and  assaulted  tne  house
of  Jason,  and  sought  to  bring  them  out  to  the  peo-
ple," Acts,  chap,  xvil  4,  5.  Their  persecutors
follow  them  to  Berea :  "  When  the  Jews  of  Thes-
salonica  had  knowledge  that  the  word  of  God  was
preached  of  Paul  at  Berea,  they  came  thither  also,
and  stirred  up  the  people,''  chap,  xxil  13. And


EPISTLE  TQ  THE  GALATIANS.


195


lastly  at  Coriotfh,  when  Gaflio  was  deputy  of
Achaia,  "  the  Jew  made  insurrection  with  one
accord  against  Paul,  and  brought  him  to  the  judg-
ment seat."  I  flunk  it  does  not  appear  that  our
apostle  was  ever  seTupon  by  the  Gentiles,  unleee
they  were  first  stirred  up  by  the  Jews,  except  in
two  instances;  in  both  which  the  persons  who  be-
gan the  assault  were  immediately  interested  in  his
expulsion  from  the  place.'  Once  this  happened  at
Philippi,  afterthecureof  the  Pythoness:  "  When
the  masters  saw  the  hope  of  their  gains  was  gone,
they  caught  Paul  and  Silas,  and  drew  them  into
the  market-place  unto  the  rider*,"  chap.  xvi.  19.
And  a  second  time  at  Ephesus,  at  the  instance
of  Demetrius,  a  silversmith  whicl}  made  silver
shrines  lor  Diana,  "  who  called  together  workmen
of  like  /occupation,  and  said,  Sirs,  ye  know  that
by  this  craft  we  have  our  wealth ;  moreover  ye  see

and  hear,  that  not  only  .at  Ephesus,  but  almost
...... j^  ~ .  ,


throughout  all  Asia,


Paul


sua.  but
hath  pei


rsuaded


away  much-' people,  saying,  that  they  be  no  gods
which  are  made  with  hands ;  so  that  not  only  this
our  craft  is  in  danger  to  beset  at  nought,  but  also
that  the  temple  of  the  great  goddess  Diana  should
be  despised,  and  her  magnificence  should  be  de-
stroyed, whom  all  Asia  and  the  world  worobippeth."

No.  VI.

I  observe  an  agreement  in  a  somewhat  peculiar
rale  of  Christian  conduct,  as  laid  down  in  this
epistle,  and  as  exemplified  in  the  Second  Epistle
to  the  Corinthians.  It  is  not  the  repetition  of  the
same  general  precept,  which  would  have  been  a
coincidence  of  little  value ;  but  it  is  the  general
precept  in  one  place,  and  the  application  of  that
precept  to  an  actual  occurrence  in  the  other.  In
the  sixth  chapter  anoVnret  verse  of  this  epistle,  our
apostle  gives  the  following  direction :  "Brethren,
it  a  man  be  overtaken  in  a  fruit,  ye  which  are
spirfeuelreatoresuch  a  one  in  the  spirit  of  meek-
ness." In  S  Cor.  chap,  it  6—8,  he  writes  thus:
"  flnnVient  to  such  a  man"  (the  incestuous  per-
ioned  in  the  First  Epistle,)  "is  this  pu-
,  which  was  inflicted  of  many:  so  that.
Night  rather  to  forgive  him  ana
perhaps  such  a  one  should  be
swallowed  up  with  over-much  sorrow ;  wherefore
I  beseech  you  that  ye  would  confirm  your  love
towards  him,"  I  have  little  doubt  but  that  it  was
the  earns  mind  which  dictated  these  two  passages.

No.  VII.

Our  epistlegoea  farther  than  any  of  St.  Paul's
epistles;  lor  it  avows,  in  direct  terms,  the  super-
session of  the  Jewish  Jaw,,  as.  an  instrument  of
salvation,  even  to  the  Jews  themselves.  Not  only
were  the  Gentiles  exempt  from  its  authority,  but
even  the  Jews  were  no  longer  either  to  place  any
dependency  upon  it,  or  consider  themselves  as
subject  to  it  on  a  religious  account  Before  faith
came,  we  were  kept  under  the  law,  shut  up  unto
the  faith  -which  should  afterwards  be  revealed ;
wherefore  the  law  waa  our  schoolmaster  to  bring
us  unto  Christ,  that  we  might  be  justified  by  faith ;
hut,  after  that  faith  i*  come,  we  are  no  longer
under  a  eehoolmaster,"  chap.  iii.  23— 25.  This
was  undoubtedly  spoken  of  Jews,  and  to  Jews.
In  like  manner,  chap.  iv.  1 — 5 :  ''  Now  1  say  that
the  heir,  ae  long  as  he  is  a  child,  differed*  nothing
torn  a  servant,  though  he  be  laid  of  all;  butw


under  tutors  and  governors  until  the  time  appoint-
ed of  the  father :  even  so  we,  when  we  were  chil-
dren, were  in  bondage  under  the  elements  of  the
world ;  but  when  the  fumess  of  time  was  come,
God  sent  forth  his  Son,  made  of  a  woman,  made
under  the  law,  to  redeem  them  that  were  under
the  fatr,  that  we  might  receive  the  adoption  of
sons."  '  These  passages  are  -nothing  abort  of  a
declaration,  that  the  obligation  of  the  Jewish  Law,
considered  as  a  religious  dispensation,  the  effects
of  which  were  to  take  place  in  another  life,  had
ceased,  with  respect  even  to  the  Jews  themselves.
What  then  should  be  the  conduct  of  a  Jew,  (for
such  St.  Paul  was,)  who  preached  this  doctrine  1
To  be  consistent  with  himself,  either  he  would  no
longer  comply,  in  his  own  person,"  with  the  direc-
tions of  the  law ;  or,  if  he  did  comply,  it  would  be
for  some  other  reason  than  any  confidence  which
he  placed  in  its  efficacy,  as  a  religious  institution.
Now  so  it  happens,  that  whenever  St.  Paul's  com-
pliance with  tne  Jewish  law  Is  mentioned  m  the
history,  it  is  mentioned  in  connexion  with  circum-
stances which  point  out  the  motive  from  which
it  proceeded ;  and  this  motive  appears  to  have  been
always  exoteric,  namely,  a  love  of  order  arid  tran-
quillity, or  an  unwillingness  to  give  unnecessary
offence.  Thus,  Acts,  chap.  xvi.  3:  "  Him  (Ti-
mothy,) would  Paul  have  to  go  forth  with  him,
and  took  and  circumcised-  him,  because  of  the
Jew*  which  were  in  thoee  quarters.  Again.  Acts,
chap.  xxi.  26,  when  Paul  consented  to  exhibit  an
example  of  public  compliance  with  a  Jewish  rite
by  purifying  himself  in  the  temple,  it  is  plainly
intimated  that  he  did  this  to  satisfy  "  many  thou-
sands of  Jews  who  believed,  and  who  were  all
zealous  of  the  law."  So  far  the  instances  related
in  one-book,  correspond  with  the  doctrine  deliver-
ed in  another. i

'" No.  vin.

Chap.  i.  18.  "  Then,  after  three  years,  I  went
up  to  J  erusalem  to  see  Peter,  and  abode  with  him
fifteen  days."

The  shortness  of  St  Paul's  stay  at  Jerusalem
is  what  I  desire  the  reader  to  remark.  The  direct
account  of  the  same  journey  in  the  Acts;  chap.  ix.
28,"  determines  nothing  concerning  the  time  of  his
continuance  there :  "  And  he  was  with  them  (the
apostles)  coming  in,  and  going  out,  at  Jerusalem}
and  he  spake  boldly  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus,
and.  disputed  against  the  Grecians^  but  they  went
about  to  slay  hun ;  which  when  the  brethren  knew,
they  brought  him  down  to  CBsarea."  Or  rather
this  account,  taken  by  itself,  would  lead  a  reader
to  suppose  that  St.  Paul's  abode  at  Jerusalem,  had
been  longer  than  fifteen  days.  But  turn  to  the
twenty-second  chapter  of  the- Acts;  and  you  will
find  a  reference  to  this  -visit  to  Jerusalem,  which
plainly  indicates  that  'Paul's  continuance  in  that
city  had  been  of  short  duration :  "  And  it  came
to  pass,  that  when  I  was  come  again  to  Jerusalem,
even  while  I  prayed  in  the  temple,  I  was  in  a
trance,  and  saw  him  saying,  unto  me,  Make  haste,
get  thee  quickly  out  of  Jerusalem,  for  they  will  not
receive  thy  testimony  concerning  me."  Here  wo
have  the  general  terms  of  one  text  so  explained  by
a  distant  text  in  the  same  book,  as  to  bring  an  in-
determinate expression  into  a  close  conformity
with  a  specification  delivered  in  another  book :  a
species  of  consistency  not,  I  think,  usually  found
in  fabulous  relations.


196


HORJE  PAULINJE.


No.  IX.


Chap,  vi.  11.  "  Ye  see  how  Urge  a  letter  I  have
Written  unto  you  with  mine  ownmuid."

Then  word*  imply  that  he  did  not  always  write
with  his  own  hand ;  which  is  consonant  to  what
we  find  intimated- in  some  other  of  the  epistles.
The  Epistle  to  the  Romans  was  written  by  Ter-
tius :  "  I,  Tertius,  who  wrote  this  epistle,  salute
you  in  the  Lord,"  chap.  ivi.  22.  The  First  Epis-
tle to  the  Corinthians,  the  Epistle  to  the  Coioa-
aians,  and  the  Second  to  the  Thessaloniana,  have
all.  near  the  conclusion,  this  clause,  "  The  salu-
tation of  me,  Paul,  with  mine  own  hand ;"  which
must  be  understood,  and  is  universally  understood
to  import,  that  the  rest  of  the  epistle  was  written
by  another  hand.  I  do  not  think  it  improbable
that  an  impostor,  who  had  remarked  this  subscrip-
tion in  some  other  epistle,  should  invent  the  same
in>a  forgery;  but. that  is  not  done  here.  The
author  ot  this  epistle  does  not  imitate  the  manner
of  erring  St.  Paul's  signature:  he  only  bids  the
Gaktians  observe  how  large  a  letter  he  had  writ-
ten to  them  with  his.  own  hand. .  He  does  not  say
this  was  different  from  his  ordinary  usage ;  that
is  left  to  implication.  Now  to  suppose  that  this
was  an  artifice  to  procure  credit  to  an  imposture,
is  to  suppose  that  the  author  of  the  forgery,  be-
cause he  knew  that  others  of  St.  Paul's  were  not
written  by  himself,  therefore  made  the  apostle  say
that  this  was :  which  seems  an  odd  turn  to  give  to
.  the  circumstance,  and  to  -be  given  for  a  purpose
which  would  more  naturally  and  more  directly  have
been  answered,  by  subjoining  the  salutation  or
signature  in  the  form  in  which  it  is  found  in  other
epstjes.*

No.X.

An  exact  conformity  appears  in  the  manner
in  which  a  certain  apostle  or  eminent  Christian,
whose  name  was  James,  is  spoken  of  in  the  epistle
and  in  the  history.  Both  writings  refer  to  a  situa-
tiohof  his  at  Jerusalem,  somewhat  different  from
that  of  the  other  apostles ;  a  kind  of  eminence  or
presidency  in  the  church  there,  or  at  least  a  more
fixed  and  stationary  residence.  Chap.  ii.  12:
"  When  PeteVwas  at  Antioch,  before  that  certain
came  from  James,  he  did  eat  with  the  Gentiles."
This  text  plainly  attributes  a  kind  of  pre-eminency
to  James :  and,  as  we  hear  of  him  twice  in  the  same
epistle  dwelling  at  Jerusalem,  chap.  i.  19,  and  ii.
9,  we  must  apply  it  to  the  situation  which  he  held
in  that  church.  In  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles  divers
intimations  occur,  conveying  the  same  idea  of
James's  situation.  When  Peter  was  miraculously
delivered  from  prison,  and  had  surprised  his  friends
by  his  appearance  among  them,  after  declaring
unto  them  how  the  Lord  had  brought  him  out  of
prison,  "Go  show,"  says  he,  "these  things  unto
James,  and  to  the  brethren,"  Acts,  chap.  xii.  17.
""  Here  James  is  Manifestly  spoken  of  in  terms  of
distinction.  He  appears  again  with  like  distinc-
tion in  the  twenty-first  chapter  and  the  seventeenth
and  eighteenth  verses :  "  And  when  we  (Paul  and
his  company)  were  come  to  Jerusalem,  the  day


*  The  words  jrnxi*o«i  yeapf**™  may  probably  be
meant  to  describe  tbe  character  in  which  be  wrote,  and
not  tbe  length  of  the  letter.  But  this  will  not  alter  the
truth  ofbur  observation.  I  think,  however,  that  as  St.
Paul,  by  the  mention  of  his  own  hand,  deeijpied  to  ex-
press to  the  Galatians  tbe'  great  concern  which  he  felt
for  ibem,  tbe  words,  whatever  they  signify,  belong  to
the  whole  of  the  epialle  ;  and  not.  as  Grotius,  after  St.
Jerome,  interprets  it,  to  the  few  verses"  which  follow.


following.  Paul  went  in  with  us  unto  James,  and
all  the  elders  were  present"  In  the  debate  whack
took  place  upon  the  business  of,  the  Gentile  con*
verts,  in  the  council  at  Jerusalem,  this  same  per-
son seems  to  have  taken  the  lead.  *  It  was  he  who
closed  the  debate,  and  proposed  the  resolution  in
which  the  council  ultimately  concurred:  "  Where-
fore my  sentence  is,  that  we  trouble  not  them
which  from  among  the  Gentiles  are  turned  to  God."

Upon  the  whole,  that  there  exists  a  conformity
in  the  expressions  used  concerning  Jamu  through-
out the  history,  and  in  the  epistle,  is  unquestion-
able. But*  admitting  this  conformity,  and  admit-
ting also  the  undesignedness  of'it,  what  does  it
}>rove  ?  It  proves  that  the  circumstance  itself  is
bunded  in  truth ;  that  is,  that  James  was  a  Heal
person,  who  held  a  situation  of  eminence  in  a  real
society  of  Christians  at  Jerusalem.  It*  confirms
also  those  parts  of  the  narrative  which  are  con-
nected with  .this  circumstance.  Suppose,  for  in-
stance,-the  truth  of  the  account  of  Peter's  escape
from  prison  was  to  be  tried  upon  the  testimony  of
a  witness  who,  among  other  things,  made  Peter,
after  his  deliverance,  say,  "  Go  show  these  things
to  James  and  to  the  brethren ;"  would  it  not  be
material,  in  such  a  trial,  to  make  out  by  other  in-
dependent proofs,  or  by  a  comparison  of  proofs,
drawn  from  independent  sources,  that  there  was
actually  at  that  tune,  living  at  Jerusalem,  such  a
person  as  James;  that  this  person  held  such  a
situation  in  the  society  amongst  whom  these  things
were  transacted,  as  to  render  the  words  which
Peter  is  said  to  have  used  concerning  him,  proper
and  natural  for  him  to  have  used?  If  this  would
be  pertinent  in  the  discussion  of  oral  testimony,  it
is  still  more  so  in  appreciating  the  credit  of  remote
history.

It  must  not  be  dissembled,  that  the  comparison
of  our  epistle  with  the  history  presents  some  dif-
ficulties, or,  to  say  the  least,  some  questions  of
considerable  magnitude.  It  may  be  doubted,  in
the  first  place,  to  what  journey  the  words  which
open  the  second  chapter  of  the  epistle,  "then,
fourteen  years  afterwards,  I  went  unto  Jerusa-
lem," relate.  That  which  best  corresponds  with
the  date,  and  that  to  which  most  interpreters  ap-
ply the  passage,  is  the  journey  of  "Paul  and  Bar-
nabas to  Jerusalem  when  they  went  thither  from
Antioch  upon  the.  business  of  the  Gentile  con-
verts; and  which  journey  produced  the  famous
council  and  decree  recorded  in  the  fifteenth  chap-
ter of  Acts.  To  me  this  opinion  appears  to  be
encumbered  with  strong  objections.  In  the  epis-
tle Paul  tells  us  that  "  he  went  up  by  revelation,"
chap.  ii.  2.  In  the  Acts,  we  read  that  he  was
sent  by  the  church  of  Antioch:  "after  no  small
dissension  and  disputation,  they  determined  that
Paul  and  Barnabas,  and  certain  other  of  them,
should  go  up  to  the  apostles  and  elders  about
this  question,"  Acts,  chap.  xv.  2.  This  is  not
very  reconcUeable.  In  the  enistle,  St.  Paul  writes
that,  when  he  came  to  Jerusalem,  "he  com-
municated that  Gospel  which  he  preached  among
the  Gentiles,  but  privately  to  them  which  were  of
reputation,"  chap.  ii.  9.  If  by  "  that  Gospel"  he
meant  the  immunity  of  the  Gentile  Christians
from  the  Jewish  law,  (and  I  know  not  what  else
it  can  mean,)  it  is  not  eatfy  to  conceive  how  he
should  communicate  that  privately,  which  was
the  object  of  his  public  message.  But  a  yet
greater  difficulty  remains  viz.  that  in  the  account
which  the  epistle  gives  of  -what  passed  updn  this


EPISTLE  TO'  THE  GALATIANS.


V7


Visit  at  Jerusalem,  no  notice  is  taken  of  the  de-
liberation, and  decree,  which  are  recorded  in  the
Acte,.and  which,  according  to  that  history,  formed
the  business  for  the  sake  of  which  the  journey
was  undertaken.  The  mention  of  the  council  and
of  its  determination,  whilst  the  apostle  was  re-
lating his  proceedings  at  Jerusalem,  could  hardly
have  been  avoided,  if  in  truth  the  narrative  be-
long to  the  same  journey.  To  me  it 'appears
more  probable  that  Paul  and  Barnabas  had  taken
some  journey  to  Jerusalem,  the  mention  of  which
is  omitted  in  the  Acts.-  Prior  to  the  apostolic  de-
cree, we  read  that  "Paul  and  Barnabas  abode  at
Antioch  a  long  time  with  the  disciples,"  Acts
chap.  xiv.  88.  Ir  it  unlikely  that,  during  this
long  abode,  they  might  go  up  to  Jerusalem  and
return  to  Antioch?  Or  would  the  omission  of
such  a  journey  be  unsuitable  to  the  general  bre-
vity with  which  these  memoirs  are  written,  es-
pecially of  those  parts  of  St.  Paul's  history  which
took  place  before  the  historian  joined  his  society?
But,  again,  the  first  account  we  find  in  the
Acts  of  the  Apostles  of  St.  Paul's  visiting  Ga-
ratia,  is  in  the  sixteenth  chapter  and*  the  sixth
Terse :  "  Now  when  they  had  gone  through  Pnry-
gia  and  the  region  of  Galatia,  they  assayed  to  go'
into  Bithynia.  The  progress  here  recorded  was
subsequent  to  the  apostolic  decree ;  therefore  that
decree  must  have  been  extant  when  our  epistle
was  written.  Now,  as  the  professed  design  of  the
epistle  was  to  establish  the  exemption  of  the  Gen-
tile converts  from  the' law  of  Moses,  and  as  the
decree  pronounced  and  confirmed  that  exemption,
it  may  seem  extraordinary  that  no  notice  whatever
m  taken  of  that  determination,  nor  any  appeal
made  to  its  authority.  Much  however  of  the
weight  of  this  objection,  which  applies  also  to
tome  other  of  St.  Paul's  epistles,  is  removed  by
the  following  reflections.

1.  It  was  not  St.  Paul's  manner,  nor  agreeable
to  it,  to  resort  or  defer  much  to  the  authority  of
the  other  apostles,  especially  whilst  he  was  in-
sisting, as  he  does  strenuously  throughout  this
epistle  insist,  upon  his  own  original  mspiration.
He  who  could  speak  of  the  very  chiefest  of  the
apostles  in  such  terms  as  the  following — "  of  those
who  seemed  to  be  somewhat,  (whatsoever  they
were  it  maketh  no  matter  to  me,  God  accepteth
no  man's  person.)  for  they  who  seemed  to  be
somewhat  in  conference  added  nothing  to  me,'2 —
he,  I  say,  was  not  likely  to  support  himself  by
their  decision.

2.  The  epistle  argues  the  point  upon  principle :
and  it  is  not  perhaps  mor*  to  be  wondered  at,  that
in  such  an  argument  St ^  Paul  should  not  cite  the
apostolic  decree,  than  it  would  be  that,  in  a  dis-
course designed  to  prove  the  moral  and  religious
duty  of  observing  the  Sabbath,  the  writer  should
not  quote  the  thirteenth  canon.

a  3.  The  decree  did  not  go  the  length  of  the  po-
sition maintained  in  the  epistle;  the  decree  only
declares  that  the  apostles  and  elders  at  Jerusalem
did  not  impose  the  observance  of  the  Mosaic  law
upon  the  Gentile  converts,  as  a  condition  of.  their
bang  admitted  into  the  Christian  church.  Our
epistle  argues  that  the  Mosaic  institution  itself
was  at  an  end,  as  to  all  effects  upon  a  future
state,  even  with  respect  to  the  Jews  themselves.

4.  They  whose  error  St.  Paul  combated,  were
not  persons  who  submitted  to  the  Jewish  law,
because  it  was  imposed  by  the  authority,  or
because- it  was  made  part  of  the  law  of  the  Chris-


tian church;  but  they  were  persons  who,  having
already  beoome  Christians,  afterwards  voluntarily
took  upon  themselves  the  observance  of  the  Mo-
saic code,  under  a  notion  of  attaining  thereby  to
a  greateri  perfection.  This,  I  think,  is  precisely/
the  opinion  which  St  Paul  opposes  in  this  episr
tie.  Many  of  his  expressions  apply  exactly  to  it :
"  Are  ye  so  foolish  t  having  begun  in  the  spirit,
are  ye  now  made  perfect  in  the  flesh  1"  chap.
viai.  3.  «  Tell  me.  ye  that  desire  to  be  Under  the
law,  do  ye  not  hear  the  law?'  chap.  iv.  31.
"  How  turn  ye  again  to  the  weak  and  beggarly
elements,  whereunto  ye  desire  .again  to  be  in
bondage  1"  chap.  iv.  3.  It  cannot  be  thought
extraordinary  that  St  Paul  should  resist  this
opinion  with  earnestness;  for  it  both  changed
the  character  of  the  Christian  dispensation,  and
derogated  expressly  from  the  completeness  of  that
redemption  which  Jesus  Christ  had  wrought  fix
them  that  believed  in  him.  But  it  was  to  no  purpose
to  allege  to  such  persons  the  decision  at  Jerusa*
iem;  for  that  only  showed  that  they  were  not
bound  to  these  observances  by  any  law  of  the
Christian  church ;  they  did  not  pretend  to  be  so
bound ;  nevertheless  they  imagined  that  there  wae
an  efficacy  in  these  observances,  a  merit,  a  recom-
mendation to  ravour,  and  a  ground  of  acceptance
with  God  for  those  who  complied  with  them.  This
was  a  situation  of  thought  to  which  the  tenor  of
the  decree  did  not  apply.  Accordingly,  St.  Paul's
address  to  the  Galatians,  which  .is  throughout
adapted  to  this  situation,  runs  in  a  strain  widely
different  from  the  language  of  the  decree :  "  Chrjat
is  become  of  no  effect,  unto  you,  whosoever  of  you
are  justified  by  the  law;1'  chap,  v.  4;  i.e.  who-
soever places  his  dependence  upon  any  merit  he
may>apprehend  there  to  be  in  legal  observances.
The  qecree  had  said  nothing  like  this ;  therefore
it  would  have  been  useless  to  have  produced  the
decree  in  an  argument  of  which  this  was  the
burden.  In  like  manner  as- in  contending  with
an  anchorite,  who  should, insist  upon  the  superior
holiness  of  a  recluse,  ascetic  life,  and  the  value  of
such  mortifications  in  the  sight  of  God,  it  would
be  to  no  purpose  to  prove  Sat  the  laws  of  the
church  did  not  require  these  vows,  or  even  to
prove  that  Che  laws  of  the  church  expressly  left
every  Christian  to  his  liberty.  This  would  avail
little  towards  abating  his  estimation  of  their  merit,
or  towards  settling  the  point  in  controversy,*


-  *  Mr.  Locke's  solution  of  this  difficulty  is  by  no  n

satisfactory.  "  St.  Paul,*'  be  rays,  "  did  .not  remind  the
Galatians  of  the  apostolic  decree,  because  they  alreadj
had  it."  in  the  first  place,  it  does  hot  appear  with  car.
tainty  that  they  had  it ;  in  the  second  place,  if  they  bad
it,  this  was  rather  a  reason,  than  otherwise,  for  refer-
ring them  to  it.  The  passage  in  the  Acts,  from  which
Mr.  Locke  concludes  that  the  Galatic  churches  were  ia
possession  of  the  decree,  is  the  fourth  v^ne  of  the  six-
teenth chapter:  "And  as  they"  (Paul  and  Timothy)
"  went  through  the  cities,  they  delivered  them  the  de-
crees for  to  keep,  that  were  ordained  of  the  apostles
and  elders  which  were,  at  Jerusalem."  In  my  opinion,
this  delivery  of  the  decree  was  confined  to  the  churches
to  which  St.  Paul  came,  in  pursuance  of  the  plan  upon
which  he  set  out,  "of  visiting  the  brethren  in  every
city  where  he  had  preached  the  word  of  the  Lord}"  the
history  of  which  progEees,  and  of  all  that  pertained  to
it,  is  closed  in  the  fifth  verse,  when  the  history  informs
that,  "  so  were  the  churches  established  in  the  faith,
and  increased  \n  number  daily."  Then  the  history  pro-
ceeds upon  a  new  section  of  the  narrative,  by  telling  us,
that  "  when  they  had  gone  throughout  Phrygia  and  the
region  of  Galatia,  they  assayed  to  go  into  Bithynia."
The  decree  itself  is  directed  to  M  the  -brethren  which
17»


196


HOIUE  PAULINJB.


Another  difficulty  arises  from  the  account  of
Peter's  conduct  towards  the  Gentile  convert*  at
Antioch,  as  given  in  the  epistle,  in  the  latter  part
of  the  second  chapter ;  which  conduct^  it  is  said,
is  consistent  neither  with  the  revelation  commu-
nicated to  hhn  upon  the  conversion  of  Cornelius,
nor  with  the  part  he  took  in  the  debate  at  Jeru-
salem.. But,  in  order  to  understand  either  the
difficulty  or  the  solution,  it  will  be  necessary  to
atate  and  explain  the  passage-  itself.  "Wnen
Peter  was  eome  to  Anooch,  I  withstood  him  to
the  lace,  because  he  was  to  be  blamed ;  for,  bo-
fore  that  certain  came  from  James,  he  did  eat
with  the  Gentiles;  but  when  they  were  come,  he
withdrew  and  separated  himself,  fearing  them
which  were  of  the  circumcision ;  and  the  other
Jews  dissembled  likewise  with  him,  insomuch
that  Barnabas  also  was  carried  away  with  their
dissimulation ;  but  when  I  saw  they  walked  not
uprightly,  ^ccordinff  to  the  truth  of  the  Gospel,  I
said  unto  Peter,  before  them  all,  If  thou,  being  a
Jew,  lives*  after  the  manner  of  the  Gentiles,  and
not  as  do  the  Jews,  why  compelkst  thou  the  Gen-
tiles to  live  as  do  the  Jews?'  Now  the  question
that  -produced  the  dispute  to  which  these  words
relate,  was  not  whether  the  Gentiles  were  capable
of  being  admitted  into  the  Christian  covenant;
that  had  been  fully  settled:  nor  was  it  whether  it
should  be  accounted  essential  to  the  profession  of
Christianity  that  they  should  conform  themselves
to  the  law  of  Moses;  that  was  the  question  at
Jerusalem:  but  it  was,  whether,  upon  the  Gen-
tiles becoming  Christians,  the  Jews  might  hence-
forth eat  and  drink)  with  them,  as  with  their  own
brethren.  Upon  this  point  St  Peter  betrayed
some  inconstancy;  and  so  he  might,  agreeably
enough  to  his  history. — He  might  consider  the
vision  at  Joppa  as  a  direction  for  the  occasion,  ra-
ther than  as  universaljy  abolishing  the  distinction
between  Jew  and  Gentile ;  I  do  not  mean  with
respect  to  final  acceptance  with  God,  but  as  to  the
manner  of  their  living  together  in  society :  at  least

are  of  the  Gentiles  in  Antiocb,  Syria,  and  Cilicia,  that
is,  to  churches  already  founded,  and  in  which  this
question  had  been  stirred.  And  I  think  the  observation
of  the  noble  author  of  the  Miscellanea  Sacra  is  not  only
ingenious-but  highly  probable,  viz.  that  there,  ia,  in  this
place  a  dislocation  of  the  text,  and  that  the  fourth  and
fifth  verses  of  the  sixteenth  chapter  ought  to  follow  the
last  verse  of  the  fifteenth,  so  as  to  make  the  entire  pas-
sage ran  thus :  "  And  they  went  through  Syria  and  Ci-
licia," fto  the  Christians  of  which  country  the  decree
was  addressed)  "  confirming  the  churches ;  and  aa  they
went  through  the  cities,  they  delivered  them  the  decrees
for  to  keep,  that  were  ordained  of  the  apostles  *and  el-
ders which  were  ar  Jerusalem ;  and  so  were  the  churches
established  in  the  faith,  and  increased  in  number  daily.*'
And  then  the  sixteenth  chapter  takes  up  a  new  and  un-
broken paragraph :  '<  Then  came  he  to  Derbe  and  Lystra,
dec"  When  St.  Paul  came,  as  he  did  into  Galatia,  to
preach  the  Gospel,  for  the  first  time,  in  a  new  place,  it  is
not  probable  that  he  would  make  mention  of  the  de-
cree, or  rather  letter,  of  the  church  of  Jerusalem,  which
presupposed  Christianity  to  be  known,  and  which-  re-
lated to  certain  doubts  that  had  arisen  in  some  esta-
blished Christian  communities.

The  second  reason  which  Mr.  Locke  assigns  4br  the
omission  of  the  decree,  viz.  "  that  St.  Paul's  sole  object
in  the  epistle  was  to  acquit  himself  of  the  imputation
that  had  been  charged  upon  him  of  actually  preaching
circumcision ,"  does  net  appear  to  me  to  be  strictly  true.
It  was  not  the  sole  object. The  epistle  is  written  in

Cneral  opposition  to  the  Judaising  inclinations  which
found  to  prevail  among  his  converts.  The  avowal  of
bis  own  doctrine,  and  of  his  steadfast  adherence  to  that
doctrine,  formed  a  necessary  part  of  the  design  of  his
letter,  but  was  not  the  whole  ofiu


he  might  not  have  osanrehended  mis  point  with
such  clearness  and  certainty,  as  to  stand  out  upon
it  against  the  fear  of  bringing  upon  himself  the
censure  and  complaint  of  his  brethren  in  the
church  of  Jerusalem,  who  still  adhered  to  their
ancient  prejudices.  But  Peter,  it  is  said,  com-
pelled the  Gentiles  i« J«i{m, — "  Why  compellest
thou  the  Gentiles  to  live  as  do  the  Jews  1"  How
did  he  do  that?  -The  only  way  in  which  Peter
appears  to  have  compelled  the  Uentiles  to  comply
with  the  Jewish  institution,  was  by  withdrawing
himself  from  their  society.  By  which  he  maybe
understood  to  have  made  tins,  declaration:  "We
do  not  deny  your  right  to  be  considered  as  Chris-
tians; we  do  not  deny  your  title  in  the  promises
of  the  Gospel,  even  without  compliance  with  our
law:  but  if  you  would  have  us  Jews  live  with
you  as  we  do  with  one  another;  that  is,  if  you
would  in  all  respects  he  treated  by  us  as  Jews,
you  must  live  as  such  yourselves."  This,  I  think,
was  the  compulsion  which  St  Peter's  conduct
imposed  upon  the  Gentiles,  and  lor  which  St
Paul  reproved  him.

As  to  the  part  which  the  historian  ascribes  to
St  Peter  in  the  debate  at  Jerusalem,  besides  that
it  was  a  different  question  which  was  there  agita-
ted from  that  which  produced  the  dispute  at  An-
tioch,  there  is  nothing  to  hinder  us  from  sup-
posing that  the  dispute  at  Antioch  was  prior  to
the  consultation  at  Jerusalem ;  or  that  Peter,  in
consequence  of  this  rebuke,  might  hove  afterwards


CHAPTER  VI.
7%e  Epistle  to  the  Ephetions.

Nal. '

This  epistle,  and  the  Epistfe  to  the  Cotoesjsms,
appear  to  nave-  been  transmitted  to  their  respect-
ive churches  by  the  same  messenger:  "  But  that
ye  also  may  know  my  aflairs,  and  iiow  I  do,
Tychicua,  a  beloved  brother  and  faithful  minister
in  the  Lord,  shall  make  known  to  you  all  things;
whom  I  have  sent  unto  you  for  the  same  purpose,
that  ye  might  know  our  aflairs,  and  that  he  might
comfort  your  hearts,"  Ephes.  chap,  vi  21,  22.
This  text,  if  it  do  not  expressly  declare,  clearly  I
think  intimates,  that  the  fetter  was  sent  by  Ty-
cbicus.  The  words  made  use  of  in  the  Epistle  to
the  Colossians  are  very  similar  to  these;  and  af-
ford the  same  implication  that  Tycbicus,  in  con-
junction with  Onesimus,  was  the  bearer  of  the
letter  to  that  church;  "  All  my  state  shall  Ty-
chicus  declare  unto  you,  who  is  a  beloved  brother,
and  a  faithful  minister,  and  fellow  servant  in  the
Lord ;  whom  I  have  sent  unto  you  for  the  same  pur-
pose, that  ho  might  know  your  estate,  and  comfort
your  hearts ;  wjth  Onesimus,  a  fidthful  and  be-
loved brother,  who  is  one  of  you.  They  shall
make  known  unto  you  all  things  which  are  done
here,"  Colon,  chap.  iv.  7—9.  Both  epistles  re-
present the  writer  as  under  imprisonment  for  the
Gospel:  and  both  treat  of  the  same  general  sub-
ject The  Epistle  therefore  to  the  Epheaans,  and
the  Epistle  to  the  Colosnsns,  import  to  >be  two
letters  written  by  the  same  person,  at  or  nearly  at
the  same  time,  and  upon  the  same  subject,  and  to
have  been  snnt  by  the  same  messenger.  Now,
every  thing  in  the  sentiment*^  order,  and  diction


EPISTLE  TO  THE  EPHESIANS.


W


of  the  two  writing*  correspond  with  vtu^t  nrig^t
be  expected  from  tens  circumstance  of  identity  or
oosmanoii  in  then*  original  The  leading  doctrine
of  both  epistles  is  the  onion  of  Jews  and  Gentiles
under  the  Christian  dispensation;  and  that  doc-
trine in  both  is  established  by  the  same  arguments
ex,  more  properly  speaking,  illustrated- by  the
same  similitudes:  *  "one  head,"  "one  body/1  "one
new  man,1'  "one  temple,"  are  in  both  epistles  the
figures  under  which  the  society  of  believers  in
Christy  and  their  common  relation  to  him  as  such,
is  represented,  t  The  ancient,  and,  as  had  been
thought,  the  indelible  distinction  between  Jew
and  Gentile,  in  both  epistles,  is  declared  to  be
"now  abofished  by  his  cross."  Besides  this  con-
sent in  the  general  tenor  of  the  two  epistles,  ano"
in  the  run  also  and  warmth  of  thought  with  which
they  are  composed,  we  may  naturally  expect  in
letters  produced  under  the  arcnmstanoe*  in  which
these  appear  to  have  been  written,  a  closer  resem-
bknce  of  style  and  diction,  than  between  other
letters  of  the  same  person  but  of  distant  dates,  or
between  letters  adapted  to  different  occasions.
In  particular,  we  may  look  for  many  of  the  same
expressions,  and  sometimes  for  whole  sentences
being  alike;  since  such  expressions  and  sentences
would  be  repeated  in  the  second  letter  (whichever
that  was)  as  yet  fresh  in  the  author's  mind  from
the  writing  of  the  first  This  repetition  occurs  in
the  following  examples:  t

Ephes.  ch.  L  7.  "In  whom  we  have. re-
demption through  his  blood,  the  forgiveness  of
sina/'i

Colos.  ch.  L  14.  "In  whom  we  have  redemp-
tion through  his  blood,  the  forgiveness  of  sins/ II
,  Besides  the  sameness  of  the  words,  it  is  farther
remarkable,  that  the  sentence  is,  in  both  places,
preceded  by  the  same  introductory  idea.  In  the
Epistle  to  the  Epbeskns  it  is  the  u  beloved
(,rw#o.V  in  that  to  the  Cokwdans  it  is  "  Ais
dear  Son"  (•«•  n«  »y*nt  «•*•*,)  "in  whom  we
have  reoVmption."-~The  sentence  appears  to  have
been  suggested  to  the  mind  of  the  writer  by  the
idea  which  tad  accompanied  it  before.

Ephes.  ch.  i  10. *fAJl  things  both  which  are


,  I  am  apt  to  believe,  has  faesa  sometimes
1  of  inconclusive  reasoning,  by  oar  mistaking
that  for  reasoning  which  was  only  intended  lor  illus*
He  is  not  to  be  read  as  a  man,  whom  own
on  of  the  troth  of  what  be  taught  always  or
j  depended  apon  the  views  ander  which  he  repre-
i  it  in  hie  writings.  Taking  for  granted  the  cer-
tainty of  his  doctrine,  as  resting  upon  the  revelation
that  Had  been  imparted  to  him,  he  exhibits  it  frequently
to  the  coneaptioa  of  his  readers  under  images  and  alle-
gories, in  which  if  an  analogy  may  be  perceived,  or  even
sometimes  a  poetic  resemblance  be  found,  it  is  ail  per-
haps that  is  required.

Colos.  1.  ia
ii.  19.
Hi.  10, 11.


T  Compare


)Ephss.i.9S,)  I

y iv.l5,VwithV

)  U1M  )

C  Ephes.  H.  14, 15,  >  (

i  Ii.  16, >  with  <

I  ** )  1


Colos.  if.  14.

i.  18-41.
ii.  7.


|WhenMr*s/i
'to  state


are  relied  upon,  it  becomes

i  original;  but  that  the  English
reader  maybe  interrupted  as  little  as  may  be,  I  snail  in
general  do  this  in  the  notes.

|  Ephes.  eh.  f.  7 *»  •  •%•*"  *n*  «roxrrf«r*v  ?<•
▼••  mtfutrf  avrow,  -m*  »* ir«r  r«»  w»fmirrmfmrm9.

|  ColOS.  ClL  i.  H. *>  •  IX»#M»  T«» »w*K*T(mWi* J  Mi

▼••  m*/**T*t  (t«r««t  rn*  •sin*  t»»  •^•^t«»».— However
it  must  bs  observed*  that  in  this  latter  text  many  copies
kave  net  lis  *•»  •«*•»••  srrtv.


in  heaven  and  which  are  in  earth,,  ever*  la
him."*

Colos.  ch.  i.  90.  "All  things  by  him,  whether
they  be  things  in  earth,  or  things  in  heaven."  t

This  quotation  is  the  more  observable,  because
the  connecting  of  things  in  earth  with  things  in
heaven  is  a  very  singular  sentiment^  and  found
no  where  else  but  in  these  two  epistles.  The*
words  also  are  introduced  and  followed  by  a  train  '
of  thought  nearly  alike.  They  are  introduced  by
describing  the  union  which  Christ  had  effected,
and  they  are  followed  by  telling  the  Gentile
churches  that  they  were  incorporated  into  it

Ephes.  ch.  iii.  2.  "  The  dispensation  of  the
grace  of  God,  which  is  given  me  to  you  ward."  t

Colos.  ch.  i  25.  "The  dispensation  of  God
which  is  given  to  me 'for  you." 4

Of  these  sentences  it  may  likewise  be  observed
that  the  accompanying  ideas  are  similar,  in  both
nlaces  they  are  immediately  preceded  by  the  men-
tion of  his  present  sufferings ;  in  both  places  they
are  immediately  followed  by  the*  mention  of  the
mystery  which  was  the  great  subject  of  his
preaching.

,  Ephes.  ch.  v,  19.  "  In  psalms  and  hymns  and
spiritual  songs,  singing  and  making  melody  in
your  heart  to  the  Lord.  II

Colos.  ch.  iii.  16.  "  In  psalms  and  hymns  and
spiritual  songs,  singing  with  grace  in  your  hearts
totheLord*^ ^* _*

Ephes.  ch.  vL  22.  $*  Whom  I  have  sent  unto
you  for  the  same  purpose,  that  ye  might  know
our  affairs,  and  that  he  might  comfort  your
hearts."*?  *

Colos.  ch.  it.  8.  "  Whom  I  have  sent  unto
you  for  the  same  purpose,  that  he  might  know
your  estate  and  comfort  your  hearts."  tt

In  these  examples,  we  do  not  perceive  a  cento
of  phrases  gathered  from  one  composition,  and
strong  together  in  the- other;  but  the  occasional
occurrence  of  the  same  expression  to  a  mind  a
second  time  revolving  the  same  ideas.

2.  Whoever  writes  two  letters,  or  two  dis-
courses, nearly  upon  the  same,  subject,  and  at  no
great  distance  or  time,  but  without  any  express
recollection  of  what  be  had. written  before,  will
find  himself  repeating  some  sentences,  in  the  very
order  of  the  words  in  which  he  had  already  used
them;  but  he  will  more  frequently  find  himself
employing  some  principal  terms,  with  the  order
inadvertently  changed,  or  with  the  order  disturbed
by  the  intermixture  of  other  words  and  phrases
expressive. of  ideas  rising  up  at  the  .time ;  or  in
many  instances  repeating  not  single  words,  nor
yet  whole  sentences,  but  parts  and  fragments  of  ~

*  BphM  eh.  1.  K). T* -r$  tv  roif  ovf«»tt»f  mi  t«  i#<

f  Colos.  ch.  f.  90. 4'  •vtov,  iiri  r»  tw*  t«  yntt  iiti

t«  iv  toi{  ovfavoif.,

t  Ephes.  ch.  Iii.  £  TV  oi«o»o/»*»»  %«( tTorrov  e*o«  rm
$9§t$rnf  /*••  ••(  *p*f.

6  OolOS.  Ch.  I.  95.  TV  tt*t*of*f'  tm  S)im,  t*»
i«hirm¥  ^ei  i*c  vp«(.

|  Ephes.  Ch.  V.  19.  TnXuotf  iw  .^voif,  xat  mfmif
rfivt*mTtx*i{  «?orri{  m««  y«Xxorrif  ir  t*  x«f f  <«  v/*»*
tm  K»f «».

f  Colos.  eh.  iii.  16.  ▼«*#"(  «•<  «**•<(  «•*  •*«•*  wtn

"  -  — - ~  eh.  Vi.  98. 0»  iwift^m  wfOf  «*«(■•(  ««t«  f»-


to,  #»•  yr-cr*  T»rif*  nj»»,  «•«  itmf«nmKam  rmf  »»fffitff

ttCotoa.  eh.  iv.  a  o»  uriM"  «-<♦?  »/*•<  m  mm  to»t«,'


too


HORJE  PAULINJS.


Of  all  these  varieties  Che  examination
of  our  two  epistles  will  furnish  plain  examples
and  I  flhould  rely  upon  this  class  of  instances  more'
than  upon  the  last ;  because,  although  an  impostor
might  transcribe  into  a  forgery  entire  sentences
and  phrasesl  yet  the  dislocation  of  words,  the  par-
tial recoUecoom  of  phrases  and  sentences,  the  in-
termixture of  new  terms  and  new  ideas  with  terms
and  ideas  before  used,  which  will  appear  in  the
examples  that  follow,  and  which  are  the  natural
properties  of  writings  produced  under  the  circum-
stances in  which  these  epistles  are  represented  to
hare  been  composed — would  not,  I  think,  have
occurred  to  the  invention  of  a  forger ;  nor,  if  they
had  occurred,  would  they  hare  been  so  easily  ex-
ecuted. This  studied  variation  was  a  refinement
in  forgery  which  I  believe  did  not  exist ;  or  if  we
can  suppose  it  to  have  been  practised  in  the  in-
stances adduced  below,  why,  it  may  be  asked,  was
not  the  same  art  exercised  upon  those  which  we
have  collected  in  the  preceding  class  1
-  Ephes.  chap.  L  19 ;  ch.  ti.  5.  "  Towards  us  who
beheve  according  -to  the  working  of  his  mighty
power,  which  he  wrought  in  Christ  when  he
raised  him  from  the  dead  (and  set  him  at  his  own
right  hand  in  the  heavenly  places,  far  above  all
principality,  and  power,  and  might,  and  dominion,
and  every  name  that  is  named,  not  only  In  this
world,  but  in  that  which  is  to  come.  And  hath  put
all  things  under  his  feet :  and  gave  him  to  be  the
head  over  all  things,  to  the  church,  which  is  his
body,  the  fulness  of  all  things,  that  filieth  all  in  all ;)
and  you  hath  he  quickened,  who  were  dead  in
trespasses  and  sins  (wherein  in  time  past  ye
walked  according  to  the  course  of  this  world,  ac-
cordinff  to  the  prince  of  the  power  of  the  air,  the
spirit  that  now  worketh  in  the  children  of  disobe-
dience ;  among  whom  also  we  all  had  our  conver-
sation, in  times  past,  in  the  lusts  of  bur  flesh,  ful-
filling the  desires  of  the  flesh  and  of  the  mind,
end  were  by  nature  the  children  of  wrath,  even  as
others.  But  (Sod,  who  is  rich  in  mercy,  for  his
great  love  wherewith  he  loved  us,)  even  when  we
were  dead  in  sins,  hath  quickened  us  together
with  Christ.*  •  ^

Colos.  ch:  ii.  13, 13.  "  Through  the  feith  of
tile  operation  of  God,  who  hath  raised  him  from
the  dead :  and  you,  being  dead  in-  your  sins  and
the  undrcumcision  of  the  flesh,  hath  he  quickened
together  with  him.  "t

Out  of  the  long  quotation  from  the  Ephesians,
take  away  the  parentheses,  and  you  have  left  a
sentence  almost  in  terms  the  same  as  the  short
Quotation  from  the  Cobssians.  The  resemblance
is  more  venule  in  the  original  than  in  our  transla-
tion; for  what  k  rendered  in  one  place,  "the
working"  and  in  another  the  "  operation,"  is  the
same  Greek  term  »*<y»:  in  one  place  it  is,  •  rewC

wtrtwrrmt  umrm  t**  ttifyum*  ;  in  the  other,  **•  rnt ,

victim*  r ,$  yny$  i*t.  Here,  therefore,  we  have  the*
same  sentiment,  and  nearly  in  the  same  words  \
but,  in  the  Epheaiana,  twice  broken  or  interrupted
by  incidental  thoughts,  which  St.  Paul,  as  his

*  Baas*,  cb,  i.  10t  90 ;  ii.  1, 5.  Tov*  «MrTt*ai>T«c  %»r»
T«»  «»tf  }-«*«r  to*  »(«to«c  TUftTXvtf  »«r»v,  nv  nnrynvtr
fl»  r»  Tftrrm%  tyttf ftf  avro*  ik  mx{»vx««  ix«6»«-iviv  jigi*
•VTOy  iv  TOif  •*»*( »t$9tt-rnmt  v««f  ovtmc  vix£0vf  TOl(  T-_
^mwrmftmn  ■««  r«'f  «««fTistc— »«i  ovta;  *m*{  raxfovc
roif  ■>«( mwrmftwt,  rv»i{«0aroiif0-i  r«  X{'«r».

tOolos.  CD.  ii.  IS,  13.  Aim  T«f  wtmari  tm(  •rifytiaf  m
6«0ittc»  vyttfvrtt  mvtov  fo  to*  »nrr.  Xmi  w/*»f  mx^x;
orraf  »t*m  rmfuwrmpmrt  %mi  tx  »x«oCvcti»  txj  r«Mt(


manner  was,  enlarges  upon  by  the  way,*  and  then
returns  to  the  thread  of  his  discourse.  It  is  inter-
rupted the  first  time  by  a  view  which  breaks  in
upon  his  mind  of  the  exaltation  of  Christ ;  and
the  second  time  by  a  description  of  heathen  de-
pravity. I  have  only  to  remark  that  Griesbach,
in  his  very  accurate  edition,  gives  the  parenthesis
very  nearly  in  the  same  manner  in  which  they  are
here  placed ;  and  that  without  any  respect  to  the
comparison  which  we  are  proposing.

Ephes.  ch.  iv.  2-4.  "With  alHowtiiieai  and
meekness,  with  long-suffering,  forbearing  one  an-
other in  love;  endeavouring  to  keep  the  unity  of
the  Spirit  in  the  bond  of  peace.  There  is  one
body  and  one  Spirit,  even  as  ye  are  called  in  one
hope  of  your  calling."t

Colos.  ch.  iii.  12—15.  "  Pat  on  therefore,  as  the
elect  of  God,  holy  and  beloved,  bowels  of  mercies,
kimlness,  humbleness  of  mind,  meekness,  long-
suffering,  forbearing  one  another  and  forgiving  one
another ;  if  any  man  have  a  quarrel  against  any,
even  as  Christ  forgave  you,  so  also  do  ye ;  ami,
above  all  these  things,  put  en  charity,  which  is  the
bond  of  perfectness ;  and  let  the  peace  of  God
rule  in  your  hearts,  to  the  which  also  ye  are  called
in  one  body."*

In  these  two  quotations  the  words  tnti***?* •*»*«,
•-(mothc,  /HMtfofe/His,  «vi%t/uiMi,«xxxx«v,  occur  in  ex-
actly the  same  order:  •>-•«■■  is  also  found  in  both,
but  in  a  different  connexion;  .rvriirpo;  t«c  f«f*r*t
answers  to  ™»f»c*»«  r%t  t*x.m»txto$  :  »xb#iti  «»  •»

rmpmri  to  •»  rmftm  s«$«f  ««<  MXaffri  •»  ftim  iKwiti-

yet  is  this  similitude  found  in  the  midst  of  sen-
tences otherwise  very  different.

Ephes.  ch.  iv.  16.  "  From  whom  the  whole
body  fitly  joined  together,  end  compacted  by  that
which  every  joint  supplieth,  according  to  the  ef-
fectual working  in  the  measure  of  every  part,
maketh  increase  of  the  body."§

Colos.  ch.  M.  19.  "  From  which  all  the  body,
by  joints  and  bands,  having  nourishment  minis-
tered and  knit  together,  increaseth  with  the  in-
crease of  God."il

In  these  quotations  are  read  •{  •*  «*»  to  r»/»«
fttZttmfrtKtw  in  both  places :  •*-«as«f»>'»»»«"'«»  an-
swering to  ***X0(tiy*»t :  ii*  T«r  «*«v  to  t*»  m-ttriC
«f  *;  :  «vg*i  txf  mv^rtv  to  minrmt  ti»» «vgx0»«ir  : BJld

yet  the  sentences  are  considerably  diversified  in
other  parts. .

Ephes.  ch.  iv.  32.  "  And  be  kind  one  to  another,
tender-hearted,  forgiving  one  another,  even  as
God,  for  Christ's  sake,  hath  forgiven  you."1T


•Vide  Locke  in  loc.

t  Ephes.  ch.iv.  8—4.  Mfra  w*mi  Tafl-itvo${0«-vv»f  ■*<
s-(aorxrof,  jut*  t*m.X(civf*.t*{}  avt%o/ciro«  «XX»X«v  tv
*ymtrnm  rr««J»^»T»{  -rxfiir  trv  i  roTxra  rov  w*H/f*mT»f  ■  *
ra  Tvv&tTpw  yxf  iifxyif.  _£»  wmft*  *»*  <r  wvivf*»t»m9mf
xai  ixXxDnti  iv  /ttm  iXx-t£i  rx«  xXx«-f*(  «*»r.

X  Colos.  ch.  iii.  12—  J5.  E»Jvc««-Si  o»»,  »(  ixXixtoi  tow
6iou  a^iQiKai  i!^xsn!j<n>oi,o-»-Xa>'Xrao»xr*{/««»Fl'Xe«l«'TO-
txt»,  T«sriiK09fC*T/vi|»,  ir^*«Ti|T«,  f*xx{tSufiim*m  mvixo/ta-
vei  mKKnkwfy  xxi  z*e*t0?t¥0i  »»vrt*t' $mw  rtjg  w(t(  t»»»
*X1  A"/*?*!*,  *■*$*>(  »■<  o  X<«rTOf  fX*f<o-«TO  vfttVfCvrm  »m»
vftnf  i3-»  *■««■!  Si  TOVTOif  TMi^«^«7ifv,  xt*5  iott«  rvrlitf'/us;

TD(  TfXItSTRTOC  XXI t| «<f KfX TSU BtOV jBfalClVtTM  It T««(

x%(S»*tf  vp**,  fi{  *►  km*  ixXxii)T«.ir  in  Tmftmri.

}  Ephes.  chj  iv.  16. B£  ow  irsv  to  o-m/t*  w*+w*.9y»

'f*n*v  xxi  ruAtCiCM^iwey  *•»  *»«*»$  mqimf  T*f  Drix»f«>-ix(
x«t*  iv$eyumv  iv  furfv  »*c(  ix««-Tev  ftif  cuf  %xi»  mv%lT*v  rm

WafidTOi  JTOIIJT0I.

V  Colos.  eh.  ii.  19.  K{  •«  w«v  r*  r*>n»  ?i«  rwv  x^«v  nmt
rvvStg-pmv  ixizofnyovfiiver  x»*  rv>iGiC«^o/«ivev,  «v{f«  ti|*>

MW^Rff-IV  TOO  ©»cw.

IT  Eph.  ch.  iv.  33.  Twrtt  l«  t*t  axxxxou*  %«*«Mr«<
fw«-x-Xsy%i>oi,  x<*f *Ce^(M<  »*W*tt  S«l«f  mi  •  ej««c  •»
Xfirrm  fx«fir«To  ¥/»*».


EPISTL^Tfr  THE  KPHESIANS.


tt)l


,  *  C«i<w.  ch.lii.  IB.  "Forriearfng  one  anofhciland"
forgtrin^  <me  another;  if  any  man  Jiave  a- 'quarrel
fegaitist  any~  even  as  Christ,  forgave  you,  so  also
do/ye.'*  #  ■  ' V'- - ~

Here  we  have  "  forgiving  one  rfnother,  even  as
God,  for  Christ's* sak&  (iVx<iTT»)  hath  forgiven
you."  in  the  first  quotation,  substantially  repeated
in  toe  second.  But  in  the  seceTJid,  the-  sentence  is
broken 'by  the  interposition  of.  a  new  clause",  *"  if
*n£ man  have  a  ouagrel  tvgainst  any-,"  and  the.
latter  part  is  a  little  varied ;  instead  of  "  God  in
Christ/'  it  is  *l  Christ  hath  forgiven  you.'* '

Ephes.  en.  iv.  22—24.  «  That  ye  put  off  con-
cerning, the  former,  conversation  the  old  man,
which  is  corrupt  according  to  the  deceitful  lusts,
and  be  renewed  in  the  spirit  of  your  mind ;  nnd
ttat  ye  put  on  the  new  man,  which,  after  Qod;  is
CTeatecTin  righteousness  and  true  hdiness."t

Colos,  ch.  ui.  9,  10.  "  Seeing  that  ve  We  pti*
off  the  old  man  with  his  deeds,  and  have  put  bn
the  new  man,  which  is  renewed  in  knowledge  af-
ter the  image  of  him  that  created  Mm.1^

In  these  quotations,  "putting  off  the*  old  map,
*md  jrattirig  on  the  new,  'Appears  in  both:  The
idea  js  further  explained  by  caHing  it  a  renewal;
in  the  one,  " renewed  in  the  spirit  ofyour  mind;"
in  the  other,' tt  renewed  in  knowledge."  In  both,
the  new  man  is  said  to  hf  formed  according  to  the
aame  model ;  in  the  one  he  is,  "sifter  God;  created
in  righteousness  and  true  holiness}"  in  the  other'
"  he  -is  renewed  .after  the  image  of  him  thatcrcate4
him."  In  a  word,  it  is  the  same  person  writing
upon  a  kindred  subject,  with  the  terms  and  ideas
which  he  had  before  employed  still  floating  in  his
memory.!

Ephes.  ch.  ▼.  6—8.  u  Because  of  these  thirigs
eomtth  the  wrath  of  God  upon  the  efiUdren  of
disobedience:  be'  not  ye  therefore  partakers  "with
them ;  for  ye' were  sometimes  darkness,  but  now
***  7?  JJg&  &  the  Lord:'  walk  as  children  of
fight  "II  . . ■  -

Coloa.  ch.  Si.  6—8.  u  For  which  ththg*s  take
the  wrath  of  God  cometh  on^the  children  of  dis-
obedience ;Tn  the  which, ye  also  walked  some
time,  when  ye  lived  in  them:  -But  now  ye  also
put  off  all  thcse.'ir  •  ,.'.:*•..

These  verses  <affoni  a  specimen  of  that  'partial


* COICW.  Cft.  frfi.  IS. AvixCftivet «XXqX«v,  x**»%*f  »<»-'

j««*«l  l**Taif{4«ff  T»f  Wf Of tr»M» f %IJ  fnO/tfMV,  Ktt6*tf.X*i •

jEf  «▼•€  ife«f  iv«t«  v^tn^  e«r«  Mart  irm*{*  . •»

. t  El**'  Ch.  iv.,33— *4..  Afbimt*i  vju«.f  »«t«  T«r  *-<  *;

KMTri  Tmi  fsri$vj»ji»f  Tuf  «*-«rfcr*  «v«viooo-9*f  Si  T»\rViv-
^•rrr«*  vtOfcc^wf,  est  ivfvo-wfoi  tov  KotivoV  *yS^»7row,T«r
jmit* ©oo»  srirfarr*-  «r  fi«*Mtf%)ur *»< oc*bt$t» m;

J  Cblos.  ch.  Ui.  9,  10*  Ajri*AW«/*«ro«  T»tr^stx«jio»  «».
Ifwiroirvp  t»i<  •^afci***  »utpv  x*»  irSWaf*!***  to*  »»o»,
T«r  »*m«i  **»/»<*•»  »i(  tnytbTiv  »f*r*  I rttowi  tov  x-r»cr«rrof


€ |o  these  comparisons,  we  often  perceive  the  reaiQti
Why  the  writer,  though  expressing  the  same  idea,  uses
a  different  term.;'  namely,  because  the  term  before  used
is  employed  In  -the'  sentence  Under  a  different^  fiirm  j
Urns,  in  thequotathras^inder  durexe,.the-newman'is
■•in;  *%$tTos  jrf  the  Ephesians,  and  tov  * ior,  (n  the
Cbloasiaas-v  bat  then- it  ifttcause  rev  saivoi*  is  used  in
(he  next  word,  «V«x«ivev/uiroi>. - •

|  Bpbes.ch.  v.  6— 8.  A»*  t«wt»  y*e-*«*»r"!  *  8?>"»  T»

▼•X««4MT»».  Jtri  ^«(vtri  rxarof,  n»»  fi  q*t .«»  Xuf  i«k  »(
risr«  f  «tT«4  »ie/jr*Ti«Tl,  * -

-  T OokM. cb* iii.6— 6. At  »'  ti&*«K  n  *fm  Oto«  i»<
w»t«,  «ti  <^»rt  •#  «St«»«.  •  »»»•  ?*  •Mrtfortt  »•«  v^uif  t«


TOemWrfnce  which  1s.  only  to  1>e  niet  with  when
no  imitation  is  designed,  when  ho  studied  reeol-
lcctidn  is  employed,  bugt  when,  the  mind,  exercised
Vpon  the  same  subject,  is  left  to  the  "Bpontancous
return  of'suoh  terms  and  itfirasrs,  as,  having  beeii
used  befotp/inay  happerr  to  present  themselves
again.'  The  srntihirht  of  both  passages  is  through-
out alike:  naif  of  that  sentiment^  tlie  denunciation
of  God's,  wraih,  Is  .expressed  in'id^ntical  words;
the  other  half,  viz.  the  admonition  to  quit  their
former  conversation,  in  word*  entirely  different.

Ephcs.  ch.  v.  15,  16.  "  feee  then  that  ye-wais;
circunii^>cctly^'  not  as  fSbls,  but  as  wise,  redeem- .
ingthe  tjniex"*  <  ' "'

-  Colos.  ch.  iv.  5.  v ."  Walk  in  wisdorn  towards
tjieru  that  arc' Without;  redeeming  the* time,"t
;  This  is  anotlu»r  example  of  tl^il  mixture,  which
we  remarked  of  sa^nencss  and  variety  in  th£  lan^
guage  of  one  writer.  »"  Redeeming '  the  time^
(»2»v  e(aZof*iyn  rtv  xaje.ft*,)  i^  *  literal*  repetition.
"  Walk  not/ as  fools,  hut  as  wise,"  (^<w«thti  )i«
mi  «5-s^ai,  „kk[  *,-  <rc^Bi)  ansWew  exaftly  in  senser
and  nearly  \n  terhis,  to  "walk  in  wisdom," '  far
ffj9i»  ^-ij nr'nruTi.)  Ut (itt xt (tTt  ax{&«.<c  is  avery  dif-
ferent jahrase,-  but  is  intended  to  convey  precisely
the  same  idea- as  x-t(tw*TUT^xtof.T*vf»lm.  a^iCwc
is  not  well  rendered  K  citcurtispoctlyt"  It  means
what  in  modern  speech' we  should  calL lt  correctly,"
anil  when  we  advise  a  person  to  behaVe  *  correct-
ly," our  advice  is  always  given  wifh  a  reference
"  to  the  opinion  of  ethers,"  jr{of  V^5 '•(•:  "  Wajk
correctly,  redeeming  the  time,"  t.  e.  suiting  your-
selves to  the  drfficuttyand  ticklishness  of  Jfcetimeif
in  which  we  live^  "  because  the  days  are  evih?  *
Ephcs.  ch.  vi;.19,  20:  "And  (praying)  for  me,
that  utterance  may  be  given  unto  me,  that  I  niay
open  my  mouth  boldly  to  make  known  the  myste-
ry of  the  Gospe^  for  which  I  am  an  ambassador
.in*bonds,  that  therein  I  may  s^estk  boldly,  as  I
ought  to  apeak.^  > - ' '  ' .  ~

Coioa.  ch:  iv!  3,  4.  4'  Withal  praving  also  for
us  that  God  would  open  unto  us  *  door  of  utter-
ance to'  speak  the,  mastery  of  *  Christ,  fox  which  I
am  also  in  bonds,  that  I  may  make  it  manifest  as  I
ought  to  speak."§ - . . ' '  .  * v

in  these  quotations,  the  phrase, 4t  as  1  ought  to
speak"  (-,->!•  mi  x«\n<r».,) the  ^ords * "utteTance"
(^ov.c,)  "a  mystery"  t/««<rTxe40r,)  <fofen"  (»roi^
and  ik  «votgir,)  a*  the  same.  "  To  make  Known
the  mystery  of  the  Gosper*  faiyirut  to  ^wrmprtifj
answers  to  "  make  it  manifest"  (ir«.9«r»<»r»  mvro  j)
"for  which  I  am  an  ambassador  in  bends*' (""^  •* "
«-pio-Ci«<.o»xu«-ii,))to  "for  which  I  am^aj*)  In
bonds" (f«  o*»i$«Jim^.)  .'' ..*  * '

Ephes.  ch.  v.  22,  "  Ifiras,  subtnit  youraehw
to  your  own  hilsbands,  as  *nnto  th$  &ord,  fortthe
husband  is  the  head  6f  the  wife,  even  as  Christie
■the  head  of  the  church,  and  lie  is  the  saviour  of
toe  body. TheTefore^  as  the  church  is  Subject


M-


-•  Epbea.ch.  \.  K,  16. BXi»-it«  ovv  r»t  **et^(  *»f:
a-»T«4Ti*  f*n  d>s  «rte»«,  mKK*  •$  ro90«,i^«yof»5o^oo«  to^

t  Golos.  ch.  iv.  5. *»  «r^>*  rtf*»TiiTtre»t  T0»ff  •{•,

t  Ephes.  ch.  vi.  W,  ». **»  »""f  '*»»,  ltm  '*0''  Mn*

^oyi*  j*  .vo>4«.  T8u  o-to>«*tocm«w  i*T*fp*rri»f  yvwvmi -

TO AwffT^.OV  T0V*IW*y>-l\l0V,V5r«e  0W *********  •* •*•"«<§

<f«  iv  tour*  •r»>**r*aic«MMH,«t  ^w  M*  K»Knr»t.

fColos.  eh.  iv.  %  4. n^onwxo^ivoi  ufim  *f>.xrti  yt**;
tvm  •  «ro«  »vo.igif  HA*'V  *«*••  T^  *.»r»»f  A«^*r»<  TO  /<v.

A/T^fiOr  T0i  X«IO-TW  {l  0  K*» ff«»V««f  <»#  ^•>lf«0'- «»Tt
Off  f»»  /««  \SA.««T»1.  •


**


HORJE  PAULINA


onto  Christ,  so let  the  wit*  be  to  their  own  kw-
rsuidsm  every  thing,  husbands,  love  vour  wivts,
even  as  Christ  also  lev  ed  the  church,  and  gave
himself  lor  it,  that  he  might  sanctify  and  cleanse
it  with  the  washing  of*  water  by  the  word;  that  he
might  present  it  to  himself  a  glorious  church,  not
having  spot  or , wrinkle,  of  any  such  thing;  but
that  it  should  be  holy  an^  without  bfemian.  So
ought  men  to  love  their  wives  as  their  own  bodies.
He  that  loveth  his  wife,  lovetji  himself;  for  no  man
e>or  yet  hated  his  own  flesh,  hut  nodrisheth  and
cherisheth  it,  even  as  the  Lord  the  church :  for  we
are  members  of  his  body,  of  h»  flesh,  *and  of  hin
bones.  For  this  cause  shall  a  man  leavi\his  fa-
ther; and  his  mother  and  be  joined  unto  his  wife,
and  they  two  shall  be  one  flesh.  This  Is  a  great
mystery;  but  I*  speak  concerning  Christ  inn  the
church.  Nevertheless,  let  every  one  of  von  in
particular,  so  love  his  wife  even  as  himself:  and
the  wife  see  that  she  reverence  her  husband;
Children,  obey  your  parent*  in  the  Lord,  for  this
i»  right.  Honour  thy  lather  and  thy  mother
(which  is  the  first  commandment  with  promise,)
that  it  may  be  well  with  thee,  and  that  thou  msy-
sst  live  long  on  the  earth/  And  ye  father*,  fro-
9oke  not  your  children  to  wrath;  but  bring  them
up  in  the  nurture  and  admonition  of  {he  Lord.
Servants,  be  obedient  to  them  that  are  yom:  moo-
ter* according  to  the  Jtesh,  wifh  fear  and  trem-
bling, in  singleness  of  your  heart,  as  unto  Christ  ;
not wxtheye-service,  do  men^pleasers', tut  as  the
servants  of  Christ,  doing  the  will  of  God  from
the  heart;  wjthgood  mu  doing  service,  as  to  the
Lord,  and  not  tp  men;  knowing  that,  whatsoever
good  thing  any  man  doeth,  the  same  shall  he  re-
oeivc-qf  the  Lord,  whether  he  6e  bond  ox  free.
And,  ye  masters,  do  the  same  things  unto  them;
forbearing  threatening^  knowing  that  your  mas-
ter also  is  in  heaven,  neither  is  there  respect  of
persons  with  hini+n

t  Cpios.  ch.  iii.  18.  "  Wives,  submit  yourselves
onto  your  own  husbands,  as  it  is  fit  in  .the  Lord.
Husbands,  lore  your  wives,  and  be  not  bitter
-afl*inst,them.  Children,  obey  your  parents  in  all
things,  for  this  is  well  pleasing  unto  the  Lord.
Fathers,  provoke  not  your  children  to  anger,  lest
they  be  discouraged.-  Servants,  obey  in  all  things,
your  masters  according  to  the  flesh :  not  with  eye-
service  as  men-pteaseis,'but  in  singleness  of  heart,
fearing  God ;  and  whatever  ~Jre  do,  de  it  heartily


m i  dL  V*.  29. A*  yvvmlMf,  toij  if  rui  «vfff«r«r

t  Coles.  ch.  iii.  18. Ai  yv»»**$sf  ta-orat+srti  aro*f  if**

Bpbek. Oi  «»*(<£,  my*wmr*  img  yvr«i««c  tuvrmv.
«■  r  ColM. O*  »ttft{9  myturmrrf  Tpf  yvv»t*m{.
.  SphMb T»  rtitvM,  vjt«x«uiti  TOlf  ^Ofrjvri*  vj*»»  •»  Xtf-
(lm\T*VTOy*fiCT»  tnutft. '

.Colds;  T»  riiffa,  vtiutujri  toi#  yofjtri  %mrm  wmrrm'
vovro  ymg  wti»  »\)0$(irrpv  rm  Kt?(<«.  "

.  BpbSS.  Tmi  ei  wmrif  •(,  m*  mm^tyt^t-rt  rdttnvm  tjun.
CotaS.  O*  «rpT»j*ff  fm  tf«ii£*<r<  *r»  tkm  v/Mwf.

Bfh^r Ol JOWX**, W»«MVITI T04« CV{*«*f MfTM C«f R»

prru  *«6o«  *•«  T<Vo«t  ••  ••'A.OTiri  fjf.  *»ettmfv/*»vt  *i

■  rm  X^iCTM*  /*n  «»t»  vt4«X£o£ovXj«»v,  »t  *»ff«ir«ft*xoi,

■XX'  »f  FtvXO*  r«»^>«*T«v,sroiO«rri(  to  &»Knp*m  Ton  Ore*

■*  tyfcnt'  *»«T*  mnff  t*»K»v*vr*t  *t  rm  Rjpt«'r*mi  ovs  «*.

fpMr«if  ««J«T4f  OTI  P  fwrt  l»««~T0f  »0IJ|«T|  «V-»9**,  T0VT0

«««*iiTai  rmf*  toV  *•>>»■•<  .««to  feuXOf,  uri  iXivJifOf.

ColOS.  Oi  iVvXoi,  v*\n»9viTg  mmrm  w»rrm  xt^nmrm
«MpK#KV^e»c,  ^n  iv  e*J«XAionwX««»i«,-«»6  •*9pmw»pT%tt,
•XX»  i»  «otXotjit»  x«^i»^,  0 aUv/uvti  toV  6»o>*««m  r«*  «,
t«  i^nrOtTi.  t*  ^vx««  "py'O^'f  "«  T-  *»^«<»,«««  ov»
•r^nroV  ii/ot*c  on  »»•  Xvptov  «voXi|^M4rr«ir  •vrikro.'
Jon?  Tjit  *Mpo*o>»i«i(*  f  •  yrfp  !»•<•  Xpirra  ^ouX'fvm.


as  to,  the  Lord,  and.  not  unto  men,  koowmffmsi
of  the  Lord  ye  shaj!  receive  the  reward  of  the  it>
heritanoe:  for  ^e serve  (phe  Lord  Christ,— But  he
that  doeth  wrong  shall  receive  for  the  wrong  which
he  hath  dene ;  and  there  is  no  respect  of  persons.
Masters  give  Onto  your  servants  that  which  is
just  and  equal,  knowing  that  ye  also  have  a  mas-
ter ki  heaven."  .  • x

The  passams  marked  by  Italics  in  the  Quota-
tion from  the  Ephesians,  bea^  a  strict  resemblance,
net  only  in  signification  but  m  terms,  to  the  quo-
tation from  the  Cotossiana.  Both  the  words  and
the  order  of  the  words  are  in  many  clauses  a  do-'
nijeate  of  one  another.  In  the  Epistle  to  the  Co-
tossisns.  these  passages. are  laM  together;  in  that
to  die  Ephesians,  they  are  dividetl  by  intermediate
jnatter/especialljrby  a  long  digressive  allusion  to
the  mysterious  union  between  Christ  and  his
church ;  which  possessing;  ss  Mr.  Locke  hath  well
-observed,  die  mind  of  the  apostle,  from  being  an
incidental  thought,  grows  up  into  the  principal
subject.  The  affinity  between  these  two  passaffes
in  signlncation,  in  terms,  and  m  the  order  of  the
words,  is  closer  than  can  be  pointed  out  between
any  parts  of  any  two  epistles  in  the  volume.

If  the  reader  would  see  how  the  same  subject
is  treated  by  a  difleienthand,  and  how  distinguish^-
able  it  is  from  the  production  of  the  same  pen,  let
him  turn  to  the  second  and  third  chapters  oi  the
First  EpisUe  of  St  Peter.  The  duties  of  servants,
of  wives, -and  of  husbands,  are  enlarged  ujkm  in
that  epistle,  as  they  are  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Ephe-
sians-, but  the  subjects  both  occur  in  a  different
order,  and  the  tain  of.sentiment  subjoined  to  each
is  totally  unlike.

3.  fa~two  letters  issuing  from  the  same  person,
nearly  at  the  same  time,  and  upon  the  same  gene-
ral occasion,  we  may  expect  to  trace  the  influence
of  association  in  the  order  in  which  the  topics  fol-
low one  another.  Certain  ideas  universally  or
usually  suggest  others.  Herd  the  order  .is  what
we  call  natural,  and  from  such  an  order  nothing
can  be  concluded-  But  when  the  order  is  arbi-
trary, yet  alike,  the  concurrence  indicate*  the  e£
feet  of  that  principle,  by  which  ideas,  which  have?
been  once  joined,  commonly  revisit  the  thoughts
together.  The  epistles  under  consideration  Hfur-
msh  the  two  following  remarkable  instances  of
this  species  of  agreement

Ephes.  eh.  iv.  34.  "And  that  ye.pqt  on. the
new  man,  which  after  God  is  created  in  righteous?
ness  and  true  hnfiness^  wherefore  gutting  away
lying,  speak  every  man  truth  with  his  neighbour^
for  we  are  members  one  of  another. •"»
•  Color,  eh.  in.  9.  '*  Lie  not  to^ene  another ;  see*
ing  that  ye  have,  put  off  the  .old  man  with  his
deeds?  and  have  put  on  the  new  man,  which  is
renewed  in  knowledge.,"r

The  vice  of  "  lying,"  ore  correction  of  that  vice,
dees  not  seem  to  bear  any  nearer  relation  to  the
u  putting  on  the  new  man  "  than  a  rtfbrmationin
any  other  article  of  morals.  Yet  these  two  ideas,
we  see,  stand  in,  both  epistles  in  immediatft  con-
nexion.

Ephes. ch.  y.40,21,9& "Giving  thanks  al-


e  9^t\y*(*T9t1scti»  don


OajSSBACB.*


.+  Ephes.  eh.  iv.-44, 85. K*i  i»XW*«***  to>  juuviv  «#.

9p'«*»rT  rer  xmtk  Bnw  »v*^9nrTk  tv  tlx»t6*v*n  um't  or<rr«>
ti  rnt  mKni%i*f  ?i«  »jf66«i«irfl<  ro  $Ht$?(9XMXltTi  «Xif $u»9
«x«<rroc  fitvm  tow  irX^cSov  #vro«  tori.irjbtv  »XX^X«»  /uX«.

t  Coloi.  ch.  in.  0.  ^  ^1^4$  n§  •xxuxot* ,  •««!•-
raAifvoi  to»  trnkmn  mvifmm*,  w»  t«ms  vpagtv-ir  mth,
»a»  ivoWomivo*  rov  Nor,  rtr  »rM«ir»w/uriv  n(  t*tyvw€**.


EPISTLB  TO  TBE  ERHESIANS.


*tt


ways  fbt  all  things  unfo&od  and-the"  Father,  itf
the'  n*me  of  our  Lord  Josus  Christ :  submitting
ranaeivea  one  -to  another,  in  toe  rear  of  -God.
Wives,  submit  yourselves  unto  your  own  hus-
baiiday  as  unto  the  Lord.**  s

Coke.  ch.  iii.  17.  "  Whatsoever  ye  ^o,  ir
void  ordeedi  do  all  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus,
giving  thanks  to  God  and  the  Father  by  him.
Wives,  submit  yourselves  unto  your  own  husbands,
as  it  is  fit,  in  the  Lord." t

In  both  these  passages,  submission  follows  giv-
ing of  thanks,  without  any  similitude  in  themeaa
Which  should  account  .Cor  the  transition^

H  is  not  necessary  to  puisne  the  comparison  be-
tween the  two  epistles  Jarther.  The  argument
which  results  from  it  stands  thus  :-No  two  other
epistles  contain  a  circumstance  which  indicates
that  they  were  written  at  the  same,  of  nearly  at
the  same  time.  &>  two  other  epistles  exhibit  so
many  marks  of  correspondency  and  resemblance.'
If  the  original  whtau  we  ascribe  to  these  two,epis>
tles  be  toe  true  one,  that  is,  if  they  were  both
really  written  by  St.  Paul;  and  both  sent  Ui  their
respective  deatmhtiau  by  the  same  -messenger,  the
arroilifririe  is,  in  all  points,  what  should  be  expects
ed  to  take  place. .  If  they  were  forgeries,  then  the
mention  of  Tyebicus  iu  both  epistles,  and  in' a
manner  which  shows  that  he  either  carried* or  ac-
companied both  epistles,  was  inserted  fbrthe  pur-
pose of  accounting  for  their  similitude:  or  else  the


i  forgeries,

fleetly intimated  eoncenung  their  date,  was  only  -a
happy  accident.  Not  one  of  these  three  supposi-
tions will  gain  credit  with  a  reader  who  peruses
the  epistles  with  attention,  and  -who  reviews  the
several  examples  we  have  pointed  Dut,  and  the  ob-
.  _1  ^^  ^fcfcfo  they  were  accompanied.


Noyi

Then  Ir  such  a  thing  as  a  peculiar  word  or
phrase  cleaving,  as  it  were^to  the  memory  of  a
writer  or  -speaker,  and  presenting  itself  to  his  utter-
ance, at  every  turn.  When-.we  observe  this,  we
call  it  a  eon*  word,  or  vacant  phrase,  ft  is  a  natu-
ral effect  of  hah$  >  and  would  appear  .more  fre-
quently than  it  does,  had^not  the  rules  of  good
Writing  taught  thenar  to  be  offended  with  the  iter-
ation of  the  same  sound,  and  oftentimes  caused
tst  to  reject,  on  that-account,  the  word  which  ofler-
ed  itself  first  to  bur  recollection.  With  a  writer
who,  Eke  BtPfcul,  either  knew  not  theserules,  of
.  disregarded  them,  such  words  wdl  not  be  avoided.
T^e  truth  is,  an  example  of  this  kind -runs  through
several  of  hi*  epistles, /and  in  the  epistle,  before  us
abound*  /  and  that  is  in  the  word  rictus.  (•**.»*r*)
used  ftetafthoncaUy  as  an  argumentative  of  the
Idea  to  which  it  happen*  to  be  subjoined.  Thus,
"the  rien*/*f  his  glory ,"- "  his  riches  in  glory,^
*  richc*  of  the  glory  of  his  inheritance,"  "  riches  of
the  dory  of  thfrmystery,"  Rom.  ch.  ix.  33.  'Ephes.
ch.  iii.  16.  Ephes.  ch.  i.  18.  Colos.  c>.  i.  27:
"  riches  of  his  grace,'*  twice  fat  the  Ephesiansr  ch.


•  BpheS.  the  *«  8ft,-  21,  Ss>  £o%»p»«*re«m«  wmvrtri
•wrts  wmvTtnJiv  tvcftmr*  rtvKopttv*/***  Ijfreu  XfirT*«,ra

t  Ootoa,  ch.  ill.  17.',  *»«  *»*  •,  *•"■»  wtwnf  •»  \oy*t
n  •»  iry*y  wmvrm  tt  «»op»T*  K»p<op  1nro«%  tujgMptrrtvrrtf
tw  •••  *•«  mt(^  it  wwvt A*  <yv**i%$s  nnramHi


i  7.4nd  ch.  ii,  7$  "  riches  ofthe  Reassurance  of
understanding,"  Gobs,  ch:  ii.  2,  ^riches  of  his
goodness,"  ftom.  ch.iL  4; li  riches'  efthe  wisdom
of  God,-  Rom.  ch.  xl  33-r  "ricfiei  of  Chrisy*
Ephes.  ch.  in.  8.  Iu  a  like  sense  the  adjective.
Rom.  ch.  x.  IS,  "  rtc/uunto  all  that  call  upon  himr
Ephes.  eh.  it.  4.  "rfcA,  in  mercy:".  1  Tun.  ch.  vi.
18,  rich  in  vood  works."  Also  the  adverb\  Colos.
ch.  iii.  16,  ."let  the  word  of  Christ  dwell  in  you
richly?.  This  figurative  use  of  the  word,  though
so  familiar  to  St  Paul,  does'not  occur  in  any  part
of  the  NeW.  Testament,  except  once  in  the  Epistle
of  St  Jamea,  eh.  ii  5.  "  Hath  not  God  choaen
the  poor  of  this  world,  rich  in"  faith  1  where  It  is
manifestly  suggested  by  the  antithesis.^  I  propose
the  frequent  yet  seemjnglv-uiiaffectetl  use  of.  this
phrase,  in  the  epistle  before  us,  as  one  interna)
inar^  of  its  genuineness.  ^
No.JII.
There  is*  another  singularity  in  St  Paul's  style,
which, swhertfve*  it  is  found,  may  be* deemed, a
badge  of 'authenticity ;  because,  if  it  were^noticed,
it  would  riot,  I'  think,  be  imitated,  inasmuch  as  it
almost  always  produces  embarrassment  and  inter-
ruption in  tile  reasoning.  This  singularity  is  a
speciea^f  digression  which  may  properly,  I  thjnk,
be  denonmiate<f  #<rirur  of  ai  a  word.  It  ia  turn-
ing asicje  from  the  subtect  upon  the^oecurrence  of
tome  Darticularword,  breaking  the  tram  of  thought
then  m  hand,  and  entering  upon  a.  parenthetic
sentence  in  which  that  word  is  the  prevailing
term.  I  snail  lay  befbie  the  ivadW  some  exampies-
of  tins,  cotteoted  from  the  other  epistles,  and  men
propose  two  examples  of  it  which  are  found  in  the
Epptfo  W-the  Ephesiana,  9  Cor.  ch.  ii.  14,  at  the
word  favour:  "Now  thanks  be  Unto  God,  which
always  causeth  ub  to  triumph-in  Christ,  and  mak-
eth  manifest  the  savour  of  his  knowledge  by  us  in
every  place,  (for  we  are  unto  God- a  sweet  savour
of  Christ  in  them  that  are  saved,  and  in  them
that  perish.;  to  the  one  we  are  the  savour  of  death
unto  death,,  and  to  the  othetthe  savour  of  life  unto
Hfej  and  w^o  is  sufficient- for  these  things?)  For
we  are' not  as  many  which  corrupt  the  word  of
God,  but  as  of  sincerity,  but  as  of  God;  in  the
sight  of  God,  speak  We  in  Christ."  ,  Again,  2  Cor.
ch.'iii.  1,  at  the  ward  epistle :  "  Need  we,  as  some
others,  epistles  of  commendation  to  you,  or  of  com-
mendation from  you?  (ye  are  oux.epUtU  written
in<mr  hearta,  known  and  read  of  all  men;  foras-
much as  ye  are  manifestly  declared  to  be  the  episf-
tle  at  Christ,  ibinistereeVby  us,>ritten  not  .with
ink.  but  with  the  Spuif  ofthe  hvingGod;  net  hi,
tables  of  stone,  but  in  the  fleshly  tables  of  the
.heart")  The  position,  of  the'  words  in  the  origi-
nal, shows  more  strongly  than  in  the' translation,
that  it  was  the  occurrence  of  the  word  Wri'va
which  gave  bhth  to  the  sentence  that  fellows:  »

Cor.  chap,  iii,  1.'  'ft^i  Xgl^ii'/«s  i-mc,  vvrrm-rUmf
$wtrreKm*  wfOf  v)*»u  1  'i  */*»»' *wr»Tiwr  |  n  twiTToJkf
m*mv  vfitis  larr*,  iyr$*yp*nptvn  twrmtf  %*pSnng  w»#»,  y*~
v*r%»fHV)(  xki  •*m'y*voT*Of*tvii  wrfo  w*rr<*¥  utdpwvmv  9S-
ttpov/ttw  frrt'irn  iario-TOX.il  Xfurrov  ^t»*9vnSi»T»  »?
n/d»v,  »yytyf»/t/nvn  •»  /uKmri,  **K*  »t»ivamiti  Bitii  £»»•
td««  oil*  i»  irxxgi  X<5**«*ff,  mKK*'»¥  >\^i  *«p*i»«  >»p^4-

*  Again,  2  Cor.  ch.  iii.  12,  &fl.  -at  the  word  tail  ?
^  Seeing  then  that  we  have,  such  hope,  we  use
great  plainness  pi  speech:  and  not  as  Mosee,
which  put  a  vdit  over  hie  face,  that  the  children
of  Israel  co'uia  not  steadftsUy  look  to  the  end  of
that  which  is  abolished.'  But  their  minds  were
bfodediforunnUthiedayremeinethto


HORJE  PAULHifi.


tmtaken  a**y  in  (he  reading  of  the  Old  Testa*
mentrWhkh  vailU  doneniway  in  Christ :  but  even
unto  this  day,  when  A^oses  is  reajj,  the  vail  is
upon  then*  heart:  nevertheless,  when  it  f>tiajl  *um
to  the  Lord,  the  rail  shall  be  taken  away  (now
the  Loid  is  that  Spirit ;  and  where  the  Spirit  o£the
Lord  is,  there  is  liberty.)  But  we  all  With*  open
free,  beholding  as  in  a  glass  the  glory  of  the"  Lord,  •
are  changed  into  the  same  image  from  gjpry  to
glory,  even  a*  by  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord.  There-
Jbre,  peeing  we  have  this  ministry,  as  we  have  re-
ceived mercy,  we  faint  not"  j

Who  sees  not  that 'this  whole  allegory  of  the
vail  artoes  entirely  out  of  the  occurrence  pf  the
word,  in  telling  us  that  "  Moses  pat  a  vail  over
his  face,"  and  that  it  drew  the  apostle  away  from
the -proper  subject  of  his  discourse,  the  dignity  of
the  office  in  whicfy  he  was  engaged  1  which  sub*
ject  he  fetches  up  again  almost  in  the  words  with
which  he  had  left  it  f  p  therefore,  seeing  we  have
this  ministry,  as  we  have  received  mercy'  we  Joint
not0  The  sentence  which  he  had  before  been
going  on  with,  and  in  which  he  had  been  inter-
rupted by  thfe  *«#,  was,  "  Seeing  then  that  we
have  such  nope,!  we  uae  great,  plainness  of
1  speech,"

In  the  Epistle  to  the  Ephesinns,  the  reader  will
remark,  two  instances  in  which  the  same  habit, of
composition  obtains ;  'mfwiti  recognise  the  same
pen.  Une  he  will  find,  chap.  iv.  8— 11,  it  the
word  ascended :  "  Wherefore  he  saith,  When  he
ascended  upon  high,  he  led  captivity  captive,  and
gave  gifts  unto.  men. — (Now  that  tie,  ascended,
what  is  it  but  feat  he  aleo^cBcended-first  unto  the
lower  parts  of  the  earth?  He  that  descended  is
the  same  also  that  ascended  up  far  above  all
heavens,  that  he  mieftt  fi|J  all  things.)  And  he
gave  some,  apostles, '  &c.

The  oUwr  appears,  chap.  V.  12 — 15,  at  the  word
light ':  *'  For  i^t  is  a  swamo  even  to  speak  of  those
things  which  are  done  a(  theni  in  secret :  but  all
things  thai  are  reproved,  are  made  manifest  by  the
lightf  (for  whatsoever  doth  unake  nfarafust,  is*
light  i  wherefore  he  saith.  Awake,  thou  that
steepest,  and  arise  from  the  dead',  and  Christ  shall
give  thee  tight ;)  see.  then  that  ye  walk  circumC
•pecty-"  .";.,■'

J. "  '  " - No.IV.  -

•  Although  it  does  -not  appear  to  have  ever  been
disputed  that  the  epistle  before  -us.  was  written  by
6|.  Paul,  yet  it  is  well  known  that  a  doubt  has  long
b^en>  entertained  concerning  the  persons'  to  Vhoni
it  was  addressed.  The  question  is  founded  partly
in  aomi  ambiguity  in  4he  external  evidence:  Mar-
cion,  a  .heretic  of  the  second  century,  as-  quoted
\n  TertulUan,  a  father  in  the  bcsmning  of  the
third,  calls  it,  the  -Epistle  to  the  Laodiceans.  From
what  we  know  of  MarcioiT,  his  judgment  is  little
fa  be  relied  upon;  nor  is  It  perfectly  clear  that
Mardon  was  nghthy  understood  by  'Tertullian.
_  If,  however,  Marcibn  be  brought  to  prove  that
""  some  copies  in  'his  time  gave  i»  Awt«n«  in  the
superscription,  his  testimony,  if  it  be  truly  inter-
preted, is  not  diminished  by  his  heresy ;  fhr  as
Gnotius observes," cur  mea  re  mentirelur n,ihil-
etai  causa."  The  name  »  B>i<r*,  in  the  first
verse,  upon  which  word  singly  depends  the  proof
that  the  epistle.was  written  to  the  Ephesians,  is
not  read  in  all  the  manuscripts  now  extant.  1  ad-t
mtt,  however,  that  the  external  •  evidence  prepon-
derates with  a  manifest'  excess  oh  (he  side  of  the


received  leading.  The  objection,  theufae  prin-
cipally arises  from  tfae-cenjents  of  the  epistle  itself
which,  in  many  respects, militate  with  the  suppo-
sition that  it  was  written  to  the  church  of  Ephe-
sus.  According  to  the  history,  St.  Paul  had  patt-
ed two  'whole  years  at  Ephcsus,  Acts,  chap.  xix.
10.  J±nd  in, this,  point.  vix,  of  St  Paul  having
preached  for  a  considerable  length  of  jime  at  Ephe-
sus,  the  history  is  confirmed  by  the  two  Eristic*
to  the  Corinthians,  ami  by  tlie  two  Epistles  to
Timothy:  "I  will  tarry  at  Ephesus  until  PejHo-
cost,"  lOor.  ch:  xvi.  ver.  8.  "We  would  not
have  you  ignorant  of  our  trouble  which  ?ame  to
ns  in  Asia"  2  Cor,  ch.  i.  8. .  i"  As  1  besought
thee  to  abide  still  at  Ephcsus,  when  I  went  into
Macedonia,"  1  Tim.  chap.  I  3.  *  "And  in  how
"many  things  he  ministered  to  me  at  Ephcsus  thou
fcnoweat  well,"  2  Tim,  d).  i.  1$.  I  adduce  these
testimonies,  because,  had  it  been  a  competition  of
oredH  between  the  iristory  and  the  epistle.  I
should  have  thoOght.  myself  bound  to  have  prefer-
red the  epistle.  .Now,  .every  epistle  winch  St
Paul  wrote  -to  churches  which  ha  himself  had
founded,  or  which  he  had  visited,  abounds  with
references,  and  appeals  to  what  had  passed  during
the  time  that  he  was  ©resent  amongst  them?
whereas  there  is  not  a  text  in  the  Epistle  to  the
Ephesinns,  from  which  we  can  coileet  that  he  had
ever  been  at  I£phesus  at  all.  The  twp  Epistle*  to
the  Corinthians,  the  Epistle  to  ^e  Galatians,  the
Epistle  to  the  Philippians,  and  the  two  Epistles
-to  Che  Thessafonians,  are  of  this  class;  and  they
are  full  of  allusions  to  -the  apostle's  history,  his  re-
ception, and  his  conduct  whilst  amongst  them ;
the  total  want  of  which,  in>the  epistle  before  us,
is  very  difficult  to  account  for,  if  it  was  in  truth
written,  to  the  church  of  Ephesus,  in  whkji  city
he  had  resided  for  bo  long  a  time.  This  is  the  first
and  strongest  objection.^  But  father,  the  Epistle
to  the  Co)ossians  was  addressed  to  a,  church,  in
which  St.  Paul  had  never  been.  This  we*  infer
from  the  first  verse  of  the  second  chapter:  "For
I  would  that  ye  knew  what  great  conflict  I  have
foryou-and  lor  them  at  LaodVcea,  and  for  as  many
as  Have  not  seen  ray  nice  in  the  flesh."  Then
could  J*3  no  propriety  bfthua  joining  the  Coios- '
siana  and  Laodiceans  with  those  "  who  nad  not
seen  his  lace  in  the  ffesh?"  if  .they  did  not  also  be-
long to  the  same  description.  **  Now,  his  address
.to  the  Cojossians,  whom  he  had  not .visited,  is
precisely  the  same  as  his  address  to  the  Christiana,
to  Whom  he  wrote  in  the  euistle  which  we  are  now
considering:  "  We  give  thanks  to  God  and  the
Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  praying  always
for  ypu,  since  fte  heard  qf  your  faith  in  Chrirt.  Je-
sus, and  of  the  love  which  ye  have  to  all  the  saints,'*.
Col.  ch.  i,  3.  Thus,  he  speaks  to  the  Ephoaians.
in  the  epistle  before  xssx  as  follows :  "  Wherefojre  I"
also,  after  J  heard  tfyour  faith  in  the  -Lord  Je-
sus, and  love  unto  all  the  saints,  cease  not  to  give
^thanks  for  you  in  my  prayers,"  chap.  i.  15.  The
terms  of  this  address  are  observable. «  The  words
lk  having  heard  of  your  fajthfind  love,n  are  the  very
words,  we  see,  which  he  uses  towards  strangers;
and  it  is  not  prolmble  that  he  should  employ  the
srfhie  in  accosting  af  church  in  which  he  had  long
exercised-  his  ministry,  and  whose  "  faith  and  love


*  Dr.  I«ardaer  contends  acalntt  the  validity  of  this
conclusion;  but,  [  tbfzrk,  without  success.  LuaMtaat
voj.  xiv.  p.  473,>edit.Jtf57.  >


EPISTLE  TO  THE  EPtfESlANS.


**


ImfiaAhmto'ppmBa&ykxMmn.*  The  Blotto
Jo  the  Roontns  was  written  before  St  Paul  bad
been  at  Rome;  .and  his- address  to  them  runs-in
the  same  strain  with  that  just  *now  quoted;  "1
thank  my  God,  through  'Jesus  Christ,  for  you  all,
that  your  faith  is  spoken  of-  throughout  the  whole
worjd:"  itorn.  en:  i.  8.  Let  as  now  see  vjhat  war
the  form  iri  which  our  apostle  was  accustomed  to
introduce  his  epistles,  when*  he  wrote  to  those  With
wjjom  he  .was  already  acquainted.  TV  the  Go-
rinthians  it  was  this:  ■"  I  thank  my  God  always
on  your  hehah^  for  the  grace*  of  God  wjiich  is
given  you  -by  Christ  Jesus,'*.'  1  Con  ch.  i.  4;  To
the  Philippians :  "I  thank  my  God' upon  every
remembrance  of  you,,,  Phil.  ch.  f.  3.  'To  the
ThessakmisjRS :  "  We  give  thanks  to  God,  always
lor.  you  all,  making  mention  of  yon  in  ourprayets,
remembering,  without  ceasing,  your  work  of  raith,
and  labour  of  love,"  I  Thess.  ch.  i.  3.  To  Timo-
thy: "  I  thank  God,  whom  I  sera  from  my  fore-
fathers with  pure  conscience,  that  without  ceasing
I  have  remembrance  of  thee  in  my  prayers,  night
and  day,"  2  Tim.  ch.  i.  3,  In  these  quotation*,
it  is  usually  his  remembrance>  and  never  his
hearing  of  them,  whi<m  he  majtcs  ttys  subject  of
his  thankfulness  to  God.

.  As  great  difficulties  stand  in  the  way  supposing
the  epistle  before  us  to  have  been  written  teUhe
church  of  Ephesus,  so  I  think  it  probable  that. it
is  actually  the  Epistle  to  the'  Laodiceans,  referred
to  in  the  fourth  chapter  of  the  Epistle  to.  the  Co-
iossians.  The  text  which  contains  that  reference
is  this:  "When  thin  epistle  is  read  among  you,
cause  that  it  be  read  also  in  the  church  of  the  Lao-
.dkeanfe,  and  that  ye  likewise  read  ihc  epistle  from
Laodicea,^  ch.  iv.  i£  The  "  epistle /rw»  Lao-
dicea  was  an  epistle  sent  by  St  Paul  to  that
church,  and  by  toenr  transmitted  to  Colosse.  The
two  churches  were  mutually  to  communicate' the
epistles  they  had  received.  This  is-  the  way  in
which  the' direction  is'  explained  by  the  greater-
part  of  commentators,  and  is  the  most  probable'
souse  that  can  he  given  to  it.  It  is  also  probable
that  the  epistle-  alluded  to  was  an  epistle  which
had  been  received  hy  the  church' of  Laodicea
lately. *It  appears  then,  with  a  considerable  de-

ri  of  evidence,  that  there  existed  an  epistle  'of
Paul's  nearly  of  the  same,  date  with  the  Epis-
tle to  the  CoJoesians,  and  aji  epistle  xHfecfed  to  a
church  (for'such  the?  church  of  Laodicea  was)  in
which  St.  Paul  had  never  been.  What  has  been
observed  concerning  the  epistle  before  us/  shows
that  it  answers  perfectly  to  that  character.

Nor  does,  the  mistake  seem  very  difficult  to
account  for.  '  Whoever  inspects'  the  map  of  Asia
Mums,  will  see,  that  a  person  proceeding  from
Rome  fo  Laodicea,  would  probably  land  at  Ephe-
sus, as  the  nearest  frequented  sea-port  in  that:
direction.  Might  not  T^ychicos  then,  in  passing-
through  Epnasus,  communicate!  to  the  Christians


of  that,  place,  the  letter  with  which  ha  was
chained,?  And  might  notpcopies  -of  that  letter  be
multiplied  and,  preserved  at  Ephesus  1  Might  not.
aorne  of  the  copies'  drop  the  words  of  designation
•»«*»  A««fr«Mfc,*  which  it  'Was  of  no  consequence
to  an .  Ephesian  to  retain  f  Might  not  copies  of '
.the  letter  come  but  into  tha  Christian  church  at
large  from  Ephesus;  and  might  not  this  give  oc-
casion to  a  belief  thai  the  letter  was  written  to  that
church  1  And,  lastly,  might  not  this  belief  pro-
dude  the  error  which  we  suppose  to  have  crept''
iUtothemscriptionl -..

'.•■:-..."  .;>o.v.'

As  our  epistle  purports  to  have  been  written
during  St.  Paufs  imprisonment' at  Rome,  which
lies1  beyond  the  period  to  which  the  Acts  of  the
Apostles  tarings  up  his  history;  and  as  we  have
seen  and  ^acknowledged  'that  the  epistle  contains
no  reference  to.  any  transactional;  Ephesus,  during
,  the  apostle's  residence  in* that  city,  we  cannot  ex-
pect that4t  should  supply  many  marks  of  agree;
ment  with  the  narrative.  One  coincidence  how-
ever ■occurs,  and  a  coincidence  of  that  minute  and
less  obvious  kind,  which;  as  hathheen  repeatedly
observed,  is  of  ail  others  the- most  to  be  retted
upon. ' „ '  .  • • "•  *  '

Chap,  vi  19,  90,  we  read,  M  pYaymr4br  mej
that  Imayopenmymoiithbol61y,tojnakeknown
the  mystery  of  the  Gospel,  for  which  I  am  an  am-
bassador in  btfnds."  «  Inixmd»tn  «*  Awm,  ma
cJiain\  In  the  twenty-eighth  chapter  of  tlje  £eta
we.  are  informed,  that  Paul,  after  his  arrival  at
Rome,  Was  suffered  to  dwell  by  himself  with  a
soldier  that  kept  hhn.  '  £r.  Laidner  has  showiT
that  this  mode  of  custody  was  in  use  amongst  the
Romans; and  that- whenever H  was  adopted  thsV
prisoner  was  bound  to  /the  soldier  by  a- single
chain:  in  reference  to  which  St.'  Paul,  in  tn»
twentieth  verse  of  this  chapter,  tells  the  Jews
whom  he  had  assembled,  "For  this  cause  there*
fore,  have  leaded  fei5  yowto  seeyou>nd  to-speak
with  yon,  because  that  for  the*  hope"  of  Israel  I
"am  bound  withthischain,"  tV  •MwvVmrrV  ■*{!*«-
pm*.  It  is  in  exact  conformity  therefore-  with  the
truth  of  St.  Paul's  situation  at  the  time,  that  *  he  .
deolares  of  himself  in  the'epistle,  r<$<rt$vw  $*  •axwmi
And  the  exactness  'is  the  mote  remarkable,  as
mkvrtf  {a  chain)  is  no  where  used  in  the  singular
number  to  express  any  other  kind  of  custody.
Whetf  the  prisoner's  hands  or  feet  were  bound
together,  the  word  was  S,<rM*t  (bonds,)  as  in  the
twenty-sixth  chapter  of  the  Acts,  where  Paul  Ye*


•  *  Mr.  Locke  endeavours  to  avoid  this  difficulty,  by
explaining  "  tkrir  faith,  of  which  fit.  Paul  had  heard/'
to  mean  the  steadfastness  of  their  persuasion  that  they
were  sailed  into  toe  kingdom  of  God,  without  subjection
to  the  Mosaic  institution.  But  .this  interpretation
seems  to  me  extremely  hard;  for,  in  the  manner  in
which  faith  is  here  joined  with  love,  in  the  expression
u  four  faith  and  love,"  it  could  not  be  mearft  to  denote
any  nariicorar  tenet  which  distinguished  one  se.t  of
Christians  from  others t  forasmuch  as  the  expression,
deseri  be*  the  general  virtues  of  the  Christian,  profession.

nscLocfsiAlpr  ^  -\ ■«


ler  tne  worm  »*  xpiutiu,  or  ins  worss  9*  lAuatua.
Basil,  a  -writer  of  the  fourth  century,  sntekihg  oCths
sent  epistle,  has  this  very  singular"  passage:  »*-And
ting  "to  the  Ephesians,  as  truty  united  to  nim  who  is, .


♦And  it  ja  remarkable  that  there  seem  to  have  teen
some  ancient  copies  without  fete  words  of  designation,
either  the  words  in  fijthtsits,  or  the  words  i*  Laoditt*:
SfcBasif,!  -  - - - -

present  e\

writing  "to  the  Ephesians,  as 'truly  united  to  Turn  who  is,  .
through  knowledge,  he  (Paul)  calleth  them  in  j\  peculiar
sense  such  who  are;  saying,  to  tfojtaintp  who  or*  dud  (of
even)  the  faithful  in  Christ  J&tu ;  fbr  so  those  Wore  urn
have  transmitted  it,  and  we  have  found  it  in  ancient
copies."  Dr.  Mill  interprets  (and,  nonvithstandin^ «ome
objections  that  have  been  made  to  him,  in  my  opinion
rightly  interprets)  these  words  of  Basil,  as  declaring
thfct  Uus  father  had  seen  certain-  copies  of  the  epistkr
in  which  therwords  "  in  Ephesus^  were  wanting.  And
the  passage,  I  think,  mast  be  considered  as.  Basil's  fon>
ciful  way  of  explainingWhat  was  ready  a  corrupt  and
defective  reading ;  for  I  do  not  believe  it  possible  that
the  aifthorvof  the  epistle  could  have  opginally  written
my»*§  Tfttc  ow«-»r,  without  any  najne  of  plaoa  to  fbl«
lowit .- ■ . . ■ m - • • .  •  c


H6&JK  PAULINJE,-


tftiea to Aftdpfw.  MwrwldtoGodtbet  notonly
thou,  but  also  all  that  hear  me  this  day,  were  both
almost  and  altogether  inch  at  I  am,  except  f Aese

fcoiui»,"  irsfiirrof  rm%  tir^wp  r«n«p. When the

prisoner  was  confined  between  two  soldie/s,  ai  is
the  caae  of  Peter,  Acta,  chap,  xil  6,  two  chains
wwb  employed;  and  it  it  said  upon  hii  iniracu-
loos  A&  vefance,  that  the


(»xwrt«,  in
the  ptval)  (<iefl  from  his  bands,"  6«*w,  the
noun,  and  *•«-*•!  the-  -verb',  being'  general  terma,
were  applicable  to  this  in  common  with  any  other
species  of  personal  coercion^  hot  «mw,.  in  the,
angular  number,  tp  none  but  this.

If  it  can  be  suspected  that  the  writer  of  the
present  epistle,  who  in  no  ether  particular  ap-
peals to  have  availed  himself  of  the  information
concerning  St,JPauf,  delivered  in  the  Acts,  had.
a  this  vene,  farrowed -the  word  whicfc  he  read
in  that  booavsnd  had. adapted  his  expression  to
what  he  found  there  recorded  of  St.  Paul's  treat-
meat  at  Rome ;  in  short,  that  the  coincidence  hem
noted  was  ejected  by  craft  and  design  ;•  I  think  it
a  strong  reply  to  remark,  that,  in  the  parallel  pas-
sage ofthe  Epistle  Uo  the  Coloemans,  the  same'
allusion  is  iwt  preserved;  tfye  words  there  are,
"praying  also  for  us,  that  <J(od  would  open  unto
us  a  door  of  utterance  to-  speak  the  mystery  of
Christ,  for  which  I  am  also  in  bonds,11  ft  • ««.
tiTftmi.  After  what  has  been  shown  in  a  preceding
number,  there  can  be  kittle  doubt  but  (bat  these
two  epistle*  were  written  by  the  same  person  If
the  writer,  thesefot*,  sought  for,  end.fauaduleiUly
inserted,  tfee  correspondency  into  one  epistle,  why
did  he  not  do  it  in  the  other  1  A  real  pnsoner
naght  use  either-  general  words  which  compre-
hended this  among*  many  other  modes  of  cus-
tody; or;m|ght  use  appropriate  words  whid*  spe-
ctfied  this,  and  diattoimshed  it  from  any  other
anode.  It  would  be  accidental  which  form  of  ex-
presstoiihe  fell  upon.x  But  an  impostor;  who  bM
the  art,  in-one  place,  to  employ  die  appropriate
term  for  the  purpose  of  fraud,  would  nave  used
i^m^oth  places.


chapter  vn. ;

; f The.  Epistle  to  the  PhiUppians. .

;  [ '.Kdi.

When  a  tranaaetioo-Ja  referred,  fe>  .in  such*
manner,  as.,  thai  .the  reference  is  easily  and  im-
mediately understood,  by  those  who  are  before-
hand, or  from  other  quarters,  acquainted  with  the,
net,  but'  is  obscure,  or  imperfect;  or  requires  in-
vestigation, or  a  comparison  of  deferent  pasta*  in
order  to  be  made  dear  to  other  leaders,  the  trans?
action  so  referred  to  is  probably  real ;  because,
had  ft  been  fictitious,  the  writer  would  have  set
forth  his  story  more  fully  and  plainly,  not  merely
as  conscious  of  the  fiction,  but  as  conscious  that'
bis  readers  oould  have  no  other  knowledge  of  the
subject  of  his  allusion  than  from  the  information
of  which  he  put  Chemtn  possession.

The  account  of  Epaphrodifus,  in  the  Epistle  to
the  Philippians,  of  hir  journey  to  Home,  andof  the
business  which  brought  him  thitner,Nis  the  article
to  whiclr  I  mean  to  apply  this  observation.  There

S  three  passages  in  the  'epistle  whicjr  relate  to
subject.  Tie  4ist,  chap.  L  7,  "  Even  as  it  is
meet  for  me  to  think  this  of  you  all,  because  1
1 — >  you  in  my  heart,  inasmuch  as-both  in  my


bonds,  and  in  the  defence  and  i
Gospel,  ye  all  are  rvyx«»Mr*o*  po« t^$  %■{«-»«,  joint,
contributors  to  the  gift  which  I  have  received.''*
Nothing  mow  is  said  in  this  place.  Ifr  the  latter
part  of  the  second  chapter,  and  at  the  distance  of
half  the  epistle  ^rom  the  last  quotation,  the  subject
appears  agam:  "  Yet  I  supposed  it  necessary  to
send  to  you  Epaphroditus,  my  brother  and  cum-
in labour,  and  leitaw^eokher,  but  your
',  and  he  that  ministered to  movants:


for  be  longed  after  you  aJL  and  was  lull  of  heavi-
(hat  ye  had  heard  that  he  had  been


sick:  for  mdeed  be  wn  sick  nigh  unto  death}  but
Gpd  had  mercy  on  him,  and  not  on  him.  only,  but
on  me  also,  lest  I  should  have  sorrow  upon  sor-
row. I  sent  him  therefore  the  more  carefully,
that  when  ye  see  him  again  ye  may  rejoice,  ana
that  I  may  be  the  Jess  sorrowful.  Receive  him
therefore  in  the  Lord  with  all  gladness;  and  hold
such  in  reputation:  because  for  the  work  of  Christ
he  was  nigh  unto  death,  not  regarding  his  fife  to .
supply  your  lack  of  service  toward  me^'  chap.
k\  25~AX  The  matter  is  here  dropped,  and  no
farther  mention  made  of  it  till  it  is  taken  up  near
the  conclusion *>f  the  epbue  as  follows:  "But  I
rejoice  in  the  Lord  neatly,  that  now  at  the  last
your  care  of  me  bath  flourished  again,  wherein  ye
were  also  careful,  but  ye'  lacked  opportunity.  Not
that  I  speak  in  respect  of  want;  for  I  have  learned
in  whatsoever  state  I  am,  therewith  to  be  content.
I  know  both  how  to  be  abased,  and  I  know  how
to  abound ;  every  where  and  in  all  things,  lam.
instructed  both  to  be  lull  andto  be  hungry,  both
to  abound  and  to  suner  need.  lean  do  ell  things
tlinjughCUirirtwhichstrengthenethine.  Notwith-
standing, ye  have  well  done  that  ye  did  ornnmnnt-
cate  with-  my  'affliction.  Now,  je  Phihppuna,
knew  also;  that  in  the  beginning  of  the  Gospel,^
when  I  departed  from  Macedonia,  no  church  com-
municated with  me,  as  concerning  giving  and  re-
ceiving, but  ye  only.  For  even  m  Thessalpnica
ve  .sent  once  and  again  unto  my  necessity.  Not
because  I  desire  a  gift:  But  I  desire  fruit  that  may
abound  to  your  account  But  I  have  all,  and.
abound:  I  am  full,  having. received  of  Epaphup-
ditus  the  things  which  Were  sent  from  you,"
chap.  iv.  10—18.  To  the  phittppian  reader,  who
knew  that  contritions  were  wont  to  be  made  in  ■
that  church  for  the  apostle's  subsistence  and  re-
lief, that  the  supply  .which' they  were- accustomed
to  send  to  him  had  been  delayed  -toy. the  want  of


opportunity,  that  Epaphmditus  had  undertaken
the'  charge  of.  conveying  tjieir  liberality  to  the)
hands  of  the  apostle,  tnat  he  had  acquitted  him-
self of  this  comnusaion  at  the  peril  or  his  life,  by
hastening,  to  Rome  under  the  ^oppression  of  a
grievous  sickness;  to  a  reader  who  knew  all  thiat.
Beforehand,  every  line  in  the  above  quotations
would  be  plain  and  .clear.  But  how  is  it  with  *
stranger  ?  The  knowledge  of  these  several  por^
ticulars  is  necessary  to  tne  perception  and- ex-
planation of  the  references ;  yet  that  knowledge
must  be  gathered  from  a  comparison  of  passages
lying  at  a  great  distance  from  one  another.  Texts
must  be  interpreted  "by  texts  long  subsequent  te '


*  Peaeee.l  believe,  was  the  irst  commentator,  who
gave  Uiia  tense  to  the  expression*;  and  I  believe  *J*o
that  bis  exposition  ii  now  generally  assented  to.  .  Be
interprets  m  the  aame  sense  the  phrase  in  the  fifth
veree,  which  oaf  translation  renders  "  yoor  fellawabin
in  tseGospel  ;**  but,whi£h  rn  the  original  is not«»»»«vu»
rev  *vmyy$Kt9v9or  «»r  •»••  tv  T»  wmyytk** ',  but  »t4r«vce
•if  to  nmyytXnr*  "


EPISTLR  TO  T&$  PHIL1PPIAN3.


m


than,  which  lyoessnrily  r^ucee.embafrassment
and  suspense,  Hie  passage  quoted  from  the  be-
ginning of  the  epistle  contains  an  acknowledg-
ment, on  the  put  of  the  apostle,  of  the  liberality
which  the  Phiftpoiana  had  exercised  towards
hinv,  hut  the  allusion  is  so  general  and  indeter-
minate, that  had  nothing  more  been.  Aid  iiuthe
soqueJ  of  the.  epistie,  it  would  hardly  have  been
applied  to  this  occasion  at,  alL  in  the  second
quotation,  Epaphroditus  is  declared  to  have  "mi-
natered-  to  the  apostle's  wants,",  and  "to  have
supplied  their  lack  of  ^service  towards  him;"  .but
how,  that .  is,  at  whose  expense/  or  from  .what
fond  he  "  mmistered,"  or  what  wajf  «  the  lack  of
service"  which  he  supplied,  are  left  very  much
mtexplained,  till  we  arrive  at  the  third  quota-
tion, where  .we  find  that  Epaphroditus  "minis-
tared  to  St.  Paul's  wants"  only  by  conveying  to
hie  hands  the  contributions  of  the  Philippians :
ul  am  full,  having  received  of  Epaphroditus  the
things  which, were  sent  from  you:"  and  that
"the  lack  of  service. which  he  supplied"  was  a
delay  or  interruption  ef  their  accustomed  bounty,
occasioned  by  the  want  of.  opportunity:  "I  re-
joiced inihe  Lord  greatly,  that  now  at  the  last
your  care  of  me  hath  nourished  again;  wherein
ye  were  abo  careful,  but  ye  lacked  opportunity.''
The  affiir  at  length  comes  oat  clear ;  but  it  comes
out  by  piecemeal. The  clearness  is  the  result  of

the  feoprocal  illustration  of  divided  texts.  Should^.  . -«,.,■■.*  »

any  one  choose  therefore  to  insinuate,  thai  this  ^hod*i  one  at  Thessalomca,  mi  .*»»  *k,  the  otl


whole  story  df  Epaphroditus,  or  his  journey,  his
•mad,  his  sickness,  or  even  his  existence,  might,
lor  what  we  know,  have  no  other  foundation  than
m  the  mvention  ot  the  forger  of  the  epistle;  I  an-
swer, that  a  forger  would  nave  set  forth  his  story
connectedly,  and  eJso  more  rally  and.  more  per-
•picnoQsly.  If  the  epistle  be  authentic,  anq  the
^twnsactjjim  real,  then  every  thing  which  is  said,
concerning  Epar>hro<ntus,  and  his  commission,
would  be  clear  to  those  into, whose  hands  the
•gristle  was  expected  to  come.  Considering  the
Fhifippians  as  his  readers;  a  person'  might  na-
totralJy  write  upon  the  subject,  as  the  author  of
the  epistle  has  written^  but  them  is  no  supposition
of  forgery  with  which  ft  wfll  suit.

- N6.ILr

The  history  of  Epaphroditus  supplies  another
observation:  "Indeed  he  was  sick>  nigh  unto
death:  but  God  Jiad  mercy  vo*  him,  and  not  on
him  only,  but  oh  me -also,  lest  I  should  have  sorrow
~*f*?n  •arrow."  In  tb  is  passage,  no  indmation  is
given  that  Ep&phroduWs  sscovery  was,  miracur
loosL  It  is  pj£inly,athink,  spoken  of  as  a  natu-
ral event  This  instance,  together  wttiTene  in
the  Second  Epfatfle,*)  Timothy  /"  Tmphmiua  have
I  left  at  MUetum  «ck,y)  affords  a  proof  that  the.
power  of  performing  cures,  sand,  by  parity  of
reason,  of  working  other  miracles,  was  a  power
which  onjy  visited  the  Apostles  occasionally,  and
did  not  aTall  depend  upon  their  own  will.  .Paul
umloubtedly  would  have  healed  Epaofcroditua  if  he
could.  '  Nor,  if  the  power  of  working  cures  had
•watted  his  disposal,  would  he  have  left  his  /fellow-
traveller  at  Miletum  sick.  This,  I  think,  is  a  fojr
observation  upon  the  instances  adduced ;  but  it  is
not  the  observation  I  am  concerned  to  male..  It
is  mote  for  the,  purpose  of  my  argument  to  Remark,
that  forgery,  upotr  such  an  occasion,  would  not
have  spired  a  miracle ;  much  less  would  it  have
introduced  8tr  Pad  professing  the  utmost  anxiety


for  the  safety  of  hu  fHend,  jret  acfaicwfedgin^
himself  unab|e  tb  help  him:  which  he  does,  •lmost
expressly  "hi  the  case  of  Trophimus,  for  he  "left
him  sick ;  ,  and  virtually  indhe  passage  before  us,'
in.  which  he  felicitates  himself  upon' the  recovery
of  Epaphroditus,  in  terms  which  almost  exclude
the  supposition  ef  any  supernatural  means  being
employed  to  effect  it  This  is  a  reserve'  which
nothing  -but  truth  would  Have' imposed.

' No.  nL ; -
Chap.  IV.  fa, 16.  "Nowz  ye  Philippian*,  know
also,  tnat'in  the^begiiining  of  the-  Gospel,  when  I
departed  from  Macedonia:,  "ho  church  Communicat-
ed with  me,  as  concerning\mying  «nd  receivings' .
but  ye  only. For  even  in  Xhessaloniea  ye  sent
once  and  again  unto  my  necessity ."  ~
-"  It  will  he  necessary  to  state  the  Greek  of~(his
passage,  because  our  translation  does  not,  I  think,
give  trje  sense  of  it  accurately.

'  Otimn  ft  tf«i' t^fcfifc,  +tki$rwi*tM%  ot«»»  ttfXn  to*
fv«t^y»\<ov,  on  t%n*.6ov  «n?»  Mm»th*t»(t  .9vi«*<6.A(0«. '
fXxA.««-i»  tK«*v«vaa-ir,  »*i  Koyov  StTtmg  *«t  Xjfi{<f>f,  •<  juf

VfUtf  ftOV9*'  0T» X«l|f O#T«-#*.0»4xi|»JK^  MjrafjjpXMI  ff+J  tig

The  reader  will  please  4o  direct  .his  attention
to  the  corresponding  particulars  en  and  0T*  «*>,
whicfr-connect  the  words  n  »f%*  ro»  ivsyyix  w,  or*

$Znk9i*  mwt  Jfeiu£ovi»f,  Vfiththe Words  ty  Qtrrmkovitut,

and  denote,  as  I  interpret  the  passage;  two  distinct
donations,  or  rather  donations  at  two  distinct  pe-


jafteriris  departure  from  Macedonia,  m  »$&&*?  •**•
m«*iJo».ik:*  I  would  render  the  passage,  so'as  to1
mark  these  different  periods,  thus:  "rfpw,  ye
Phitippians,4mow  also,,  that  •  in  the-  beginning  of
the  Gospel,  wheal  was  departed  from  Macedonia,  r
no  church  jcommunicated-wiwi  me,  as  concerning
giving  and  receiving,  but  ye  only.1  And  that  also
m  Tnessalohica  ye  sent  once  and  again  unto  my.
necessity."  "Now -with  this  exposition  of  the  pas-
sage compare  2  Qdr.  chap,  xi,  8L9^  "I  Tobbed
other  churches-,  taking  wages  of  them  to  do  yon
service.  And  when  f  was  present  with  you  and
"Wanted;  I  was  .chargeable  to  no  man;  for  that
which  was  lacking  to  me,  the  -brethren  which
came  from  Macedonia  supplied,"

It  appears  from  $t.  Paul's  history,  a*  related  in.
the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  that  upon  leaving  Ma-
-cedoma  he  passed,  after  a  very  short  stay  al  Athens,
into  Achaia.  It  nppears,  secondly,  from-  the  quo-
tation out  of  the '  Epistle  to  the  Corinthians,  that
in  Achaia  he*  accepted  no  pecuniary  assistance
from  the  converts  of  that  country;  but  that  he
drew  a  supply  for  his  wants  fromthe  Mapedomaii
Christians,  Agreeably  whereunto  it*  appears,  in
the  thir4  place,  from  the  text  which  is  tn^  subject
of  the  present  number,  that  the  brethren  in  Phi-
fippi,  a  city  of  Macedonia,  had  foUowrd  him  with
their  murnficehce,  en  i^fiev  «Vo  ife***^** ;  when
he  was^departed  from  'Macedonia,  that  is,  when
he  was  c#7ne  trUo  Achaia: *  • .  -

The  passage  utider  eonsidentdrjn  aflbrds  another
circumstance  o^agreement  deserving  of  our  notice.


*  Luke,  Ch.  ii.  15.  K**  iyi«TO,  «*s **nK8ov  ««■•  mvjmy

uf^-nv  v^mv»v  et  my?tx.ot%  u«a  the  angels  werje  goae
•way.*  i.  e.  after  their  departure,  o*  >ro*/«ir«5  «»*-o»  wpoe
m*\nk*vt.  Matt.  ch.  xli.  43.  Or**  it  to  tf**a«pr»v  «-vio>**
iZtkft  m  tou  «»tft»;ro*,i"wh4it  the  unetoan  spirit  is


rft,"  i.  e.  afUr  bis  departure,  J«  vx*1"*1- 1&™,  Ch:  iiii.
Qn  tinKH  Qtvtut)  "  when  be  #<8  gone,"  i. «.  <tfur
bis  departure,  kiy»  i*r«v«,  Acts,  eh.  x.  7,  »V  Star*\$u>


t>  »vyi*off  •  xmkmw  rm  ^vi,x»«,  "and  when  tbeuaagel
which  spake  unto  him  Vfas  departed,"  i.  e.  «/e*r  his  de-
partare,f«»Mr»iL^BOT«»»  oi^Tbiyjfcc.  *  ;


808


HORJE  PAtflLiNJE.


The  gpft  alluded  to  hv  the  Cpistle  to  the  Philip*
-  plans  10  staled  to  Have  been_  made  "  in  the  begin-
ning of  the  gospel."  \  This  phrase  is  most  natu-
rally explained-to  signify- the  hrst  preaching  of  the
Qospel  in  "these  parts,  viz.  on,  that  side  of  tie
<£gean  sea.  '  The  succour*  referred  to  ra  the
Epistle  to  the  Corinthians,  as  received  from  $la~
cedonia,  are  stated  to  have  been  received  by  him
ubon  his  first  visit  to  the  peninsula  of  Greece.
Tfce  dates  therefore  assigned  to  the  donation  in
the  two  epistjes 'agree;  yet  is  the  date  in  one  as-'
Pertained  very  incidentally,  namely,  by  the  consi-
derations which  fix  the  date  of  the  epistle  itself;
and-  in  the  other,  -by,  an  expression  (u  the  begin-
ning of  the  Gospel-)  much  too  general  to  have
been  used  if'  the  text  had  been  -penned  with  any
vjew  to  the  correspondency  we -are  remarking.

Farther,  the  phrase,  "  in  the  beginning  of  the
Gospel,"  raises  an-  idea  iii  the  reader's  nund  (hat
the  Gqepel  had  been  preached  there  more  than
09100.  The  writer  would  hardly  have  called  the
visit  to  which  lie  refers,  the  "  beginning  q£  the
Gospel,"  if  he  had  not  also  visited  them,  m  some
other  sta^e  of  it.  r  The  fact  corresponds  with  this
idea.  Ifwe  consult  the  sixteenth  and  twentieth
chapters  of  the  Acta,  we  shall  find,  that  St.  Paul,,
before  his  imprisonment  at  Rome,  during  which
this  Qptstk  purports  to  have  been  written,  had  been
total  is.  Macedonia,  and  each  time  at  PhilippL

"  ' '  ~ NO.  IV:  '

^Chat  Timothy  had  been  long  with  St.  Paid  at
Philippic  is  a  fact  which  seems  to  be  implied  in,
this  epistle  twice,  First,  he  joins  -iii  the  saluta-
tion with  which  the  epistle,  opens:  "Paul  and
Tunotheusj  -the  servants  of  Jesus  Christ,  to  all  the
saints  in  Christ  Jesus  which  are  at  Philippi."  Se-
-  cotidly,'  and  mor>'  directly,  the  point  is  inferred
ftofin  whit  is  said  concerning  ban,  chap,  it  19 :
"  Bui  I  trust  in  die  Load  Jesus  to  send  Timotheus
shortly  unto  you, -that  I  also  may -be  o(good  com-
fort when  I  know  your  state ;  Tor  1  have  no  man
like  minded,  who  will  naturally  care  for  your
state;  for  all  »eek  their  own,  not  the  things  which
are. Jesus  Christ's;  hut  ye  know  the  vrotf  of Aim,
that  as  a  son  with  the  lather,  he  frdtn  served  witi}
me1n  the  Gospel."  Had  Timothy's  presence  with
St.  Paul  at  Pfritippi,  when,  he  preached  the  Gospel
there,  been  expresjily  remarked  in  the  Acts  of  the
Apostles,  this  quotation  might  be  thought  to  con-
tain aebntrived  adaptation  tothe  history ;  although, '
even  in  that  case,  toe  everment,  o&xatneri  the  afiu-
sjob,  in  the  epistle,  is.  too  oblique  to  aflbtd  much
■room,  for  such  suspicion.  But  the  truth  is,  that  in
the  history  of  St,  Paul's  transactions  at  Philippi,
which  occupies  the  greatest  part  of  the* sixteenth
chapter 'of  the  £cts,  no  mention  is  made  of  Timor
thy-' at  all.  What  appears  concerning  Timothy  in
the^lustprV,  sp  fcr.  as  relates  to  the  present  subject,
is  this:  "  When  Paill  came  to.Derbe'and  Lystra,
behold  a  certain  disciple  was  there  name<J  Timo*
theufk  whom  Paul  would  have  to  go  .forth' with
.  nim.  The  narrative  then  proceeds  with  the  ac-
count of  St.  Paul's  progress  through  various  pro-
vinces of  the  Lesser  Asia,  till  it  brings  him  down
to  Troae, .  At  Troas -he,  was  warned  in  a  vision
to  pass  over  -into  Macedonia.  •  Jn  obedience  to
Which  he  crossed- the^v^^earr  sea  taSamothracia,
"the  next  day  to  Neapolis,  and  from-thence  to  Phi-
lippi- His f  preaching,  rntfaeks^  and  persecutions'
at  Philippi,  follow  next ;  after  which  Paul  and  his
company,  when  they  had  passed  through  AmpmV


.none  and  Apoltohia,  oame  to  Theesakmiea,  and  from
rhessalonfca  to  Berea*  From  Berca  the  bwthren
"sent  away  Paul;  "  but  Silas  and1  'J\muthcu**bodo
there  stilh,l-The  itinerary,  of  •which  the  above  is  an
abstract,  rs  undoubtedly  sufficient  to  tmpport  an  in-
ference that  Timothy- was  along  with  fcft.  Paul  at
Philippi.  We  mid  them  setting  out  together  upon
this  progress -from  Berbe,  in  Lyculonia;  we  find  them
together  near  the  conclusion  of  it,  at  Rerea  in  Ma-
cedonia. It  is  highly  probable,  therefore,  that  they
came  together  to lJhifipra,through  which  their  route
between  these  two  places  lay.  If  this  be  thought
probable,  it  is  sufficient.  For  what  I  wish  to  be
.observed  is,  that  in  comparing,  upon  this  subject,
the  epistle  with  the  history ,. We.  do  not  find  a  reei*
tal  in  one  place  of  what  is  related  in  another;  out
that  we  find,  what  is  much  rfiore  to  be  rehed'upon,
an  oblique  allusion  to  an  implied  feet.

No.  V,.

Our  epistle  purports  to  have  been  written  near
the  conclusion  of  St.  Paul's  imprisonment  at
Rome,  and  a/ter  a  residence  in  that  city  of  «onsi»
derable  duration.  ■  These  circumstances'are  made
but  by  different  intimations,  and  the  intimations '
upon  the  subject  preserve  among  themselves  a  lint
f  consistency,  and  a  consistency  certainly  unmedita-
ted. First  ~the  aposde  had  already  been  a  prisoner  at
Rome  so  long,  as  that  the  reputation  of  His  bonds,
,  arid  of  his  constancy  under  them,  bad  contributed  to
advance  the  success  of  the.  Gospel :  "-But  1  would
ye  should  understand,  brethren,  that  the'  thing!
which  happened  unto  me*  have  fallen  out  rather
unto  the  furtherance  of  the  .Gospel;  so  that  my
bonds  In  Christ  are  manifest  in  all  the  palace,  and
in  all  other  places;  and  many  of  the  brethren. in
the  Lord  waxing  confident  by  my  bonds,  afenluch
more  bold  to  sfSeak  the  word  without  fear."  Se-
condly, the  account  given  of  Epaphrodkus  imports,
that  9t.  Paul,  when  he  wrote  the  epistle,  had  bean
in  Rome  r  a  considerable  time:  "  He  longed -after

CaH,  and  was  full  of  heaviness,  because  that  ye
heard  that  he  had  been  sick  J'  '  Epaphroditos
was  with  St.  Paul  at  Rome.  He  hacf  been  siek.
The  PhiKppians  bad  heard  of  his  sickness,  and  he
again  had  received  an  account  how  much  tney  had
been  affected'  by  the  intelligence.  The  passing
and  repassing  of  these  advices  must  neceesariiy
hate  occupied  *  -large  portion  of  time,  and  must'
have  all  -taken  place  during  St.  Paul's  resMence^at
Rome.  Thirdly,  after  a  residence  at  Rome  thus
proved  to  have  Been  of  considerable  duration,  he
now  regards- the  decision  of  his  fate  as  nigh  at
hand-  rle  contemplates  ekher  alternative,-  that  of
his  deliverance^  ch.  ii.  23.  " Him  tjierefer*  (Ti-
mothy) I  hope  to.  send  presently,  so-soon -aa  I  shall
see  how  it  will  go  with  me ;  but  4  trust  in  th$
Lord*  that  I  also  myself  shall  come  shortly  Vr  that
of  his  condemnation,  ver.  17.  *  Yea,'  and  if  1  he  •
offered*  upon  the  sacrifice'  and  service^  of  your"
iaith,  I  joy  and  rejoice  with  you  all.,r  .Thia  con-
sistency is  material,  if  the  consideration  of  it  be
confined  to  the  epistle.  ."It  is  farther  material,  as
it  agrees  with  respect  to  the  duration  of  St  Paul's
first  imprisonment  at  Rome,  with  the  account  de-
livered in  the  Acts',  which,  having  brought  the
apost)eT  to,  Rome,  closes  the  History  by  tefHng  <fe
•'  that  he  dwelt  there  two  whole  years  in  his  own
lured  house'.'1  >  * *


■  1  1 1) •*- . « *

if  .ray  blood  4w  poured  out  as  a  Jifcatioif  upon  the  sacri*
'fice  of  your  fhenV  -, * "


EPISTLE  TO  THE.COLOSSIANS.


909


No.  VL

Chap.  L  23.  "For  I  am  in  a  strait  betwixt
two,  having  a  desire  to  depart,  and  to  be  with
Chziat :  which  is  far  better."

With  this  compare  2  Cor.  chap.  v.  8:  "We  are
confident  and  willing. rather  to  be  absent  from  the
body,  and  to  be  present  with  the  Lord."

The  sameness  of  sentiment  in  these  two  quota-
tions is  obvious.  I  rely  however  not  so  much
upon  that,  aa  upon  the  similitude  in  the  train  of
jthought  which  in  each  epistle  leads  up  to  this  sen-
timent, and  upon  the  suitableness  of  that  train  of
thought  to  the  circumstances  under  which  the
epiatlpB  purport  to  have  been  written.  This,  I
conceive,  bespeaks  the  production  of  the  same
mind,  and  nf  a  mind  operating  upon  real  circum-
stances. The  sentiment  is  in  both  places  preced-
ed by  the  contemplation  of  imminent  personal  dan-
ger. To.  the  Pbihppians  he  writes,  in  the  twentieth
verse  of  this  chapter.  "  According  to  my  earnest
expectation  and -my  nope,  that  in  nothing  I  shall
be  yftnm*At  but  that  with  all  boldness,  as  always,
so  now  also.  Christ  shall  be  magnified  in  my  body,
whether  it  be  by  life  or  by  death."  To  the  Co-
rinthians, "  Troubled  on  every  side,  yet  not  dis-
tressed; perplexed,  but  not  in  despair;  persecuted,
but  not  forsaken:  cast  down,  .but  not  destroyed ;
always  bearingjibout  in  the  body  the  dying  of  the
Lord  Jesus."  This  train  of  reflection  is  continued
to  the  place  from  whence  the  words  which  we
compare  are  taken.  The  two  epistles,  though
written  at  different  times,  from  different  places,
and  to  different  churches,  were  both  written  under
circumstances  which  would  naturally  recall  to  the
author's  mind  the  precarious  condition  of  his  life,
and  the  perils  Tvhkh  constantly  awaited  him.
When  the  Epistle  to  the  Pliilippians  was  written,
the  author  was  a  prisoner  at  Rome,  expecting  his
trial.  When  the  Second  Epistle  to  the  Corin-
thian* was  written,  he  had  lately  escaped  a  danger
in  which  he  had  given  himself  over  for  lost.  The
epistle  opens  with  a  recollection  of  this  subject,
and  the  impression  accompanied  the  writer's
thoughts  throughout

I  know  that  nothing  is  easier  than  to  transplant
into  a  forged  epistle  a  sentiment  or  expression
which  is  found  m  a  true  one;  or,  supposing  both
epistles  to  be  forged  by  the  same  hand,  to  insert
the  same  sentiment  or  expression,  in  both.  But
the  difficulty  is  to  introduce  it  in  just  and  close
connexion,  with  a  train  of  thought  going  before,
and  with  a  train  of  thought  apparently  generated
by  the  circumstances  under  which  the  epistle  is
written.  In  twp  epistles,  purporting  to  be  writ-
ten on  different  occasions,  and  in  different  periods
of  the  author's  history,  this  propriety  would  not
easily  be-managed.

No.  VII.
p.  L  29, 90 ;  ii.  1, 2.  "  For  unto  you  is  given,


f  of  Christ,  not  only  to  believe  on  him,
but  also  to  suffer  for  nis  sake ;  having  the  same
conflict  which  ye  saw  in  me,  and  now  hear  to  be
in  me.  If  there  be,  therefore,  any  consolation  in
Christ,  if  any  comfort  of  love,  if  any  fellowship  of
the  Spirit,  it  any  bowels  and  mercies ;  fulfil  ye  my
joy,  tnat  ye  be  nke  minded,  having  the  same  love,
being  of  one  accord,  of  one  mind.

With  this  compare  Acts,  xvi.  22:  "  And  the
multitude  (at  Phihppi)  rose  up  against  them  (Paul
and  Silas-)  and  the  magistrates  rent  off  their


clothes,  and -commanded  to  beat  them;  and  when
they  had  laid  many  stripes  upon  them,  they  cast
them  into  prison,  charging  the  jailor  to  keep  them
safely;  who.  having  received  such  a  charge,  thrust
them  into  tne  inner  prison,  and  made  their  feet
fast  in  the  stocks."

-The  passage  in  the  epistle  is  very  remarkable.
I  know  not  an  example  in  any  writing  of  a  juster
pathos,  or  which  more  truly  represents  the  work*
ings  of  a  warm  and  affectionate  mind,  than- what
is  exhibited  in  the  quotation  before  us.*  The
apostle  reminds  his  Philippians  of  their  being
joined  with  himself*  in  the  endurance  of  persecu-
tion for  the  sake  of  Christ.  He  conjures  them  by
the  ties  of  their  common  profession  and  their  com-,
mon  Bufferings,  "  to  fulfil  nis  joy ;"  to  complete,  by
the  unity  of  their  faith,  and  by  their  mutual  love,
that  joy  with  which  the  instances  he  had  received
of  their  zeal  and  attachment  had  inspired  his  breast.
Now  if  this  was  the  real  effusion  of  St.  Paul's  mind,
of  which  it  bears  the  strongest  internal  character,
then  we  have  in  the  words  "the  same  conflict
which  ye  saw  in  me,!'  an  authentic  confirmation
of  so  much  of  the  apse's  history  in  the  Acts,  as
relates  to  his  transactions  at  Phihppi ;  and,  through
that,  of  the  intelligence  and  general  fidelity  of  the
historian.


CHAPTER  VIII.

The  Epistle  to  the  Colossians. '

JSo.I.

There  is  a  chxnunstance  of  conformity  between
St.  Paul's  history  and  his  letters,  especially  those
which  were  written  during  liis  first  imprisonment
at  Rome,  and  more  especially  the  epistles  to  the
Colossians  and  Epheaians,  which  being  too  close
to  be  accounted  for  from  accident,  yet  too  indirect
and  latent  to  be  imputed  to  design,  cannot  easily
be  resolved  into  any  other  original  than  truth.
Whicll  circumstance  is  this,  that  St.  Paul  in  these
epistles  attributes  his  imprisonment  not  to  his
preaching  of  Christianity,  but  to  his  asserting  the
right  of  the  Gentiles  to  be  admitted  into  it  with-
out conforming  themselves  to  the  Jewish  law:
This  was  the  doctrine  to  which  he  considered
himself  as  a  martyr.  Thus,  in  the  epistle  before
us,  chap.  i.  24 :  (I  Paul)  "  who  now  rejoice  in  my
sufferings  for  you"— (lfor  you,"  i.f.  for  those
whom  he  had  never  seen ;  for  a  few  verses  after-
wards he  adds,  '>  I  would  that  ye  knew  what  great
conflict  I  have  for  you  and  for  them  in  Laodicea,
and  for  as  many  as  have  not  seen  my  nice  in  the  .
flesh."  His  suffering  therefore  for  them  was,  in
their  general  capacity  of  Gentile  Christians,  agree-
ably to  what  he  explicitly  declares  in  his  Epistle
to  the  Epheaians,  iv.  1 :  "  For  this  cause,  I  FauL
the  prisoner  of  Jesus  Christ,  for  you  Gentiles.*
Again,  in  the  epistle  now  under  consideration,  iv.
3:  "  Withal  praying  also  for  us,  that  God  would
open  unto  us  a  door  of  utterance  to  speak  the  mys-
tery of  Christ,  for  which  I  am  also  in  bonds."
What  that  "mystery  of  Christ"  was,  the  Epistle
te  the  EphesiaiSs  distinctly  informs  us:  "  Whereby


- •  The  original  is  very  ■pirited :  Ei  r*s  •«»  rmp*xkws

»vXf»<rrw,  «i  ti  «r«p»A««8«6i'  «y**-»lf'»  «.»  t««  nottmvt*  Ilrtv-


910


HORiE  PAULINA


when  ye  read,  ye  may  understand  my  knowledge
In  the  mystery  of  Christy  which  in  other  ages,
was  not  made  known  unto  the  sons,  of  men,  as  it
is  now  revealed  unto  his  holy  apostles  ana  pro-
phets by  the  Spirit,  that  the  Gentiles  should  be
fellow-heirs,  and  of  the  same  body,  and  partak-
ers qf  his  promise  in  Christ  by  the  Gospel**  This,
therefore,  was  the  confession  for  which  he  declares
himself  to  be  in  bonds.  Now  let  us  inquire  how
the  occasion  of  St.  Paul's  imprisonment  is  repre-
sented in  the  history.  The  apostle  had  not  long
returned  to  Jerusalem  from  his  second  visit  into
Greece,  when  an  uproar  was  excited  in  that  city
by  the  clamour  or  certain  Asiatic  Jews,  who,


u  having  seen  Paul  in  the  temple,  stirred  up  all
the -people,  and  laid  hands  on  him."  The  charge
advanced  against  him  was,  that  "he  taught  all
men  every  where  against  the  people,  and  the  law,
.  and  this  place :  ana  farther  brought  Greeks  also
into  the  temple,  and  polluted  that  holy  place/'
The  former  part  of  the  charge  seems  to  point  at
the  doctrine,  which  he  maintained,  of  the.  admis-
sion of  the  Gentiles,  under  the  new  dispensation,
to  an  indiscriminate  participation  of  God's  favour
with  the  Jews.  But  what  follows  makes  the  mat-
ter clear.  When,  by  the  interference  of  the  chief
.captain,  Paul  had  been  rescued  out  of  the  hands
of  the  populace,  and  was  permitted  to  address  the
multitude  who  nad  followed  him  to  the  stairs  of
the  castle,  he  delivered  a  brief  account  of  his  birth,
of  the  early  course  of  his  life,  of  his  miraculous
conversion;  and  is  proceeding  in  this  narrative,
until, he  cornea  to  describe  a  vision  which  was
presented  to  him,  as  ne  was  praying  in  the  tem-
ple; and  which  bid  him  depart  out  of  "Jerusalem,
"  for  I  will  send  thee  far  hence  unto  the  Gentiles,"
tActa,  xxii.  21.  "  They  gave  him  audience,"  says
the  historian, "  unto  this  \por<L;  and  then  lift  up
their  voices,,  and  said,  Away  with  such  a  fellow
from  the  earth !"  Nothing  can  show  more  strongly
than  this  account  does,  what  was  the  offence
which  drew  down  upon  St.  Paul  the  vengeance  of
his  countrymen.  His  mission  to  the  Gentiles,
and  his  open  avowal  of  that  mission,  was  the  in-
-  tolerable  part  of  the  apostle's  crime.  But  although
the  seal  motive  of  the  prosecution  appears  to  have
been  the.  apostle's  conduct  .towards  the  Gentiles ;
yet,  when  his  accusers  came  before  a  Roman
magistrate,  a  charge  was  to  be  framed  of  a  more
legal  form.  The  profanation  of  the  temple  was
the  article  they  chose  to  rely  upon.  This,  there-
fore, became  the  immediate  subject  of  TertulJus's
oration  before  Felix,  and  of  Paul's  defence.  But
that  he  all  along  considered  his  ministry  amongst
the  Gentiles  as  the  actual  source  of  the  enmity
that  had  been  exercised  against  him,  and  in  par-
ticular as  the  cause  of  the  insurrection  in  which
his  person  had  been  seized,  is  apparent  from  the
conclusion  of  his  discourse  before  Agrippa:  "1
have  appeared  unto  thee,"  says  he,  describing  what
passed  upon  his  journey  to  Damascus,  "  for  this
purpose,  to  make  thee  a  minister  and  a  witness,
both  of  these  things  which  thou  hast  seen,  and  of
those  things  in  the  which  I  will  appear  unto  thee,
delivering  thee  from  the  people  and  from  the  Gen-
tiles, unto  whom  now  I  send  thee,  to  open  their
eyes,  and  to  turn  them  from  darkness  to  light,
and  from  the  power  of  Satan  unto  God,  that  they
may  receive  forgiveness  of  sins,  and  inheritance
among  them  which  are  sanctified  by  faith  that  is
in  me.  Whereupon,  O  king  Agrippa,  I  was  not
disobedient  unto  the  heavenly  vision;  but  showed


first  unto  them  of  Damascus,  and  of  Jerusalem,
and  throughput  all  the  coasts  of  Judea,  and  then
to  the  Gentiles,  that  they  should  repent  and  turn
to  God,  and  do  works  meet  for  repentance.  For
these  causes  the  Jews  caught  me  in  the  temple,
and  went  about  to  kill  me.  The  seizing,  there-
fore, of  St.  Paul's  person,  from  which  he  was
never  discharged  till  his  final  liberation  at  Rome;
and  of  which,  therefore,  his  imprisonment  at  Rome
was  the  continuation  and  effect,  was  not  in  con*
sequence  of  any  general  persecution  set  on  foot
against  Christianity :  nor  did  it  befaH  him  simply
as  professing  or  teaching  Christ's  religion,  which
James'  and  the  elders  at  Jerusalem  did  as  well  as
he  (and  yet,  for  any  thing  that  appears,  remained
at  that  time  unmolested  ;)  but  it  was  distinctly  and
specifically  brought  upon  him  by  his  activity  in
preaching  to  the  Gentiles,  and  by  his  boldly  placing
them  upon  a  level  with  the  once-favoured  and  still
self-flattered  posterity  of  Abraham.  How  well  St.
Paul's  letters,  purporting  to  be  written  during  this
imprisonment,  agree  with  this  account  of  its  cause
and  origin,  we  nave  already  seen.

No.  II.

Chap.  iv.  10.  "  Aristarchus  my  fellow-prisoner
saluteth  you,  and  Marcus,  sister's  son  to  Barna-
bas, (touching  whom  ye  received  commandments:
If  he  come  unto  you,  receive  him;)' and  Jesus,
which  is  called  Justus,  who  are  of  the  circum-
cision."

We  find  Aristarchus  as  a  companion  of  our
apostle  in  the  nineteenth  chapter  of  the  Acts,  and
the  twenty-ninth  verse :  *•  And  the  whole  city  of
Ephesus  was  filled  with  cpnfusion ;  and  having
caught  Gaius  and  Aristarchus^  men  of  Macedonia,
Paul's  companions  in  travel,  they  rushed  with
one  accord  into  the  theatre.11-  And  we  find  him
upon  his  journey  with  St.  Paul  to  Rome,  in  the
twenty-seventh  chapter,  and  the  second  verse:
"  And  when  it  was  determined  that  we  should
sail  into  Italy,  they  delivered  Paul  and  certain
other  prisoners  unto  one  named  Julius,*  centurion
of  Augustus's  band :  and;  entering  into  a  ship  of
Adramyttium,  we  launched,  meaning  to  sail  by
the  coast  of  Asia ;  one  Aristarchus,  a  Macedo-
nian qf  Thessalonica,  being'  with  us."  But  might
not  the  author  of  the  epistle  have  consulted  the
history;  and,  observing  that  the  historian  had
brought  Aristarchus  along  with  Paul  to  Rome,
might  he  not  for  that  reason,  and  without  any
other  foundation,  have  put  dowir  his  name
amongst  the  salutations  or  an  epistle  purporting
to  be  written  by  the,  apostle  from  that  place  ?  1
allow  so  much  of  possibility  to  this  objection,  that
I  should  not  have  proposed  this  in  the  number  of
coincidences  clearly  undesigned,  had  Aristarchus
stood  alone.  The  observation  that  strikes  me  m
reading  the  passage  is,  that  together  with  Aris-
tarchus, whose  journey  to  Rome  we  trace  in  the
history,  are  joined  Marcus  and  Justus,  of  whose
coming  to  Rome  the  history  says  nothing.  Aris-
tarchus alone  appears  in  the  history,  and  Aristar-
chus alone  would  have  appeared  in  the  epistle,
if  the  author  had  regulated  himself  by  that  con-
formity. Or  if  you  take  it  the  other  way;  if  you
suppose  the  history  to  have  been  made  out  of  the
epistle,  why  the  journey  of  Aristarchus  to  Rome
should  be  recorded,  and  not  that  of  Marcus  and
Justus,  if  the  ground-work  of  the  narrative  was
the  appearance  of  Aristarchus's  name  in  the  epis-
tle, seems  to  be  unaccountable.


FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.


911


"  Marcos,  sister's  sen  to  Barnabas."  Does  not
this  hint  account  for  Barnabas'*  adherence  to  Mark
in  the  contest  that  arose  with  our  apostle  concern-
ing him?  "  And  some  days  after,  Paul  said  unto
Barnabas,  Let  us  go  again  and  visit  our  brethren
in  every  aty  where  we  have  preached  the  word  of
the  Lord,  and  see  how  they  do ;  and  Barnabas
determined  to  take  with  them  John,  whose  sur-
name was  Mark  ;  but  Paul  thought  not  good  to
take  him  with  them,  who  departed  from  Pamphy-
Ua,  and  went  not  with  them  to  the  work ;  and  the
contention  was  so  sharp  between  them,  that  they
departed  asunder  one  from  the  other:  and  bo  Bar-  -
nabas  took  Mark  and  sailed  unto  Cyprus."  The
history  which  records  the  dispute  nas  not  pre-
served the  circumstance  of  Mark's  relationship  to
Barnabas.  It  is  no  where  noticed  but  in  the  text
before  us.  As  for,  therefore,  as  it  applies,  the  ap-
plication is  certainly  undesigned.

"  Sister's  son  to  Barnabas."  This  woman,  the
mother  of  Mark,  and  the  sister  of  Barnabas,  was,
as  might  be  expected,  a  person  of  some  eminence
amongst  the  Christiana  of  Jerusalem.  It  so  hap-
pens that  we  hear  of  her  in  the  history.  "  When
Peter  was  delivered  from  prison,  he  came  to  the
house  of  Mary,  the  mother  of  John,  whose  sur-
name was  Mark,  where  many  were  gathered  to-
gether praying,"  Acts.  xii.  12,  There  is  some-
what of  coincidence  in  this ;  somewhat  bespeaking
real  transactions  amongst  real  persons.

No.  III.

The  following  coincidence,  though  it  bear  the
appearance  of  great  nicety  and  refinement,  ought
not,  perhaps,  to  be  deemed  imaginary.  In  the  salu-
tations with  which  this,  like  most  of  St.  Paul's
epistles;  concludes,  "we  have  Aristarchus  and
Marcus,  and  Jesus,  which  is  called  Justus,  who
are  of  the  circumcision," iv.  10,  11.  Then  follow
also,  "  Epephras,  Luke  the  beloved  physician,  and
Demas."  Now,  as  this  description,  "  who  are  of
the  circumcision,"  is  added  after  the  first  three
names,  it  is  inferred,  not  without  great  appearance
of  probability,  that  the  rest,  amongst  whom  is
Lake,  were  not  of  the  circumcision.  Now,  can
we  discover  any  .expression  in  the  Acts  of  the
Apostles,  which  ascertains  whether  the  author  of
the  book  was  a  Jew  or  not?  If  we  can  discover
that  he  was  not  a  Jew,  we  fix  a  circumstance  in
his  character,  which  coincides  with  what  is  here,
indirectly  indeed,  but  not  very  uncertainly,  in-
timated concerning  Luke:  and  we  so  for  confirm
both  the  testimony  of  the  primitive  church,  that
the  Acts  of  the  Apostles  was  written  by  St.  Luke,
and  the  general  reality  of  the  persons  and  circum-
stances Drought  together  in  this  epistle.  The
text  in  the  Acts,  which  has  been  construed  to
show  that  the  writer  was  not  a  Jew,  is  the  nine-
teenth verse  of  the  first  chapter,  where,  in  de-
scribing the  field  which  had  been  purchased  with
the  reward  of  Judas's  iniquity,  it  is  said,  "  That
it  was  known  unto  all  the  dwellers  at  Jerusalem;
insomuch  as  that  field  is  called  in  their  proper
tongue,  Aceldama,  that  is  to  say,  The  field  of
blood."  These  words  are  by  most  commentators
taken  to  be  the  words  and  observation  of  the  his-
torian, and  pot  a  part  of  St.  Peter's  speech,  in  the
midst- of  which  they  are  found.  If  this  be  admitted,
then  it  is  argued  that  the  expression,  "in  their
proper  tongue,"  would  not  have  been  used  by  a
Jew,  but  is  suitable  to  the  penof  a  Gentile  writing


concerning  Jews.*  The  reader  will  judge  of  the
probability  of  this  conclusion,  and  we  urge  the
coincidence  no  farther  than  that  probability  ex-
tends. The  coincidence,  if  it  be  one,  is  so  remote
from  sJI  possibility  of  design,  that  nothing  need  be
added  to  satisfy  the  reader  upon  that  part  of  the
argument.

"Ko.  IV.

Chap.  iv.  9.  /' With  Onerimus.  a  fekhful  and
beloved  brother,  who  is  one  of  you. *

Observe  how  it  may  be  made  out  that  Onesl-
mus  was  'a  Colossian.  Turn  to  the  Epistle  to
Philemon,  and  you  will  find  that  Onesimus  was
the  servant  or  slave  of  Philemon.  The  question
therefore  will  be.  to  what  city  Philemon  belonged*
In  the  epistle  addressed  to  him  this  is  not  declared.
It  appears  only  that  he  was  of  the  same  jphvee,
whatever  that  place  was,  with  an  eminent  Chris-
tian named  Archippus.  "  Paul,  a  prisoner  of  Je-
sus Christ,  and  Timothy  our  brother,  unto  Phile-
mon our  dearly  beloved  and  fellow-labourer;  and
to  our  beloved  Apphia,  and  Archippus  our  fel-
low-soldier, and  to  the  church  in  thy  house.,,
Now  turn  back  to  the  Epistle  to  the  Colossians,
and  you  will  find  Archippus  saluted  by  name
amongst  the  Christians  of  that  church.  "  Say
to  Archippus,  Take  heed  to  the  ministry  which
thou  hast  received  in  the  Lord,  that  thou  fulfil  it,"
iv.  17.  The  necessary  result  is,  that  Onesimus
also  was  of  the  same  city,  agreeably  to  what  is  said
of  him,  "  he  is  one  of  you."  And  this  result  is
the  effect  either  of  truth  which  produces  con*
sistency  without  the  writer's  thought  or  care,  or
of  a  contexture  of  forgeries  confirming  and  wil-
ing in  with  one  another  by  a  species  of  fortuity
of  which  I  know  no  example.  The  supposition
of  design,  I  think,  is  excluded,  not  only  because
the  purpose  to  which  the  design  must  have  been
directed,  viz.  the  verification  of  the  passage  in  our
epistle,  in  which  it  is  said  concerning  Onesimus,
"  he  is  one  of  you,"  is  a  purpose,  which  would  be
lost  upon  ninety-nine  readers  out  of  a  hundred-;
but  because  the  means  made  use  of  are  too  cir-
cuitous to  have  been  the  subject  of  affectation  and
contrivance.  Would  a  forger,  who  had  this  pur-
pose in  view,  have  left  his  readers  to  hunt  it  out,
by  going  forward  and  backward  from  one  epistle
to  another,  in  order  to  connect  Onesimus  wfyh
Philemon,  Philemon  with  Archippus,  and  Ar-
chippus with  Colosse  1  all  which  he  must  do  be-
fore he  arrives  at  his  discovery,  that  it  was  truly
said  of  Onesimus,  "  he  is  one  of  you."


CHAPTER  IX.
The  First  Epistle  to  the  TTiessalonians.

No.  I.

It  is  known  to  every  reader  of  Scripture^  that
the  First  Epistle  to  the  Thessalonians  speaks  of
the  coming  of  Christ  in  terms  which  indicate  an
expectation  of  his  speedy  appearance :  "  For  this
we  say  unto  you  by  the  word  of  the  Lord,  that
we  which  are  alive  and  remain  unto  the  coming
of  the  Lord,  shall  not  prevent  them  which
are  asleep.  For  the  Lord  himself  shall  descend
from  heaven  with  a  shout,  with  the  voice  of  the


•  Vide  Benson's  Dissertation,  vol.
works,  ed.i7tt.


p.  318,  of  hit


S19


HORJE  PAULINjE.


.  and  with  the  tnunp  of  God ;  and  the
'  dead  uTCnriet  shall  rise  first :  then  w  vhick  are
alive  and  remain,  shall  be  caught  op  together
with  them  in  the  clouds — But  ye,  brethren,  are
not  in  darkness,  that  that  day  should  overtake  you
as  a  thief/'  chap.  iv.  15, 16, 17;  ch.v.  4.

Whatever  other  construction  these  texts  may
bear,  the  idea  they  leave  upon  the  mind  of  an
ordinary  reader,  is  that  of  the  author  of  the  epis-
Ife  looking  lor  the  day  of  judgment  to  take  place
in  his  own  time,  or  near  to  it.  Now  the  use  which
I  make  of  this  arcumatance,  is  to  deduce  from  it  a
proof  that  the  epistle  itself  was  not  the  production
of  a  subsequent  age.  Would  an  impostor  have
given  this  expectation  to  St.  Paul,  after  experience
bad  proved  it  to  be- erroneous'?  or  would  he  have
put  into  the  apostle's  mouth,  or  which  is  the  same
thing,  into  writings  purporting  to  come  from  his
hand,  expressions,  if  not  necessarily  conveying,
at  least  easily  interpreted  to  convey,  an  opinion
which  was  then  known  to  be  founded  in  mistake  1
I  state  this  as  an  argument  to  show  that  the  epis-
tle was  contemporary  with  St  Paul,  which  is  lit-
tle less  than  to  show  that  it  actually  proceeded
from  his  pen.  For  I  question  whether  any  an-
cient forgeries  were  executed  in  the  life-time  of
the  person  whose  name  they  bear ;  nor  was  the
primitive  situation  of  the  church  likely  to  give
biith  to  such  an  attempt

No.  XL

Our  epistle  concludes  with  a  direction  that  it
should  be  publicly  read  in  the  church  to  which  it
was  addressed :  "  1  charge  you  by  the  Lord,  that
this  epistle  be  read  unto,  all  the  holy  brethren."
The  existenee  of  this  clause  in  the  body  of  the
epistle  is  an  evidence  of  its  authenticity ;  because
to  produce  a  letter  purporting  to  1
lead  in  the  cl


5  church  of  Thessalonica,  when  no
letter  in  truth  had  been  read  or  heard  of  in  that
church,  would  be  to  produce  an  imposture  destruc-
tive of  itself.  At  least,  it  seems  unlikely  that  the
author  of  an  imposture  would  voluntarily,  and  even
officiously,  afford  a  handle  to  so  plain  an  objection.
— ^Either  the  epistle  was  publicly  read  in  the
church  of  Thessalonica  during  St.  Paul's  life-time,
er  it  was  not.  If  it  was,  no  publication  could  be
more  authentic,  no  species  of  notoriety  more  un-
questionable, no  method  of  preserving  the  integrity
of  the  copy  more  secure.  If  it  was  not,  the  clause
we  psoduce  would  remain  a  standing  condemna-
tion of  the  forgery,  and  one  would  suppose,  an
'  invincible  impediment  to  its  success.

If  we  connect  this  article  with  the  preceding,
we  shall  perceive  that  they  combine  into  one
strong  proof  of  the  genuineness  of  the  epistle.
The  preceding  article  carries  up  the  date  of  the
epistle  to  the  time  of  St.  Paul ;  the  present  article
fixes  the  publication  of  it  to  the  church  of  Thes-
salonica. Either  therefore  the  church  of  Thessa-
lonica was  imposed  upon  by  a  false  epistle,  which
in  St.  Paul's  life-time  they  received  and  read  pub-
licly as  his,  carrying  on  a  communication  with
him  all  the  while,  and  the  epistle  referring  to  the
continuance  of  that  communication;  or  other
Christian  churches,  in  the  same  life-time  of  the
apostle,  received  an  epistle  purporting  to  have  been
publicly  read  in  the  church  of  Thessalonica,  which
nevertheless  had  not  been  heard  of  in  that  church ;
or,  lastly,  the  conclusion  remains,  that  the  epistle
now  in  our  hands  is  genuine.


No,  HL

Between  oar  epistle  and  the  history  the  accord-
ancy  in  many  points  is  circumstantial  and  com-
plete. The  history  relates,  that  after  Paul  and
Silas  had  been  beaten  with  many  stripes  at  Phi-
lippi,  shut  up  in  the  inner  prison,  and  their  feet
made  fast  in  the  stocks,  as  soon  as  they  were  dis-
charged from  their  confinement  they  departed  from
thence,  and,  when  they  had  passed  through  Am-
phipohs  and  ApoUonia,  came  to  Theasakoica,
where  Paul  opened  and  alleged  that  Jesus  was
the  Christ,  Acts,  xvi.  23,  dec  The  epistle  writ-
ten  in  the  name  of  Paul  and  Sylvanus  (Silas,)  and
of  Timotheus,  who  also  appears  to  have  bean
along  with  them  at  Philippe  (vide  Phil.  No.  iv.)
speaks  to  the  church  of  Thessalonica  thus :  "Even
after  that  we  had  suffered  before,  and  were  shame-
fully entreated,  as  ye  know,  at  Philiopi,  we  were
bold  in  our  God  to  speak  unto  you  the  Gospel  of
God  with  much  contention,"  ii.  2.

The  history  relates,  that  after  they  had  been
some  time  at  Thessalonica,  "  the  Jews  who  be-
lieved not,  set  all  the  city  in  an  uproar,  and  as-
saulted the  house  of  Jason  where  Paul  and  Bibs
were,  and  sought  to  bring  them  out  to  the  people,"
Acts,  xvii.  5.  The  epistle  declares,  "  when  we
were  with  you,  we  tola  you  before  that  we  should
suffer  tribulation',  even  as  it  came  to  past,  and  ye
knov"  iii.  4.

The  history  brings  Paul  and  Silas  and  Timo-
thy together  at  Corinth,  soon  after  the  preaching
of  the  Gospel  at  Thessalonica: — "And  when
Silas  and  Timotheus  were  come  from  Macedonia,
(to  Corinth,)  Paul  was  pressed  in  spirit,"  Acts,
xvih.  5.  The  epistye  is  written  in  the  name  of
these  three  persons,  who  consequently  must  have
been  together  at  the  time,  and  speaks  Uuoughout
of  their  ministry  at  Thessalonica  as  a  meant  trans-
action: "We,  brethren,  being  taken  frrnn  you
for  a  short  time,  in  presence,  not  in  heart,  endea-
voured the  more  abundantly  to  see  your  face,  with
great  desire,"  it  17.

The  harmony  is  indubitable;  but  the  points  of
history  in  which  it  consists,  are  so  expressly  set
forth  in  the  narrative,  and  so  directly  auforied  to
in  the  epistle,  that  it  becomes  necessary  for  usvto
show  that  the  acts  in  one  writing  were  not  copied
from  the  other.  Now,  amidst  some  minuter  dis-
crepancies, which  will  be  noticed  below,  there  is
one  circumstance  which  mixes  itself  with  all  the
allusions  in  the  epistle,  but  does  not  appear  in  the
history  any  where :  and  that  k"of  a  visit  which  St
Paul  had  intended  to  pay  to  the  Thessalotuans
during  the  time  of  his  residing  at  Corinth: —
"  Wherefore  we  would  have  come  unto  you  (even
I  Paul)  once  and  again ;  but  Satan  hindered  us,"
ii.  18.  u  Night  and  day  praying  exceedingly  that
we  might  see  your  face,  and  might  perfect  that
which  is  lacking  in  your  faith.  Now  God  himself
and  our  Father,  and  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  direct
our* way  unto  you,"  in.  10,  11.  Concerning  a  de-
sign which  was  not  executed,  although  the  person
himself,  who  was  conscious  of  his  own  purpose,
should  make  mention  in  his  letters,  nothing  is
more  probable  than  that  his  historian  should  be
silent,  if  not  ignorant.  The  author  of  the  epistle
could  not.  however,  have  learnt  this  circumstance
from  the  history,  for  it  is  not  there  to  be  met  with}
nor,  if  the  historian  had  drawn  his  materials  from
the  epistle,  is  it  likely  that  he  would  have  passed
over  a  circumstance,  which  is  amongst  the  mott


FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIAN8.


213


obvious  and  prominent  of  the  feces  to  be  collected
from  that  source  of  information.

No.  IV.

.Chap.  iii.  1 — 7.  "Wherefore  when  we  could
no  longer  forbear,  we  thought  it  good  to  be  left  at
Athens  alone,  and  sent  Timothcus,  our  brother
and  .minister  of  God,  to  establish  you,  and  to  com-
fort you  concerning  your  faith ; — but  now  when
Thnotheus  came  from  you  unto  us,  and  brought
us  good  tidings  of  your  faith  and  charity,  we  were
comforted  over  you  in  all  our  affliction  and  distress
by  your  frith."

The  history  relates,  that  when  Paul  came  out
of  Macedonia  to  Athens,  Silas  and  Timothy  staid
behind  at  Berea :  "  The  brethren  sent  away  Paul
to  go  as  it  were  to  the  sea;  but  Silas  and  Timo-
theue  abode  there  still;  and  they  that  conducted
Paul  brought  him  to  Athens,"  Acts,  ch.  xvii.
14,  15.  The  history  farther  relates,  that  after
Paul  had  tarried  some  time  at  Athens,  and  had
proceeded  from  .thence  to  Corinth,  whilst  he  was
exercising  his  ministry  in  that  city,  Silas  and
Timothy  came  to  him  from  Macedonia,  Acts,
ch.  zvih.  5.  But  to  reconcile  the  history  with  the
clause  in  the  epistle,  which  makes  St.  Paul  say.
"  I  thought  it  good  to  be  left  at  Athens  alone,  and
to  send  Timothy  unto  you/'  it  is  necessary  to  sup-
pose that  Timothy  had  come  up  with  St.  Paul  at
Athens;  a  circumstance  which  the  history  does
not  mention.  I  remark,  therefore,  that  although
the  history  does  not.  expressly  notice  this  arrival,
yet  it  contains  intimations  which  render  it  ex-
tremely probable  that  the  foot  took  place.  First,
as  soon  as  Paul  had  reached  Athens,  he  sent  a
message  back  to  Silas  and  Timothy  "  for  to  come
to  him  with  all  speed,"  Acts,  ch.  xrii.  15.  Se-
condly, his  stay  at  Athens  was  on  purpose  that
Jbey  might  join  him  there:  "Now  whilst  Paul
tDoUedjor  them  at  Athens  fYm  spirit  was  stirred  in
him,"  Acts,  ch.  xvii.  16.  Thirdly,  his  departure
from  Athens  does  not  appear  to  have  been  in  any
sorfhastened  or  abrupt.  It  is  said,  "After  these
things,"  viz.  his  disputation  with,  the  Jews,  his
conferences  with  the  philosophers,  his  discourse  at
Areopagus,  and  the  gaining  of  some  converts,  "-be
departed  from  Athens  and  came  to  Corinth."  It
b  not  hinted  that  he  quitted  Athens  before  the
time  that  he  had  intended  to  leave  it;  it  is  not  sug-
gested that  he  was  driven  from»thence,  as  he  was
from  many  cities,  by  tumults  or  persecutions,  or
because  his  fife  was  no  longer  safe.  Observe  then
the  particulars  which  the  history  does  notice-
that  Paul  had  ordered  Timothy  to  follow  him  with-
out delay,  that  he  waited  at  Athens  on  purpose
that  Timothy  might  come  up  with  him,  that  he
staid  there  as  long  as  his  own  choice  led  him  to
continue.  Laying  these  circumstances  which  the
history  does  disclose  together,  it  is  highly  probable
that  Timothy  came  to  the  apostle  at  Athens,  a
fact  which  the  epistle,  we  have  wen,  virtually  as-
serts when  it  makes  Paul  send  Timothy  back
from  Athens  to  Thessalonica.  The  sending
back  of  Timothy  into  Macedonia  accounts  also
for  his  not  coming  to  Corinth  till  after  Pan]  had
been  fixed  in  that  city  for  some  considerable  time.
Paul  had  found  out  Aquila  arid  Priscilla,  abode
with  them  and  wrought,  being  of  the  same  craft ;
and  reasoned  in  the  synagogue  every  Sabbath  day,
and  persuaded  the  Jews  ana  the  Greeks,  Acts,  ch.
zviiL  1 — 5.  All  this  passed  at  Corinth  before  Si-
huTand  Timothcus  were  come  from  Macedonia,


Acts,  ch.-xvHL  5.  If  this-  was  the  first  time,  of
their  coming  up  with  him  after  their  separation  at
Berea,  there  is  nothing  to  account  for  a  delay  so
contrary  to  what  appears  from  the  history  itself  to
have  been  St  Paul's  pfatn  and  expectation.  Thin
is  a  conformity  of  a  peculiar  species.  The  epistle
discloses  a  feet  which  is  not  preserved  in  the  his-
tory ;  but  which  makes  what  is  said  in  the  history
more  significant,  probable,  and  consistent  The
history  bears  marks  of  an  omission ;  the  epistle  by
reference  furnishes  a  circumstance  which  supplies
that  omission.

Mi.  v.

Chap.ii.  14.  "For  ye,  brethren,  became  fol-
lowers of  the  churches  of  God  which  in  Judea  are
in  Christ  Jesus;  for  ye  also  have  suffered  like
things  of  your  own  countrymen,  even  as  they
have  of  the  Jews.''

To  a  reader  of  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  it
might  seem,  at  first  sight,  that  the  persecutions
which  the  preachers  and  converts  of  Christianity
underwent,  were  suffered  at  the  hands  of  their  old
adversaries  the  Jews.  But  if  we  attend  carefully
to  the  accounts  there  delivered,  we  shall  observe:
that,  though  the  opposition  made  to  the  Gospel
.usually  originated  from  the  enmity  of  the  Jews,
yet  in  almost  all  places  the  Jews  went  about  to
accomplish  their  purpose,  by  stirring  up  the  Gen-
-tile  inhabitants  against  their  converted  country-
men. Out  of  Judea  they  had  not  power  to  do
much  mischief  in  any  other  way.  This  was  the
case  at  Thessalonica  in  particular:  f'The  Jews
which  believed  not,  moved  with  envy,  set  all  the
city  in  an  uproar,"  Acts,  ch.  xvii.  ver.  5.  It  was
the  same  a  short  time  afterwards  at  Berea*  "  When
the  Jews  of  Thessalonica  had  knowledge  that  the
word  of  God  was  preached  of  Paul  at  Berea,  they
came  thither  also,  and  stirred  up  the  people."  Acts,
ch.  xviL  13.  Arid  before  this  our  apostle  had  met
with  a  like  species  of  persecution,  in  his  progress
through  the  Lesser  Asia:  in  every  city  "the  unbe-
lieving Jews  stirred  up  the  Gentiles,  and  made
their  minds  evil-affected  against  the  brethren,'*
Acts,  ch.  xiv.  2.  The  epistle  therefore  represents
the  case  accurately  as  the  history  states  it.  It  was
the  Jews  always  who  set  on  foot  the  persecutions
against  the  apostles  and  their  followers.  He  speaks
truly  therefore  of  them,  when  he  says  in  this  epis- '
tie,  "  they  both  killed  the  Lord  Jesus  and  their
own  prophets^  and  haye  persecuted  us — forbidding
us  to  speak  unto  the^  Gentiles  "  u\  15, 16:  But
out  of  Judea  it  was  at  the  hands  of  the  Gentiles,
it  was  "  of  their  own  countrymen,"  that  the  inju-
ries they  underwent  were  immediately  sustained :
"  Ye  have  suffered  like  things  x>f  your  own  coun-
trymen, even  as  they  have  of  the  JewB."

No.  VI.


The  apparent  d

and  the  r  -^ —  Al


ancies  between  our  epistle
of  magnitude  sufficient  to.
repel  the  imputation  *of  confederacy  or  transcrip-
tion (in  which  view  they  form  a  part  -of  our  -argu-
ment,) are  neither  numerous,  nor  very  difficult  to
.•reconcile.  One  of  these  may  be  observed  in  the
ninth  and  tenth  verses  of  the  second  chapter:
"For  ye  remember,  brethren,  our  labour  and
travail ;  for  labouring  night  and  day,  because  we
would  not  be  chargeable  unto  any  of  you,  we
preached  unto  yon  the  Gospel  of  God.  Ye  are
witnesses,  and  God  also,  how  holily,  and  justly,
and  unbhimeaHy  we  behaved  ounetfas  among


§14


HORJE  PAULINA


JW  that  beBeve.''  .  A  person  who  M«Kk  this  pas-
sage is  naturally  lad  by  it  to  suppose,  that  the
writer  had  dwelt  at  Thessatonica  tor  some  con-
siderable time :  yet  of  St.  Paul's  ministry  in  that
city,  the  history  gives  no  other  account  than  the
following  :  that  he  came  to  Thessalonica,  where
was  a  synagogue  of  the  Jews :  that,  as  his  man-
ner was,  he  went  in  unto  them,  and  three  Sabbath
day*  reasoned  with  them  out  of  the  scriptures :
that  some  of  them  believed,  and  consorted  with
Paul  and  Silas."  The  history  then  proceeds  to
tell  us,  that  the  Jews  which  benevednot,  set  the  city
In  an  uproar,  and  assaulted  the  house  of  Jason,
where  Paul  and  his  companions  lodged ;  that  the
consequence  of  this  outrage  was,  that  "  the  bre-
thren immediately  sent  away  Paul  and  Silas  by
night  unto  Berea,"  Acts.  ch.  zvii.  1—10.  From
the  mention  of  his  preaching  three  Sabbath  days
in  the  Jewish  synagogue,  and  from  the  want  of
any  further  specification  of  his  ministry,  it  has
usually  been  taken  for  granted  that  Paul  did  not
continue  at  ThesssJonica  more  than  three  weeks.
This,  however,  is  inferred  without  necessity.  H
appears  to  have  been  St.  Paul's  practice,  m  al-
most every  place  that  he  came  to,  upon  his  first
arrival  to  repair  to  the  synagogue.  He  thought
himself  bound  to  propose  the  Gospel  to  the  Jews
first;  agreeably  to  what  he  declared  at  Antioch  in
Pisidia:  "  it  was  necessary  that  the  word  of  God
should  first  have  been  spoken  to  you,"  Acts,  ch.
ami.  46.  If  the  Jews  rejected  his  jninistry,  he
quitted  the  synagogue,  and  betook  himself  to  a
Gentile  audience.  At  Corinth,  upon  his  first
coining  thither,  he  reasoned  in  the  synagogue  every
Sabbath ; "  but  when  the  Jews  opposed  themselves,
and  blasphemed,  he  departed  thence,  expressly
tdlinff  them,  "  from  henceforth  I  will  go  unto  the
Gentiles:  arid  he  remained  in  that  city  ayear  and
six  months,"  Acts,  ch.  xviii.  6 — 11.  At  Ephe-
sus,  in  like  manner,  for  the  space  of  three  months
he  went  into  the  synagogue ;  but  "when  divers
were  hardened  and  believed  not,  but  spake  evil  of
that  way,  he  departed  from  them  and  separated
the  disciples,  disputing  daily  in  the  school  of  one
Tyrannus;  and  this  continued  by  the  space  of  two
years."  Acts,  ch.  xix.  9,  10.  Upon  inspecting
the  history,  I  see  nothing  in  it  which  negatives
t&e  supposition,  that  St  Paul  pursued  the  same
plan  at  Thessalonica  which  he  adopted  in  other
places ;  and  that  though  he  resorted  to  the  syna-
gogue only  three  Sabbath  days,  yet  he  remained
In  the  city,  and  in  the  exercise  of  his  ministry
amongst  the  Gentile  citizens,  much  longer;  and
until  the  success  of  his  preaching  had  provoked
the  Jews  to  excite  the  tumult  and  insurrection  by
which  he  was  driven  away.

Another  seeming  discrepancy  is  found  in  the
ninth  verse  of  the  first  chapter  of  the  epistle;
"  For  they  themselves  show  or  us  what  manner  of
entering  in  we  had  unto  you,  and  how  ye  turned
.to  Chafrom  idol*  to  serve  the  living  and  true
God."  This  text  contains  an  assertion,  that,  by
means  af  St  Paul's  ministry  at  Thessalonica,
many  idolatrous  Gentiles  had  Seen  brought  over  to
Christianity.  Yet  the  history,  in  describing  the
effects  of  that  ministry,  only  says,  that  "some  of
the  Jews  believed,  and  of  the  devout  Greeks  a
creaf  multitude,  and  of  the  chief  women  not  a
fcw,"  ch.  xvii.  4.  The  devout  Greeks  were  those
who  already  worshipped  the  one  true  God :  and
therefore  could  not  be  said,  by  embracing  Chris-
tianity,«  to  be  turned  to  God  from  idols?


This  is  the  difficulty.  The  answer  maybe
assisted  by  the  following  observations:  The
Alexandrian  and  Cambridge  manuscripts  read  (for

mm*  exav«*  *%k*  wKnUf  in  which  reading  they  are
also  confirmed  by  the  Vulgate  Latin.  And  this
reading  is,  in  my  opinion,  strongly  supported  by
the  considerations,  first  that  •>  c.Ce^.ro.  alone,  £  e.
without  Exxuftf r  is  used  in  this  sense  in  the  same
chapter — Paul  being  come  to  Athens,  *<ixty*T«  *

tii rvvmywyn tojj I«wf«i«t{ mi T»«f nCi/uvatf  •

secondly,  that  «••  €«,*»«•  and  'Bxxwr  no  where
come  together.  The  expression  is  redundant
The  «i  r«Co^M4  must  be  'exmw.  Thirdly,  that
the  »••  is  much  more  likely  to  have  been  left  out
incuria  menus  than  to  have  been  put  in.  Or
after  all,  if  we  be  not  allowed  to  change  the
present  reading,  which  is  undoubtedly  retained
by  a  great  plurality  of  copies,  may  not  the  pas-
sage in  the  history  be  considered  as  describ-
ing only  the  effects  of  St.  Paul's  discourses  dur-
ing the  three  Sabbath  days  in  which  he  preached
in  the  synagogue  ?  and  may  it  not  be  true,  as  we
have  remarked  above,  that  his  application  to  the
Gentiles  at  large,  and  his  success  amongst  them,
was  posterior  to  this  1


CHAPTER  X.

The  Second  Epistle  to  the  Thestalonian*.

No.  I.


It  may  seem  odd  to  allege  obscurity  itself  as  an
argument,  or  to  draw  a  proof  in  favour  of  a  writ-
ing from  that  which  is  naturally  considered  as  the
principal  defect  in  its  composition.  The  present
epistle,  however,  furnishes  a  passage,  hitherto
unexplained,  and  probably  inexplicable  by  us,  the,
existence  of  which,  under  the  darkness  and  dif-#
Acuities  that  attend  it,  can  be  accounted  for  only
by  the  supposition  of  the  epistle  being  genuine  ;
and  upon  that  supposition  is  accounted  for  with
great  ease.  The  passage  which  I  allude  to  is
found  in  the  second  chapter :  u  That  day  shall
not  come,  except  there  come  a  foiling  away  first,
and  that  man  of  sin  be  revealed,  the  son  of  perdi-
tion, who  opposeth  and  exalted  himself  above  ai|
that  is  called  God,  or  that  is  worshipped ;  so  that
he  as  God,  sitteth  in  the  temple  of  God,  showing
himself  that  he  is  God. Remember  ye  not  that

WHEN  I  WA8  TET  WITH  YOC  I  TOLD  TOD  THE&B

things.'?  And  now  ye  know  what  withholdeth
that  he  might  be  revealed  in  hi*,  time ;  for  the
mystery  of  iniquity  doth  already  work,  only  he  that
now  letteth  will  let,  until  he  be  taken  out  of  the
way;  and  then  shall  that  wicked  be  revealed,
whom  the  Lord  -shall  consume  with  the  spirit  of
his  mouth,  and  shall  destroy  with  the  brightness
of  hi*  coming."  It  were  superfluous  to  prove,
because  it  is  in  vain  to  deny,  that  this  passage  is
involved  in  great  obscurity,  more  especially  the
clauses  distinguished  by  Italics.  -  Now  the  obser-
vation-! have  to  offer  is  founded  upon  this,  that
the  passage  expressly  refers  to  a  conversation
which  the  author  had  previously  holden  with  the
ThessakHiians  upon  the  same  subject;  "  Remem-
ber ye  not,  that  when  I  was  yet  with  you  /  told
you  these  thing*  ?  And  now  ye  know  what  with-
holdeth." If  such  conversation  actually  passed ;
if,  whilst  "he  was  yet  with  them,  he  told  them
those  things,"  then  it  follows  that  the  epistle  is


SECOND  EPISTLE  THE  THESSALONIANS.


911


authentic.  And  of  the  reality  of  this  conversa-
tion it  appears  to  be  a  proof,  that  what  is  said  in
the  epistle  might  be  understood  by  those  who  had
been  present  to  such  conversation,  and  yet  be  in-
capable of  being  explained  by  any  other.  No
man  writes  unintelligibly  on  purpose.  Bat  It  may
easily  happen,  that  a  part  ofa  letter  which  relates
to  a  subject,  upon  which  the  parties  had  conversed
together  before,  which  refers  to  what  had  been
before  said,  winch  is  in  truth  a  portion  or  continu-
ation of  a  former  discourse,  may  be  utterly  with-
out meaning  to  a  stranger  who  "should  pick  up
the  letter  upon  the  toad,  and  yet  be  perfectly  clear
to  the  person  to  whom  it  is  directed,  and  with
whom  the  previous  communication  had  passed.
And  if,  in  a  letter  which  thus  accidentally  fell
into  my  hands,  I  found  a  passage  expressly  refer-
ring to  a  former  conversation,  and  difficult  to  be
explained  without  knowing  that  conversation,  I
should  consider  this  very  difficulty  as  a  proof  that
the  conversation  had  actually  passed,  and  conse-
quently that  the  letter  contained  the  real  corres-
pondence of  real  persons.

No.  H.

Chap.  m.  8.  "Neither  did  we  eat  any  man's
bread  lor  nought)  but  wrought  with  labour  night
and  day,  that  we  might  not  be  chargeable  to  any
of  you :  not  because  we  have  no  power,  but  to
make  ourselves  an  ensample  unto  you  .to  fol-
low." '

In  a  letter,  purporting  to  have  been  written  to
another  of  the  Macedonian  churches,  we  find  die
following  declaration:

"Now,  ye  Philippians,  know  also  that  in  the
beginning  of  the  Gospel,  when  I  departed  from
Macedonia,  no  church  communicated  with  me
a»  concerning  giving  and  receiving  but  ye
enta"

The  conformity  between  these  two  passages  is
.  sarong  and  plain.  They  confine  the  transaction
to  the  same  period.  The  Epistle  to  the  Phihp.
mans  refers  to  what  passed  "in  the  beginning  of
the  Gospel"  that  is  to  say,  during  the  first  preach-
ing of  the  Gospel  on  that  side  of  the  iEgean  sea.
The  Epistle  to  the  Thessalonians  speaks  of  the
apostle's  conduct  in  that  city  upon  "his  first
entrance  in  unto  them,"  which.the  history  informs
us  was  in  the  course  of  his  first  visit  to  tW  penin-
sula of  Greece.

As  St  Paul  tells  the  Philippians,  "that  no
church  communicated  with  him,  as  concerning
giving  and  receiving,  but  they  only,"  he  could  not,
consistently  with  the  truth  of  this  declaration,
have  received  any  thing  from  the  neighbouring
church  of  Thessalonica.  What  thus  appears  by
general  implication  in  an  epistle  to  another  church,
when  he  writes  to  the  Thessalonians  themselves,


to  any  of  you.'

The  texts  here  eked  further  also  exhibit  a  mark
of  conformity  with  what  St.  Paul  is  made  to  say  of
himself  in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles.  The  apostle
not  only  reminds  the  Thessalonians  that  he  bad
not  been  chargeable  to  any  of  them,  but  he  states
likewise  the  motive  which  dictated  this  reserve :
"  not  because  we  have  not  power,  but  to  make
ourselves  an  ensample  unto  you  to  follow  us,"
ch.  iii.  9.  This  conduct,  and,  what  is  much
i  he  bad


more  precise,  the  end  which  .


1  in  view  by  it,


was  the  very  same  as  that  which  Che  history  at-
tributes to  St  Paul  in  a  discourse.  Which  it  repre-
sents him  to  have  addressed  to  the  elders  of  the
church  of  Ephesus:  ''Yea,  ye  yourselves  also
'know  that  these  hands  have  ministered  unto  my
necessities,  and  to  them  that  were  with  me.  I
have  showed  you  all  things,  how,  that  so  labour-
ing ye  ought  to  support  the  weak,"  Acts,  ch.  XX.
34.  The  sentiment  in  the  epistle  and  in  the
speech  is  in  both  parts  of  it  so  much  alike,  and
yet  the  words  which  convey  it  show  so  little  of
imitation  or  even  of  resemblance,  that  the  agree-
ment cannot  well  be  explained  without  supposing
the  speech  and  the  letter  to  have  realty  proceeded
from  the  same  person. , .

No.  III.

Our  reader  remembers  the  passage  in  the  First
Epistle  to  the  Thessalonians,  in  which  St  Paul
spoke  of  the  coming  of  Christ:  "  This  we  say
unto  you  by  the  word  of  the  Lord,  that  we  which
are  alive,  and  remain  unto  the  coming  of  the  Lord,
shall  not  prevent  them  which  are  asleep:  for  the
Lord  himself  shall  descend  from  heaven,  and  the
dead  in  Christ  shall  rise  first ;  then  we  which  are
alive  and  remain,  shall  be  caught  up  together  with
themin  the  clouds,  and  so  shall  we  be  ever  with  the
Lord.  But  ye.  brethren,  are  not  in  darkness,  that
that  day  should  overtake  you  as  a  thief,"  1  These,
iv.  15— 17t  and  ch.  v.  4.  It  should  seem  that  the
Thessalonians,  or  some  however  amongst  them,
had  from  this  passage  conceived  an  opinion  (and
that  not  very  unnaturally)  that  the  coming  of
Christ  was  to  take  place  insuu\tly,  on  tnrrnxip  -*
and  that  this  persuasion  had  produced,  as  it  well
might,  much  agitation  in  the  church.  The  apos-
tle therefore  now  writes,  amongst  other  purposes,
to  quiet  this  alarm,  and  to  rectify  the  misconstruc-
tion that  had  been  put  upon  his  words :-— "  Now
we  beseech  you;  brethren,  by  the  coming  of  our
Lord  Jesus  Christ  and  by  our  gathering  together
unto  him,  that  ye  be  not  soon  shaken  in  mind,  or
be  troubled,  neither  by  spirit,  nor  by  word,  nor  by
letter  as  from  us,  as  that  the  day  of  Christ  is  at
hand."  •  If  the  allusion  which  we  contend. for  be
admitted,  namely,'  if  it  be  admitted,  that  the  pas-
sage in  the  second  epistle  relates  to  the  passage  in
the  first,  it  amounts  to  a  considerable  proof  of  the
genuineness  of  both  epistles.  I  have  no  concep-
tion, because  I  know  no  example,  of  such  a  device
in  a  forgery,  as  first  to  frame  an  ambiguous  passage
in  a  letter,  then  to  represent  the  persons  to  whom
the  letter  is  addressed  as  mistaking  the  meaning
of  the  .passage,  and  lastly,  to  write  a  second  letter
in  order  to  correct  this  mistake.

I  have  said  that  this  argument  arises  out  of  the
text,  if  the  allusion  be  admitted ;  for  I  am  net  ig-
norant that  many  expositors  understand  the  pas-
sage in  the  second  epistle,  as  referring  to  some
forged  letters,  which  had  been  produced  in  St
Paul's  name,  and  in  which  the  apostle  had  been
made  to  say  that  the  coming  of  Christ  was  then  at
hand.  ,In  defence,  however,  of  the  explanation
which  we  propose,  the  reader  is  desired  to  observe,

1.  The  strong  fact,  that  there  exists  a  passage
in  the  first  epistle,  to  which  that  in  the  second  is
capable  of  being  referred;  t.  e.  which  accounts  for
the  error  the  writer  b  solicitous  to  remove.  Had
no  other  epistle  than  the  second  been  extant)  and


*  Ot*  irnrrnxtv,  nempe  hoc  anno,  says  Grotius,  ■»■••-
thkiv  his  dicitur  de  ra  presemi,  ut  Rom.  viii.  38.  1  Cor.
111. »  'GeL  i.  4. Hab.ix.9.


016


HORJB  PATJLINjE.


had  it  under  these  drcnnjstances  come  to  be  con-
sidered, whether  the  text  before  us  related  to  a
forged  epistle  pr  to  some  misconstruction  of  a  true
one,  many  conjectures  and  many  probabilities
might  have  been  admitted  in  the  inquiry,  which
can  nave  little  weight  when  an  epistle  is  produced,
containing  the  tery  sort  of  passage  we  were  seek-
ing, that  is,  a  passage  liable  to  the  misinterpreta-
tion which  the  apostle  protests  against.

3.  That  the  clause  which  introduces  the  pas-
sage in  the  second  epistle  bears  a  particular  affinity
to  what  is  found  in  the  passage  cited  from  the  first
epistle.  The  clause  is  this :  "  We  beseech  you,
brethren,  by  the  coming  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,
and  by  our  gathering  together  unto  Aim"  Now,
in  the  first  epistle,  the  description  of  the  coming  of
Christ  is  accompanied  with  the  mention  of  this
very  circumstance  of  ins  saints  being  collected
tound  him.  "  The  Lord  himself  shall  descend
from  heaven  with  a  shout,  with  the  voice  of  the
archangel  and  with  the  trump  of  God,  and  the
dead  in  Christ  shall  rise'first ;  then  we  which  are
alive  and  remain,  shall  be  caught  up  together  with
them  in  the  clouds,  to  meet  the  Lord  in  the  air,"
1  These,  chap.  iv.  16,  17.  This  I  suppose  to  be
the  "  gathering  together  unto  him"  intended  in
the  second  epistle :  and  that  the  author,  when  he
used  these  words,  retained  in  his  thoughts  what
he  had  written  on  the  subject  before.

3.  The  second  epistle  is  written  in  the  joint
name  of  Paul,  SUvanus,  and  Timotheus,  and  it
cautions  the  Thessalonians  against  being  misled
"  by  letter  as  from  us"  (•«  r*  „*•«.)  Do  not  these
words,  it  u»* ,  appropriate  the  reference  to  some
writing  which  bore  the  name  of  these  three  teach-
ers,? Now  this  circumstance,  which  is  a  very
close  one.  belongs  to  the  epistle  at  present  in  our
hands;  for  the  epistle  which  we  call  the  First
Epistle  to  the  Thessalonians  contains  these  names
in  its  superscription.

4.  The  words  in  the  original,  as  far  as  they  are
material  to  be  stated,  are  these : «««  to  m  *-«%««(  r»-

X«v6*ir«i  uf*m(  «r«  -rev  »00(,jii|T«  $ponrhn,ftnT$  *»*  arm-
HWVf)  nnr$  itm  Xoy«v,  ftfrt  it  uri«Teft.*Ct  **f  *'  1f*"*%  »t

on  ivat-TftMv  i|  >hiup*  t«o  if  lo-rew.  Under  the  weight
of  the  preceding  observations,  may  not  the  words

juti  itm  Koyw,  ftnrt  it  •  jtictoA*;,  •(  It  m»»,  be 000-

etrued  to  signify  quasi  no*  quid  tale  out  dixeri-
-  mist*  out  scnpserimus*  mtimating  that  their  words
had  been  mistaken,  and  that  they  had  in  troth
•aid  er  written  no  such  thing  %


CHAPTER  XL

The  First  Epistle  to  Timothy,

Prom  the  third  verse  of  the  first  chapter,  "  as  I
besought  thee  to  abide  still  at  Ephesus  when  I


•  Should  a  contrary  interpretation  be  preferred,  I  do
not  think  that  it  implies  the  conclusion  that  a  false
epistle  had  then  been  published  in  the  apostle's  name,  ft
will  completely  satisfy  the  allusion  in  the  text  to  allow,
that  some  one  or  other  at  Thessalonica  had  pretended
to  have  been  told  by  St.  Paul  and  his  companion*,  or  to
have  seen  a  letter  from  them,  in  which  they  had  said,
that  the  day  of  Christ  was  at  hand.  In  like  manner  as,
Acts,  xv.  1, 34,  it  is  recorded  that  some  had  pretended  to
have  received  instructions  from  the  church  at  Jerusa-
lem, which  had  been  received,  "  to  whom  they  gave  no
such  commandment."  And  thus  Dr.  Benson  interpreted
the  passage  A^-rt  5f»n«-8*«f  >i»t«  £*«  jtviu^*to{,  ^t»  Si*
£•»-«•,  *nr«  it  iw*vT9Kn(,  •<  it  KfA.v,  "nor  be  dismayed
by  any  revelation,  or  discourse,  or  epistle,  which  any
one  shall  pretend  to  have  heard  or  received  from  us."


went  into  Macedonia/*  it  is  evident  that  tins  epis-
tle was  written  soon  after  St  Paul  had  gone  to
Macedonia  from  Ephesus.  Dr.  Benson' fixes  its
date  to  the  time  of  St.  Paul's  journey  recorded  in
the  beginning  of  the  twentieth  chapter  of  the  Acts  :
"  And  after  the  uproar  (excited  by  Demetrius  at
Ephesus)  was  ceased,  Paul  called  unto  him  the
disciples,  and  embraced  them,  and  departed  for  to
go  into  Macedonia."  And  in  this  opinion  Dr.
Benson  is  followed  by  Michaehe,  as  he  was  pre-
ceded by  the  greater  pert  of  the  commentators  who
have  considered  the  question.  There  is,  however,
one  objection  to  the  hypothesis,  which  these  learn-
ed men  appear  to  me  to  have  overlooked  ;-and  it  is
no  other  than  this,  that  the  superscription  of  the
Second  Epistle  to  the  Corinthians  seems  to  prove,
that  at  the  time  St.  Paul  is  supposed  by  them  io
have  written  this  epistle  to  Timothy,  Timothy  in
truth  was  with  St.  Paul  in  Macedonia.  Paul,  aa
it  is  related  in  the  Acts,  left  Ephesus  "  for  to  go
into  Macedonia."  When  he  had  got  into  Mace-
donia, he  wrote  his  Second  Epistle  -to  the  Corin-
thians. Concerning  this  point  there  exists  tittle
variety  of  opinion.  It  is  plainly  indicated  by  the
contents  of  the  epistle.  It  is  also  strongly  implied
that  the  epistle  was  written  soon  after  the  apostle's
arrival  in  Macedonia;  for  he  begins  his  letter  by  a
train  of  reflection,  referring  to  his  persecutions  fin
Asia  as  to  recent  transactions,  as  to  dangers  from
which  he  had  lately  been  delivered.  But  in  the
salutation  with  which  the  epistle  opens,  Timothy
woe  joined  with  St.  Paul,  and  consequently  could
not  at  that  time  be  "left  behind  at  Ephesae."
And  as  to  the  only  solution  of  the  difficulty  which
can  be  thought  of,  viz.  that  Timothy,  though  he
was  left  behind  at  Ephesus  upon  St  Paurs  de-
parture from  Asia,  yeV  might  follow  mm  so  soon
after,  as  to  come  up  with  the  apostle  in  Macedo-
nia, before  he  wrote  his  Epistle  to  the  Corinthians ;
that  supposition  is  inconsistent  with  the  terms  and
tenor  or  the  epistle  throughout.  For  the  writer
speaks  uniformly  of  his  intention  to  return  to
Timothy  at  Ephesus,  and  not  of  his  expecting
Timothy  to  come  to  him.  in  Macedonia :  *'  These
things  write  I  unto  thee,  hoping  to  come  unto  thee
shortly  ;  but  if  I  tarry  long,  that  thou  mayest  know
how  thou  oughtest  to  behave  thyself/'  ch.  i£  14,
15.  "  Till  I  come,  give  attendance  to  reading,  to
exhortation,  to  doctrine,"  ch.  i*.  13.

Since,  therefore,  the  leaving  of  Timothy  behind
at  Ephesus,.  when  Paul  went  into  Macedonia,
suits  not  with  any  journey  into  Macedonia,  re-
corded in  the  Acts,  I  concur  with  Bishop  Pearson,
in 'placing  the  date  of  this  epistle,  and  the  journey
referred  to  in  it,  at  a  penod  subsequent  to  St.
Paul's  first  imprisonment  at  Rome,  and  conse-
quently subsequent  to  the  era  up  to  which  the
Acts  of  the  Apostles  brings  his  history.  The
only  difficulty  whicE  attends  our  opinion  is,  that
St  Paul  must,  according  to  us,  have  come  to  Ephe-
sus after  his  liberation  at  Rome,  contrary  aa  it
should  seem,  to  what  he  foretold  to  the  Epheaian
elders,  "that  they  should  see  his  face  no  more."
And  it  is  to  save  the  infallibility  of  thir-prediction,
and  for  no  other  reason  of  weight,  that  an  earlier
date  is  assigned  to  this  epistle.  The  prediction
itself,  however,  when  considered  in  connexion
with  the  circumstances  under  which  it  was  de-
livered, does  not  seem  to  demand  so  much  anxiety.
The  words  in  question  are  found  in  the  twenty-
fifth  verse  of  the  twentieth  chapter  of  the  Acta :
"  And  now,  behold,  I  know  that  ye  all,  among


FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.


817


whom  1  have  gone  preaching  the  kingdom  of  God,
shall  see  my  face  no  more." In  the  twenty-second
and  twenty-third  venae*  of  the  same  chapter;  t.  e.
'two  verses  before,  the  apostle  makes  this  declara-
tion :  "  And  now,  behold,  I  go  bound  in  the  spirit
unto 'Jerusalem,  not  knowing  the  things  that  shall
befall  me  there :  save  that  the  Holy  Qhost  witness-
etb  in  every  city,  saying  that  bonds  and  afflictions
abide  me."  This  u  witnessing  of  the  Holy  Ghost"
was  undoubtedly  prophetic  and  supernatural.  But
k  went  no  farther  than  to  fpreteH  that  bonds  and
afflictions  awaited  him. And  I  can  very  well  con-
ceive, that  this  might  be  all  which  was  communi-
cated to  the  apostle  by  extraordinary  revelation,
and  that  the  rest  was  the  conclusion  of  his  own
mind,  the  desponding  inference  which  he  drew
from  strong  and  repeated  intimations  of  approach-
ing danger.  And  the  expression  "  1  know,"  which
St.  Paul  here  uses,  does  not,  perhaps,  when  ap-
plied to  future  events  affecting  himself,  convey  an
assertion  so  positive  and  absolute  as  we  may  at
first  sight  apprehend. In  the  first  chapter  or  the
Epistle  to  the  Phifippians,  and  the  twenty-fifth
verse,"  I  know,"  says  he,  "  that  I  shall  abide  and
continue  with  you  all,  for  your  furtherance  and
joy  of  faith." "Notwithstanding  this  strong  decla-
ration, in  the  second  chapter  arid  twenty-third
Terse  of  this  same  epistle,  and  speaking  also  of  the
'very  same  event,  he  is  content  to  use  a  language
of  some  doubt  and  uncertainty :  "  Him  therefore  I
hope  to  send  •presently,  so  soon  as  I  shall  see  how
it  will  go  with  me. But  /  trust  in  the  Lord  that
I  also  myself  shall  come  shortly." Arid  a  few
verses  preceding  these,  he  not  only  seems  to  doubt
of  his  safety,  but  almost  to  despair ;  to  contemplate
the'  possibility  at  least  of  his  condemnation  and
martyrdom:  "Yea,  and  if  1  be  offered  upon  the
sftfrifice  and  service  of  your  faith,  I  joy  aha  rejoice
with  you  all." *

' No.  I.

But.ean  we  show  that  St.  Paul  visited  Ephesus
after  bis  liberation  at  Rome  ?  or  rather,  can  we
collect  any  hints  from  his  other  letters  which  make
it  probable  that  he  did!  If  we  can,  then  we  have
a  coincidence.  If  we  cannot,  we  have  only  an
unauthorised  supposition,  to  which  the  exigency
of  the  case  compels  us  to  resort. Now,  for  this

-  purpose,  let  us  examine  the  Epistle  to  the  Philip-
pians  and  the  Epistle  to  Philemon. These  two

,  epistles  purport  to  be  written  whilst  St.  Paul  was
yet  a  prisoner  at  Rome.  To  the  Philippians  he
writes  as  follows:  "  I  trust  in  the  Lord  that  I  also
myself  shall  come  shortly."  To  Philemon,-  who
was  a  Colossian,-he  gives  this  direction:  "But
withal,  prepare  me  also  a  lodging,  for  I-  trust  that
through  your  prayers  t  shall  be  given  unto  you."
An  inspection  of  the  map  will  show  us  that  Co-
losse was  a  city  of  the  Lesser  Asia,  lying  eastward,
and  at  no  great  distance  from  Ephesus.  Philippi
was  on  the  other,  i.  e.  the  western  side  of  the
iEgean  sea.  If  the  apostle  executed  his  purpose ;
i£,  in  pursuance  of  the  intention  expressed  in  his
letter  to  Philemonj  he  came  to  Colosse  spon  after
be  was  set  at  liberty  at  Rome,  it  is  very  improba-
ble that  lie  would  omit  to  visit  Ephesus,  which  lay
so  near  to  it,  and  where  he'  had  spent  three  years
of  his  "ministry.  As  he  was  also  under  a  promise
to  the  church  of  Philippi  to  see  them  "  shortly ;"
if  he  passed  from  Colosse' to  Philippi,  or  from
Philjppi  to  Colosse,  he  could  hardly  avoid  taking
Ephesus  in  hii  way.

2E


^No.  II.


Chap;  v.  9. "  Let  not  a  widow  he  taken  into
the  number  under  threescore  years  old." -  -

.  This  accords  with  the  account  delivered  in  the
sixth  chapter  of  (he  Acts.  "  And  in  those  days,
when  the  number  of  the  disciples  was  multiplied,
there  arose  a  murmuring  of  the  Grecians  against
the  Hebrews,  because  their  widows  were'negUcted
in  the  daily  ministration"  It  appears  that, from
the  first  formation  of  the  Christian  church,  provi-
sion was  made  out  of  the  public  funds  of  the  socie-
ty for  the  indigent  widow*  who  belonged  to  it.
The  history,  we  have  seen,  distinctly  records  the
existence  of  such  an  institution  at  Jerusalem,  a
few  years  after  our  Lord's  ascension;  and  is  led
.  to  the  mention  of  it  very  incidentally,  viz.  by  a
dispute,  of  Which  it  was  the  occasion,  and  which
produced  important  consequences  to  the  Christian
community.  The  epistle,  without  being  suspected
of  borrowing  from  the  history,  refers,  briefly  in-
deed, but  decisively,  to  a  similar  establishment,
subsisting  some  years  afterwards  at  Ephesus.
This  agreement  indicates  that  both  writings  were
founded  upon  real  circumstances.

But,  in  this  article,,  the  material  thing  to  be  no-
ticed is  the  mode  of  expression :  "  Let  not  a  widow
be  taken  into  the  nuniber." — No  previous  account
or  explanation^  is  given,  to  which  these  words,
M  into  the  number,"  can  refer ;  but  the  direction
comes  concisely  and  unpreparedly.  "  Let  not  a
widow  be  taken  into  the  number.*  Now  this-  is
the  way  in  which  a  man  writes,  who  is  conscious
that  he  is  writing  to  persons  already  acquainted
with  the  subject  of  his  letter ;  and  who,  he  knows;
will  readily  apprehend  and  apply  what  be  says  by
virtue  of  their  being  so  acquainted :  but  it  js  not
the  way  in  which  a  man  writes  upon  any  other
occasion;  and  least  of  aH,  in  which  a/man  would
draw  up  a  feigned  letter,  or  introduce  a  supposi-
tious fact*-  .

No.  III.
Chapter  UL  2,3. "A  bishop  then  must  be


*  It  is  not  altogether  unconnected  with  our  general
purpose  to  remark,  in  the  passage  before  us,  top  selection
and  reserve  which  St.  Paul  recommends  to  the  gover-
nors of  the  church  of  Ephcpus  in  the  bestowing  relief
upon  the  poor,  because  it  refutes  a  calumny  which  has
been  insinuated,  that  the  liberality  of  the  first  Christians
was  an  artifice  to  catch  converts ;  or^one  of  the  tempta-
tions, however,  by  which  (he  idle  and  mendicaqt  were
drawn  into  this  society:  "  Let  not  a  widow  be  taken  in-
to-the  number  under  threescore  years  old,  having  been
the  wife  of  one  man,  well  reported  of  for  good  works :
if  she  have  brought  up  children,  4f  she  have  lodged
strangers,  if"  she  have  washed  the  saints'  feet,  if  she  have
relieved  the  affljcied^  if  she  have  diligently  followed
every  good  work.  But  the  younger  widows  refuse,"
v.  9, 10,  11.  And  in  another  olace,  "  If  any  man  or
woman  that  belie_yeth  have  widows,  let  them  relieve
them,  and  let  not  the  church  be  charged  ;  that  it  may .
relieve  them  that  are  widows  indeed.'1  And  to  the  same
effect,  or  rather  more  to  our  present  purpose,  the  apostle
writes  in  the  Second  Epistle  to  the  Thessalonians :
"  Even  when  we  were  with  you,  this  we  commanded
you,  that  if  any  would  not  work,  neither  should  he  eat,'*
i.  e.  at  the  public  expense.  "  For  we  hear  that  there  are
some  which  walk  among  you  disorderly,  twrking  n*t  at
all,  but  are  busy  bodies.  Now  them  that  are  such  we
command  and  exhort  by  our  Lord  Jesus  Chrint,  that
with  quietness  they  work,  and  eat  their  own  bread/*
Could  a  designing  or  dissolute  poor  take  advantage  of
bounty  regulated  with  so  much  caution ;  or  could  the
mind  which  dictated  those  sober  and  prudent  directions
be  influenced  in  his  recommendations  of  public  charity
by  any  other  than  the  properett  motives  of  beneficence  i
19


M8


HORiE  PAULINA.


blameless,  the  husband  of  one  wife,  vigilant,  sober,
of  good  behaviour,  given  to  hospitality,  apt  to
teach ;  not  given  to  wine,  no  striker,  not  greedy  of
filthy  lucre;  but  patient,  not  a  brawler,  not  covet-
ous; one  that  rufeth  well  his  own  house."

"  No  striker  :n  That  is  the  article  which  I  single
out  from  the  collection  as  evincing  the  antiquity
at  least,  if  not -the  genuineness,  of  the  epistle;
because  it  is  an  article  which  no  man  would  have
made  the  subject  of  caution  who  lived  in  an  ad-
vanced era  of  the  church.  .  It  agreed  with  the  in-
fancy of  the  society,  and  with  no  other  state  of  it.
AfterJhe  government  of  the  church  had  acquired
the  dignified  form  which  it  soon  and  naturally
assumed,  this  injunction  could  have  no  place.
Would*  a  person  who  lived  under  a  hierarchy,  such
as  the ;  Christian  hierarchy  became  when  it  had
settled  into  a  regular  establishment,  have  thought
it  necessary  to  prescribe  concerning  the  qualifica-
tion of  a  bishop,  "  that  he  should  be  no  striker  1"
And  this  injunction  would  be  eaually  alien  from
the  imagination  of -the  writer,  whether  he  wrote
in  his  own  character,  or  personated  that  of  an
apostle.

No.  IV.

Chap.  v.  23.  "  Drink  no  longer  water,  but  use
a  tittle  wine  for  thy  stomach's  sake  and  thine  often
infirmities."

Imagine  an  impostor  sitting  down  to  -forge  an
epistle  in  the  name  of  St..  Paul.  Is  it  credible  that
it  should  come  into  liis  head  to  give  such  a  direc-
tion as  tins ;  so  remote  from  every  thing  of  doc-
trine or  discipline,  every  thing  of  pubhc  concern
to  the  religion  or  the  church,  or  to  any  sect,  order,
or  party  in  it,  and  from  every  purpose  with  which
jBUch  an  epistle  could  be  written  1  It  seems  to  me
that  nothing  but  reality,  that  is,  the  real  valetudi-
nary situation  of  a  real  person,  CQuld  have  sug-
gested a  thought  of  so  domestic  a  nature.

But  if  the  peculiarity  of  the  advice  be  observable,
the  place  in  which' it  6tands  is  more  so.  The  con-
text is  this:  "Lay  hands  suddenly  on  no  man,
neither  be  partaker  of  other  men's  sins :  keep  thy-
self pore.  Drink  no  longer  water,  but  use  a  little
wine  for  thy  stomach's  sake  and  thine  often  in-
firmities. Some  men's  sins  are  open  beforehand,
going  before  to  judgment;  and  some  men  they
follow  after."  The  direction  to  Timothy  about
-his  diet  stands  between  ,two,  sentences,  as  wide,.
from  the  subject  as  possible.  The  train  of  thought
seems  to  be  Broken  to  let  it  in.  Now  when  does
this  happen  ?  II  happens  when  a  man  writes  as
he  remembers ;  when  he  puts  down  an  article  that
■occurs  the  moment  it  occurs,  test  he  should  after-
wards forget  it.  Of  this  the  passage  before  us
bears  strongly  the  appearance.  In  actual  letters,
in  the  negligence  of  real  correspondence,  examples
of  this  land  frequently  take  place ;  seldom,  I  be-
lieve, in /my  other  production.  For  the  moment
a  man  regards  what  he  writes  as  a  composition,
which  the  aiithor  of  a  forgery  would,  of  all  others,
be  the. first  to  do,  notions  of  order,  in  the  arrange-
ment and  succession  of  his  thoughts,  present
themselves  to  Jus  judgment,  and  guide  his  pen.

- '  No.  V.  '■ •

Chap.  i.  15,  16.  "  This  is  a  faithful  saying,
and  worthy  of  all  acceptation,  that  Christ  Jesus
came  into  the  world  to  save  sinners;  of  whom  ,1
am  chief.  Howbeit,  for  this  cause  I  obtained  mer-
cy, that  in  me  first  Jesus  Christ  might  show  forth


all  long-suffering,  for  a  P*Uern  to  t

should  hereafter  believe  in  hirn  to  life  everlasting."
\  What  was  the  mercy  which  St  Paul  here  com-
memorates, and  what  was  the  crime  of  which  he
accuses  himself,  is  apparent  from  the'  verses  im-
mediately preceding:  "1  thank. -Christ  Jesus  our
Lord,  who  hath  enabled  me,  for  that  he  counted
me  faithful,  putting  me  into  the  ministry^  who
was  before  a  blasphemer ,  and  a  persecutor,  and
injurious:  but  1  obtained  mercy,  because  I  did  it
ignorantly  in  unbelief,"  ch.  L  12,  13.  The  whole
quotation  plainly  refers  to  §t.  Paul's  original  en-
mity to  the  Christian  name,'  the  interposition  of
Providence  in  his  conversion,  and  his  subsequent
designation  to  the  ministry  of  the  Gospel;  and  by
this  reference  affirms  indeed'  the  substance  of  the
apostle's  history  delivered  in  the  Acts.  But  what
in  the  passage  strikes  my  mind  most  powerfully,
is  the  observation  that  is  raised  out  of  the  fact
"  For  this  cause  I  obtained  mercy,  that  in  me  first
Jesus  Christ  might  show  forth  all  long-suffering,
for  a  pattern  to  them  which  should  hereafter  be-
lieve on  him  to  life  everlasting."  .  It  is  a  just  and
solemn  reflection,  springing  from  the  circumstances
of  the  author's  conversion,  or  rather  from  the  im-
pression which  that  great  event  had  left  upon  his
memory.  It  will  be  said,  perhaps,  that  an  impos-
tor acquainted  with  St  Paul's  history,  may  have
put  such  a  sentiment  into  his  mouth ;  or,  what  is
the  same  thing,  into  a  letter  drawn  up  in  his  name.
But  where,  we  may  ask,  is  such  an  impostor  to  be
found  1  T he  piety,  the  truth,  the  benevolence  ofthe
thought,  ought  to  protect  it  from  this  imputation.
For,  though  we  should  allow  that  one  of  the  great
masters  ol  the  ancient  tragedy  could  have  given  to
his  scene  a  sentiment  as  virtuous  and  as  elevated
as  this  is,  and  at  the  same  time  as  appropriate,*  and
as  well  suited  to  the  particular  situation  of  the
person  who  delivers  it;  yet  whoever  is  conversant
in  these  inquiries  will  acknowledge,  that  to  do
this  in  a  fictitious  production  is  beyond  the  reach
ofthe  understandings  which  have  been  employed
upon  any  fabrication*  that  have  come  down  to  ue
under  Christian  names.


CHAPTER  XII  ,

The  Second  Epistle'to  Timothy.

No.  I.

It  was  the  uniform  tradition  of  the  primitive
church,  .that  St>  Paul  visited  Rome  twice,  and
twice  there  suffered  imprisonment;  and  that  he
was  put  to  death  at  Rome  at  the  conclusion  of  his
second  imprisonment.  This  opinion  concerning
St.  Paul's  two  journeys  to.  Rome  is  confirmed  by
a  great  variety  of  hints-  and  allusions  in  the  epistle
before  us,  compared  with  what  fell  from  the  apos-
tle's pen  in  other  letters  purporting  to  have  been
written  from  Rome. '  Thit  our  present  epistle  was
written  whilst  St  Paul  Was  a  prisoner,  is  dis-
tinctly intimated  by  the  eighth  verse  of  the  first
chapter:  "  Be  not  thou  therefore  ashamed  of  the
testimony  of  our  Lord,  nor  of  me  his  prisoner."
And  whilst  he  was  a  prisoner  at  Rome,  by  the
sixteenth  and  seventeenth  verses  of  the  same
chapter :  "  The  Lord  give  raeucy  unto  the  house
of  Onesiphorus;  for  he  oft  'refreshed  me,  and  was
not  ashamed  of  my  chain :  but  when  he  was  in
Rome  besought  me  out  very  diligently  and  found


SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.


319


me."  Since  at  appeals  from  the  fofmer  quotation
that  St.  Paul  wrote  this  epistle  in  confinement,  it
wW 'hardly  admit  of  doubt  Jhat  the  word  chain,  in
the  latter  quotation,  refers  to  that  confinement;
the  chain  by  which  he  was  then  bound,  the  custo-
dy in  which  he  was  then  kept.  And  if  the  word
"  chain"  designate  the  authors  confinement  at  the
time  of  writing  the  epistle,  the  next  words  deter-
mine it  to  have  been  written  from  Rome:  "  He
was  not  ashamed  of  my  chain ;  nut  when  he  was
in  Rome  he  sought  me  out  very  diligently."  Now
that  it  was  not.  written  'during  the  apostle's  first
imprisonment  at  Rome,  or  during  the  same  im-
prisonment'in  which  the  epistles  to  the.  Cpheaians,
the  Colossians,  the  Phitippians,  and  Philemon,
were  written,  may  be  gathered,  with  considerable
evidence,  from  *  comparison  of  these  several  epis-
tles with  the  present

I.  In  the  former  epistles  the  author  confidently
looked  forward  to  his  liberation  from  confinement,
and.  his  speedy  departure  from  Rome.  He  tells
the  Phitippians  (oh.  ii.  24,)  ~"  I  trust  in  the  Lord
that  I  also  myself,  shall  come  shortly."  Philemon
he  bids  to  prepare' for  him  a  lodging :  "  for  1  trust,"
says  he,  "that  through  your  prayers  I  shall  be

E"  ran  unto  you/  ver.  £2.  In  the  epistle  before  us
holds  a  language  extremely  different :  "  I  am
now  ready  to  be  offered,  and  the,  time  of  my  de-
parture is  at  hand.  I  have  fought  a  good,  tight,
t  have  finished  mv  course,  I  have  kept  the  faith :
henceforth  there  is  Jaid  up  for  me  a  drown  of
righteousness,  which  the.  Lord,  'the'  righteous
Judge,  shall  give  me  at  that  day,11  ch.  iv.  6 — 8.

if.  When  the  former  epistles,  were  written
from  Rome,  Timothy  was  with  St.  Paul ;  and  is
joined  with  him  in  writing  to.the  Cojossians,  the
Phitippians,  and  to  Philemon.  The  present  epis*'
tie  implies  that  he  was  absent.

III.  In  the  former  epistles,-  Deroas  was  with
St  Paul  at  Rome :  "  Luke,  the  beloved  physician,
and  Demas,  greet  you."  In  the  epistle  now  before
us:  "  Demas  hath  forsaken  me,  having  loved  this.
present  world,  and  is  gone  to  Thessalonica."

IV,  In  the  former  epistles,  Mack  was  with  St.
Paul,  and  joins  in  saluting  the  Colossians.  In
the  present  epistle,  Timothy  Is  ordered  to  bring
him  with  htm,  "  for  he  is  profitable  to  me  fyr  the
ininistry,"  ch.  iv.  II.

The  case  of  Timothy  and  of  <Mark  might  {*
*ery  wett  accounted  for,  by  supposing  the  present
castle  to  have  been  written  before  the  others;  so
that  Timothy,  who  is  here  exhorted  "  to  come
shortly  unto  him,0  ch!  iv.  9,  might  have  arrived,
and  that  Mark,  "whom  he  was  to  bring  with
him,"  chMv.  \\t  might  Jura  also  reached  Rome
in  sufficient  time  to  have  been  with  St.  Paul  when
the  four  epistles  were  written ;  but  then  such  a
supposition  is  inconsistent  with  what  is  said  of
Demas,  by  which  the  posteriority  of  this  to  the  other
epistles  is  strongly  indicated ;  -for  in  the  other  epis-
tles Demas  was  with  St.  PauJ,  in  the  present  he
hath  "forsaken  him,  and  is  gone  to  Thessalo-
The  opposition  also  of  sentiment,  with
t  to  the  event  of  the  persecution,  is  hardly
ueabje  to  the  same  imprisonment.

The-two  following  considerations,  which  were
first  suggested  upon  this  question  by  Ludovieus
Capellus,  are  stHl  mom  conclusive.

I.  In/the  twentieth  verse  of  the  .fourth  chapter,
St  Paul  informs  Timothy,  "that  Erastus  abode
at  Corinth,"  s««rr«<  »<*«.*•  *  ■*  K*e»0».  The  form
of  expression  implies,  that  Erastus  had  staid  be-  <


hind  at  Corinth,  when  St.  Paul  left  it.  .  But  this
could  not  be  meant  of  any  journey  from  Corinth
which  St.  Paul  took  prior  to  his  first  imprison-
ment at  Rome;  for  when  Paul  departed  from  Co-
rinth, as  related  in  the  twentieth  chapter  of  the
Acts,  Timothy  waa  with  him:  and  this  was  the
last  time  the  apostle  left  Corinth  before  his  coming
to.  Rome ;  because  he  left  it  to  proceed  on  his  way
to  Jerusalem;  soon  after  his  arrival  at  which
place  he  .was  taken  into  custody,  and  continued
in  that  custody  till  he  was  carried  to  Caesar's  tri-
Dunfll.  There  could  be  no  need  therefore  to  in-
form Timothy  that  ."Erastus  staid  behind  at  Co-
rinth" upon  this  occasion,  because  if  the  fact  was
so,  it  must  have  been  known  to  Timothy,  who  was
present,  as  weH  as  to  St.  Paul.

2.  Ti\  the  same  vefse  our  epistle  also  states  the
following  article :  "  Trophimus  have  I  left  at  Mi-
letum  sick?'  When  St.  Paul  passed  through  Mi-
letum  on  his  way  to  Jerusalem,  as  related  Acts
xx,  Trophimus  was  not  left  behind,  but  accom-
panied him  to  that  city.'  Qe  was  indeed  the  oc-
casion of  the  uproar  at  Jerusalem,  in  consequence
of  which  St.  Paul  was  apprehended ;  for*"  they
had  seen,"  says  the  historian.  "  before  with  him
in  the  cfry,  Trophimus  an  Epnesian,  whom  they
supposed  that  Paul  had  brought  into  the  temple/'
This  was  evidemiythc  last  time  of  Paul's  being
at  Miletus  before  his  first  imprisonment;  for,  as
hath  been  said,  after  his  apprehension  at.  Jerusa-
lem, he  remained  in  custody-  till  he  was  sent  to
Rome. . ,  .  %

In  these  two  articles  we  have  a  journey  re-
ferred to,  which  must  have  taken  place  subse=
quent  to  the  conclusion  of  St.  Luke's  history,  and
of  course  after  St.  Paul's  liberation1  from  bis  first .
imprisonment.  The  epistle,  therefore,  which  con-
tains this  reference,  since  it  appears  from  other
parts  of  it  to  have  been  written  while  St.  Paul  was
a  prisoner  at  Rome,  proves  that  he  had  returned
to  that  city  again,  and  undergone  there  a  second
imprisonment.

I  do  nots  produce  these  -particulars  for  the  sake
of  the  support  which  they  lend  to  the  testimony
of  the  fathers  concerning  St.  Paul's .  second  im-
prisonment, but  to  remark  their  consistency  and
agreement  with  one  another. — They  are  all  re-
solvable into  one  supposition :  and  although  the
supposition  t  itself  be  ui  some  sort  only  negative,
viz.  that  the  epistle  was  not  written  during  St.
Paul's  first  residence  at  Rome,  but  in  some  ratiup
imprisonment,  in  that  city  *  yet  is  the' consistency
not  less  worthy  of  observation:,  for  the  epistle  '
touches  upon  names  aitd  circumstances  connect-
ed" with  the  date  and  with  the  history  of  the  first
imprisonment,  and  mentioned  in  letters  written  '
during  that  imprisonment,  and  so  touches  upon
them,  as  to  leave  what  is  said  of  one  consistent
with  what  .is  said  of  others,  and  consistent  also
with  what  is  said  of  them  in  different  epistles.
Had  one  of  these  circumstances  been  so  described
as  to  have  fixed  the  date  of  the  epistle  to  the  first
imprisonment,  it  would  have  involved  the  rest  in
contradiction.  And  when  the  number  and  par-
ticularity of  the  articles  which  have  been  bioughf  •
together  under  this  head,  are  considered;  and
when  it  is  considered  also',  that  the  comparisons,
we  have  formed  amongst  them,  were  in  all  proba-
bility neither  provided  for,  nor  thought  of,  bv  the
writer  of  the  epistle,  it  will  be  deemed  something
very  like  the  effect  Of  truth,  that.no  invincible  re-
pugnancy is  perceived  between  ttyem.


*90


HORJE  PAULINA.


No.  II.

•»  lb  the  Acts  of  the  Apostlesj  in  the  sixteenth
chapter,  and  at  the  first  verse,  we  are  told  that
Paul  "  came  to  Derbe  and  Lystra,  and  behold  a
certain  disciple  was  there  named  Tiinotheus,  the
son  of  a  certain  woman  which  was  a  Jewess,  and
believed ;  but  his  father  was  a  Greek."  In  the
epistle  before  us,  in  the  first  chapter  and  at  the
fourth  verse,  St  Paul  writes  to  Timothy  thus :
u  Greatly  desiring  to  see  thee,  jxing  mindful  of
thy  Jears,  that  I  may.be  filled  with  joy,  when' I
call  to  remembrance  the  unfeigned  faith  that  is  in
thee,  which  dwelt  first  in  thy  grandmother  Lois,
anal  thy  mother  Eunice >■  and  I  am  persuaded  that
in  thee  also."  Here  we  have  a  fair  unforced  ex-
ample of  coincidence.  In  the  history,  Timothy  was
the  "  son  of  a  Jewess  that  believed :"  in  the  epis-
tle, St.  Paul  applauds  *  the  faith  which  dwelt  in
his  mother  Eunice.1'  In  the  history  it  is  said  of
the  mother,  "  that  she  was  a  Jewess,  and  be-
lieved:" of  the  father,  "that  he  was  a  Greek."
Now,  when  it  is  said  of  the  mother  alone  "  that
she  believed,"  the  father  being  nevertheless  men-
tioned in  the  same  sentence,  we  are  led  to  sup-
pose o?  the  father  that  he  did  not  believe,  t.  e.
either  that  he  was  dead,  or  that  he  remained  un-
converted. Agreeably  hereunto,  whilst  praise
is  bestowed  in  the  epistle  upon  one  parent,  and
tipon  her  sincerity  in  the  faith,  no  notice'  is  taken
of  the  other.  The  mention  of  the  grandmother
is  the  addition  of  a  circumstance  not  found  in  the
history;  but  it  is  a  circumstance- which,  as  well  as
the  names  of  the  parties,  might  naturally  be  ex-
pected to  be  known  to  the  apostle,  though  over-
looked by  his.  historian.

J  No.  in.

Chap,  iii  15.  "  And  that  from  a  child  thou
hast  known  the  Holy  Scriptures,  Which  are  .able
to  make  thee  wise  unto  salvation.

This  yerse  discloses  a  circumstance -which
agrees  exactly  with  what  is  intimated '  in  the
quotation  from  the  Acts,  adduced;  in  jhe  last
number.  In  that  quotation  it  is  recorded  of  Timo-
thy's mother,  "  that  she  was  a  Jewess."  -This
description  is  .virtually,  though,  I  am  satisfied,  un-
designedly, recognized  in  the  epistle,  when  Timo-
thy is  reminded  in  it,  "  that  from  a  child  he  had
known  the  Holy  Scriptures."  "  The  Holy  Scrip-
taTes/'  undoubtedly  meant  the  Scriptures  of  the
Old  Testament.  The  expression  bears  that  sense
in  every  place  in  which  it  occurs.  Those  of  the
New  had  notyet  acquired  the  name ;  not  to  men-
tion,, that  in  Timothy's  childhood,  probably,  none
of  them  existed.  In  what  manner  then  could
Timothy  have  known  "  from  a  child,"  the  Jew-
ish Scriptures,  had  he  not  been  born,  on  one  side
or  on  both,  of  Jewish  parentage  1  Perhaps  he
was  not  less  likely  to  be  carefully  instructed  in
them,  for  that  his  mother  alone  professed  that  re-


No.  IV.

Chap.  ii.  22.  "  Flee  also  youthful  lusts;  but
follow  righteousness,  faith,  charity,  peace,  with
them  that  call  on  the  Lord  out  of  a  pure  heart."

"Flee also, youthful  lusts."  The  suitableness
of  .this  precept  to  the  age  of  the  person  to  whom
it  is  addressed,  is  gathered  from  1  Tim.  chap.  iv.
12;  *  l^A  no  man  despise  thy  youth."  Nor  do  I
deem  the  less  of  this  coincidence,  because  the  pro-
priety resides  in  a  single  epithet;  or.  because  this


one  precept  is  joined  with,  and  followed  by  a  train
of  others,  not  more  applicable  to  Timothy  than  to
any  ordinary  convert  It  is  in  these  transient
and  cursory  allusions  that  the  argument  is  best
founded.  "When  a  writer  dwells  and  rests  upon
a  point  in  which  some  coincidence  is  discerned,  it
may  be  doubted  whether  he  himself  had  not  fa-
bricated the  conformity,  and  was  endeavouring  to
display  and  set  it  off!  Bat  when  the  reference  is
contained  in  a  single  word,  unobserved  perhaps
by  most  readers,  the  writer  passing  on  to  other
subjects,  -as  unconscious  that  he  had  hit  upon  a
correspondency,  or  tmsoticitous  whether  it  were
remarked  or  not,  we  may  be  pretty  well  assured
that  no  fraud  was  exercised,  no  imposition  in-
tended.

No.V.

Chap,  iil  10, 1 1.  "  But  thou  hast  fully  known
my  doctrine,  manner  .of  life,  purpose,  faith,  long-
suffering,  charity,  patience,  persecutions,  afflic-
tions, which  came  unto  me  at  Antioch,  at  Iconium,
at  Lystra  ;  what  persecutions  I  endured ;  but  out
of  them  all  the  Lord  delivered  me."

The  Antioch  here  mentioned  was*  not  Antioch
the  capital  of  Syria,  where  Paul  and  Barnabas
resided  "a  long  time;"  but  Antioch  in  Pisidia,  to
which  place  Paul  and  Barnabas  camcln  their  first
apostolic  progress,  and  where  Paul  delivered  a
memorable  discourse,  which  is  preserved  in  the
thirteenth  chapter  of  the  Acts.  At  this  Antioch
the  history^relates,  that  the  "Jews  stirred  up  the
devout  and  honourable  women,  and  the  chief  men
of  the  city,  and  raised  persecution  against  Paul
and  Barnabas,  and  expelled  them  out  of  their
coasts.  But  they  shook  off  the  dust  of  their  feet
against  them,  and -came  into  Iconium. . .  .^  And
it  came  to  pass  in  Iconium,  that  they  went  both
together  into  the  synagogue  of  the  Jews,  and  so
spake,  that  a  great  multitude  both  of  the  Jews
and  also  of  the  Greeks  believed;  bat  the  un-
believing Jews  stirred  up  the  Gentiles,  and  jnade
their  minds  evil-affected  against  the  brethren.
Long  time  therefore  abode  they  speaking  boldly
in  the  Lord,  which  gave  testimony  unto  the  word
of  his  grace,  and  granted  signs  and  wonders  to
be  done  by  their  hands.  But  the  multitude  of  the
city  was  divided;  and  part  held  with  the  Jews,
and  part  with  the  apostles.  And  when  there  waa
an  assault  made  both  of  the  Gentiles  and  also  of
the  Jews,  with  their  rulers,  to  use  them.aespitefuUy
and  to  stone  them,  they  were  aware  of  it,  and
fled  unto  Ijystra  and  Derbe,  cities  of  Lycaonia.
and  onto  the  region,  that  lieth  round  about,  and

there  they  preached  the  Gospel And  there

came  thither  certain  Jewa  from  Antioch  and
Iconium,  who  persuaded  the  people;  and  having
stoned  Paul,  drew  him  out  of  the  city,  supposing
he  had  been  dead.-  Howbeit,  as  the  disciples  stood
round  about  him,  he -rose  up  and  came  into  the
city:  and  the  next  day  he  departed  with  Barnaba*
to  Derbe :  and  when  they  had  preached  the  Gos-
pel to  that  city,  and  had  taught  many,  they  re-
turned again  to  Lystra,  and  to  Iconium,  and  to
Antioch.'  'I'his  account  comprises  the  period  to
which  the  allusion  in  the  epistle  is  to  be  referred.
We  have  so  far  therefore  a  conformity  between
the  history  and  the  epistle,  thatSt.  Paul  is  asserted
in  the  history  to  have  suffered  persecutions  in  the
three  cities,  his  persecutions  a£  which  are  appealed
to  in  the  epistle ;  and  not  only  so,  but  to  have;  suf-
fered these  persecutions  both  in  immediate  sue-


EPISTLE  TO  TITUS.


»1


(fentai;  and  in  the  older  in  which  the  cities  are
mentioned,  in  the  epistle.  The  conformity  also
extends  to  another  circumstance.  In  the  apostolic
history,  Lystra  and  Derbe  are  commonly  men-
tioned together:  in  the  quotation  from  the  epistle
Lystra  is  mentioned,  and  not  Derbe.  And  the
distinction  will  appear  on  this  occasion  to  be  ac-
curate ;  for  St.  Paul  is  here  enumerating  his  per-
secutions: and  although  he  underwent  grievous
persecutions  in  each  of  the  three  cities  through
which  he  passed  to  Derbe,  at-Derb*  itself  he  met
with  none:  "The  next  day  he  departed,"  says
the  historian,  "to  Derbe;  and  when  they  had
preached  the  Gospel  to  that  city,  and  had  taught
many,  they  returned  again  to  Lystra."  The  epis-
tle, therefore,  In  the  names  of  the  cities,  in  the
order  in  which  they  are'  enumerated,  and  in  the
place  at  which  the  enumeration  stops,  corresponds
exactly  with  the  history.

But  a  second  question  remains,  namely,  how
these  persecutions  were  -"  known"  to  Timothy,
or  why  the  apostle  should  recall  these  in  particu-
lar to  his  remembrance,  rather  than  many  uther
persecutions  with  which  his  ministry  had  •been
attended.  When  some  time, -probably  three  years,
afterwards,  (vide  Pearson's  Annates  Paulinas,)
St.  Paul  made  a  second  journey  thraoch  the  same
country,  "  in  order  to  go  again  and  Ait  the  .bre-
thren in  every  city  where  he  had  preached  the
word  of  4he  Lord,*  we  read",  Acts*  chap.  xvi.  I,
that,  "  when  he  came  to  Derbe  and  Lystra,  be-
hold a  certain  disciple  was  there  named  Timo-
theus."  '  One  or  other,  therefore,  of  these  cities.
was  the  place  of  Timothy's  abode.  We  read
moreover  that  he  was  well  reported  of  by  the  bre-
thren that  were  at  Lyslra  and  Iconium;  so  that
he  must  have  been  well  acquainted  with  these
places.  Also  again,  when  Paul  came  to  Derbe
and  Lystra,  Timothy  was  already  a  disciple:
"Behold,  a  certain  disciple  was  there  named
Timotheufl."  He  must  therefore  have  been  con-
verted before.  But.  since  it  is  expressly  stated  in
the  epistle,  that  Timothy  was  converted  fcy  St
Paul  himself,  that  he  was  "his  own  son  in  the
faith;"  it  follows  that  he  must  have  been  con-
verted by  him  upon  his  former  jqurney  into  those
parts;  which- was  the  very  time  when- the  apostle
underwent  the  persecutions  referred  to  in  the  epis-
tle. .-Upon  the  whole,  then,  persecutions  at  the
several  cities  named  in  the  epistle  are  expressly
recorded  in  the  Acts:  and  Timothy's  knowledge
of  this  part  of  St  Paul's  history,  which  knowledge
Is  appealed  to  in  the  epistle,  ia  fairly  deduced  from
the  place  of 'his  abode,  and  the  time  of  his  con-
'  version.  It  may  farther  be  observed,  that  it  is
probable  from  this  account,  that  St.  Paul  was  in
the  midst  of  those  persecutions  when  Timothy
became  known  to  him.  No  wonder  then  that  the
apostle,  though  in  a  letter  written  long  afterwards,
should  remind  his '  favourite  convert  of  those
scenes  of  affliction  and  distress  under  which  they
first  met

Although  this  coincidence,  as  to  the  names  of
the  cities,  be  more  specific  and  direct  than  many
which  we  have  pointed  out,  yet  1  apprehend  there
is  no  just  reason  for*  thinking  it  to  be  artificial :  for
had  the  writer  of  the  epistle  sought  a  coincidence
with  the  history  upon  this  head,  and  searched  the
Acts  of  the  Apostles  for  the  purpose,  I  conceive
he  would  have  sent  us  at  once  to  Philippi  and
Thessalohica,  where  Paul  suffered  persecution,
and  where  from  what  is  stated,  it  may  easily  be


gathered  that  Timothy  accompanied  him,  rather
than  have  appealed  to  persecutions  as  known  to
Timothy,  in  the  account  of  Which  persecutions
Timothy's,  presence  is  not  mentioned;  it  not  be-
ing till  after  one  entire  chapter,  and  in  the  history
of  a  journey  three  years  future  to  this,  that  Timo-
thy's name  occurs  in  the  Acta  of  the  Apostles  for
the  £rst  f


CHAPTER  XIII.
The  Epistle  to  Titua.  /

No.I.

A  VEftY  characteristic  circumstance  in  this
epistle,  is  the.  quotation  from  Epimenides,  chap,
i.  12":  "  One  of  themselves,  even  "a  prophet'  of
their  own,  said,  The  Cretans  are  always  liars,
evil  beasts,  slow  bellies."

X<*Tif  «j<  ^ivrrmt^jfj^im  6*f**,  ymft  *&•*• «

I  call  this  quotation  characteristic,  because  no
writer  in  the  New  Testament,  -except  St.  Paul,
appealed  to  heathen  testimony;  and  because  St.
Paul  repeatedly  did  so.  In  his  celebrated  speech '
at  Athens,  preserved  in  the  seventeenth  chapter
of  the  Acts,  he  tells  his  audience,  that  "  in  God
We  live,  and  move,  and  have  our  being ;  as.  certain
abo.of  your  own  poets  have  said,  For- we  are  also
his  offspring."  -


The  reader  will 'perceive  much  similarity  of
manner  in  these  two  passages.  The  reference  in
the.  speech  is  to.a  heathen  poet ;  it  is  the. same  in
the  epistle.  In  the  speech,  the  apostle  urges  his
hearers  with  the  authority  of  a  poet  of  their  own;
in  the  epistle'  he  avails  himself  of  the  same  ad-
vantage. Yet  there  -is  a  variation,  which  shows
that  the  hint  of  inserting  a  quotation  in  the  epis-
tle was  not,  as  it  may  be  expected,  borrowed  from
seeing  the  like  practice  attributed  to  St  Paul  in
the  history:  and  it  is  this,  that  in  the  epistle  the
author  cited  is  called  a.vro^hett  "  one  of  them?
selves,  even  a  prophet  of  their  own."  Whatever
might  be  the  reason  for  calling  Epimenides  a  pro-
phet ;  Whether '  the  names  of  poet  and  prophet
were  occasionally  convertible;  whether  Epime-
nides in  particular  had  obtained  that  title,  asGro-
tius  seems  to  have  proved;  or  whether  the  ap-
pellation was  given  to  him,  in  this  instance  as
having  delivered  a  description,  of  the  Cretan  cha-
racter, which  the'  future  state'  of  morals  among
them  verified:  whatever  was  the  reason  (and  any
of  these  reasons  will  account. for  the  variation,
supposing  St.  Paul  to  have 'been  the  .author,)  one
point  is  plain,  namely,  if  the  epistle  had  been .
forged,  and  the  author  had  inserted  a  Quotation
in  Ft  merely  from  having  seen  an  example  of  the
same  kina  in  a  speech  ascribed  to  St.  Paul,  he
would  so  far  have  imitated  his  original,  as  to  have
introduced  his  quotation  in" the  same  manner;
that  is.  he  would  have  given  to  Epimenides  the
title  which  he  saw  there  given  to  Aratus.  The
h  other  side  of  the  alternative  is,  that  the  history
took  the  hint  from  the  epistle.  But  that  the  ^au-
thor of  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles  had  not  the  Epis-
tle to  Titus  before  him,  at  least  that  he  did  not
use  it  as  one  of  the  documents  or  materials  of  his
narrative,  is  rendered  nearly  certain  bythe  obser-
19*


«9


BOBJE  PATJLIN4B.


vation,  that  the  name  of  Titos  does  not  onc$  oc-
cur in  this  book.

It  is  well  known,  and  was  remarked  by  St.  Je-
rome, that  the  apophthegm  in  the  fifteenth  chap-
ter of  the  Corinthians,  "Evil  communications
corrupt  good  manners, "  is  an  iambic  of  Menan-
dare;

90<t{ft«r»»  40m  X<W  tfitktmi  iu*x«i.'

Here  we  have  another  unaffected  instance  of
the  same  turn  and  habit  6f  composition. — Proba-
bly there  are^some  hitherto  unnoticed ;  and  more,
which  ttis  loss  of  the  original  authors  renders
iinpossihle  to  be  now  ascertained.

No.  II.

There  exists  a  visible  affinity  between  the
Epistleto  Titus  and  the  Fixst  Epistle  to  Timo-
thy. Both  letters  were  addressed  to  persons. left
by  the  writer  to  preside  in  their  respective  churches
during  his  Absence.  Both  letters  are  principally
occupied  in  describing  the  qualifications  to  he
sought  for.  in  those  whom' they  should  appoint  to
offices  in  the  church ;  and  the  ingredients  of  this
description  are  in  both  letters  nearly  the  same.
Timothy  and  Titus  are  likewisftcaWtioned  against
the  same  prevailing  corruptions,  and  in  particular,
against  toe  same  misdirection  of  their  cares  and
studies.  This  affinity  obtains,  net  onjy  in  the
subject  of  the  letters,  which  from  the  similarity
of  situation-  in  •  the  persons  to  whom  they  were
sj&fossed,  might  he  expected  to.  be  somewhat
alike,  but  extends,  in  a  great  variety  of  instances,
to  the  phrases  and  expressions.  The  writer  ac-
costs his  two  friends  with  the  same-  salutation,
and  passes  on  to  the  business  of  bis  letter  by  the
'same  transition.

"Unto  Timothy,  my  own  sen  in  the  faith  t
.  Grace,  mercy,  and  peace,  from  God  our  Father
and  Jeaus^hrist  our  Lord.  As  I  besought  thee
to  abide  still  atJEpfiesus,  when  I  went  into  Ma-
cedonia," &c.  I  Tim.  chap.  i.  2,  3.

« To  Titus,  mine  own,  son  after  the  common
faith :  Grace,  mercy,  and  peace,  from  God  the
Father'  and  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  our  Saviour.
For  this  cause  left4  I  thee  in  Crete"  Tit  chap.
14,6.

If -Timothy  was  not  to  "give  heed  to  fables
arid'  endless  genealogies,  which  minister  ques-
tions*1 1  Tiirjcychap.  i.  4,  Titus  also  was  to
u  avoid  foolish  questions,  and  genealogies,  and~
contentions,"  chap.  hi.  9;  .and  was  to  "  rebuke
them  sharply,  not  giving  Iieed  to  Jewish  fables"
chap.  i.  14.  If  Timothy  was  to  be  a  pattern,  (tva-^,)
1  Tim.  ch.  iv.  12,  so  was  Titus,  chap.  ii.  7.  If
Timothy  was  to  ."  let  no'  man  despise  his  youth,"
1  Tim.  ch.  iv.  12,  Titus  also  was  to  let  ?no
man .  despise  him,"  chap.  ii.  15.  .  This  verbal
consent  is  also  observable  in  some  very  peculiar
expressions,  which  have  no  relation  to  the  par-
ticular character  of  Timothy  or  Titus.

The  phrase,  "*t"  is  a  faithful  saying"  X"'*r*t*
*.»ye0  made  use  of  to  preface  some  sentence  upon
which  the  writer' lays  a  more  than  ordinary  stress,
occurs  three  times  in  the  First  Epistle  to  Timothy,
once  in  the  Second,  and  once  in  the  epistle  before
us,  and  in  no  other  part  of  St.  Paul's  writings ;
and  it  is  remarkable  that  these  three  epistles  were
probably  all  written  towards  the  conclusion  of  his
nfe;  and  that  tfiey  are  the  only  epistles  which
were  written  after  his  first  imprisonment*  at
Rome


,  The  same  observation  belongs  to  another  amg»-
laxity  of  expression,  and  that  is  in  the  epithet
"  sound"  (yyi***,^**  appli&i  to  wolds  or  doctrine.
It  is  thus  used,  twice  in  the  First  Epistle  to  Ti-
mothy, twice  in  the  Second,  and  three  times  in  the
Epistle  to  Titus,  besides  two  cognate  expressions;

vytwremf  4-q nmi and JLtytv  vytn  ; and it is

found,  in  the  same  sense,  in  no  other  part  of  the
New  Testament.

The  phrase,  "God  our  Saviour,"  stands  in
nearly.the  same  predicament  It  is  repeated  three
times  in  the  First  Epistle  to  Timothy,  as  many
inAhe  Epistle  to  Titus,  and  in  no  other  book  of
the  New  Testament  occurs  at  siL  except  once  in
theEjnstleoif  Jude.

Similar  terms,  intermixed  indeed  with  others,
are  employed  in  the  two  epistles,  in  enumerating
the  qualifications  required  in  those  who  should  be
advanced  to  stations  of  authority  in  the  church.

"A  bishop  must  be  blameless,  the  husband  of
one  wife,  vigilant,  sober,  of  good  behaviour,  given
to  hospitality,  apt  to  teach,  not  given  to  wine,  no
striker,  not  greedy  ofJUthy  lucres  but  patient,
not  a  brawler,  not  covetous ;  one  that  ruteth  well
his  own  house,  having  his  children  in  subjection
with  all  gravity,"  ♦  1  Tim.  chap.  iii.  2—4.  ^

. "  If  any  be  blameless,  die  husband  of  one  wife,
having  fiuthful  children,  not  accused  of  riot,  or
unruly.  For  a  bishop  must  be  blameless,  as  the
steward  of  God;  not  self- willed,- not  soon  angry,
not  given  to  wine,  no  striker,  not  given,ta  JUthy
lucre  sbuta  lover  of  hospitality,  a  lover  of  food
men,  sober,  just,  holy,  temperate,"  t  Titus'' chap.

The  most  natural  account  which  can  be  given
'  of  these  resemblances,  is  to'  suppose  that  the  two
epistles  were  written  nearly  at  the  same  time,  said
whilst  the  same  ideas  and  phrases  dwelt  in  the
writer's  mind.  Let  us  inquire,  therefore,  whether
the  notes  of  time,  extant  in  the  two  epistles,  in
airymanner  favour  this  supposition.

We  have  seen  that  it  was  necessary  to  refer  the
First  Epistle  to  Timothy  to  a  date  subsequent  to
.St.  Paul's  first  imprisonment  at  Home,  because
there  was  no  journey  into  Macedoniapriorto  that
event,  which  accorded  with  the  circumstance  of
leaving  "Timothy  behind  at  Ephesus>  The
joumey  of  St  Paul  from  Crete,  alluded  to  in  the
epistle  before  us,  and  in  which  Titus  "  was  left  in
Crete  to  set  in"  order  tjie  things  that  were  want.
ing,"  must  in  like  manner,  be  carried  to  the  period
which  intervened  between  his. first  end  second
imprisonment.  For  the  history,'  which  reaches,
we  know,- to  the -time,  of  St  Paul's  first  imprison-
ment, contains  no  account  of 'his  going  to  Crete,
except  upon  his  voyage  as  a  prisoner  to  Rome ;
and  that  tjiis  could  not  be  the  occasion  referred  to
jn  our  epistle  is  evident  from  hence,  that  when
$t.  Paul  wrote  this  epistle  he  appears  to  have
been  at  liberty :  whereas  after  that  voyage,  he  con-


*  "An  tup  tov  f*trxoR'Ov  «vi$riM*"rov  ur«i,  ft*f
vuvotixe;  av£{sc,  i^^sXiok,  <rw£(»i««,  kav^iiov,  $<A.B£tror,
dijaxTixOf,  AM  *%(9i90v\  fttf  M-Jutx-rip,  fm  mtrZf9wtf5n'
*kk'  i*-«i<Ni!,«/ffcX0v,  »QiK*tyvgo»'  rov  v£ro«o<  xAv  *mKwf
Ar^cio-raAcfvov,  Tixrrt  »xovt»  iv  viTOTa^-ijAUTaV  3r»0-f/c
e-iyuveTirrof."

f  "  Ei  rtg  isTiF  mfiyxkHTK%  fit*^yV¥mx9(  «*i|f ,  t»«»»
t%mv  'wtrrA,  p«  V*  x»Tny«f  m  •«'«ti»s,  «  •vvarsraxrtf.
Alt  y*f  to*  i«»«-xos-oy  svi^xXnvov  tirs*.  m>( 6iav  •«*«»■.

««^XfOxti?M*«XXM $<*.o£«ver,  ftkmya&tv,  rwff  o»»,  ft.


EPISTLE  TO  PHILEMON.


828


timed  for  two  yean  at. lent  in/ confinement
Again,  it  is  agreed  feat  St. Paul  wrote  his  First
Epistle  to  Timothy  from  Macedonia:  "Ab  1  be*
sought  thee  to  abide  stall  at  Ephesus,'  when- 1
went  (or  came)  into  Macedonia."  And  that
be  was  in  these  parts,  4.  e.  in  this  peninsula,
when  he  wrote  the  Epistle  to  Titos,  is  rendered
probable  by  his  directing  Titos  to  come  .to  him
to  NicopoUsr  "  When  I  shall  send  Artemas  unto
thee,  or  Tychicus,  be  diligent  (make  haste)  to
come  onto  meto  Nicopolis ;  for  I  have  determined
there  to  winter."  The  .most  noted  city  of  that
name  was  in  Epirus,  near  to  Actjum.  *  And  I
think  the  fbrm  of  sneaking,  as  well  as  the  nature
of  the  case,  renders  it  probable  that  the  writer  was
at  Jiicopolis,  or  in  the  neighbour heed  thereof,
when,  he  dictated  this  direction  to  Titus.

Upon  the  whole,  if  we  may  be  allowed  to  suppose
that  St.  Paul,  after  his  liberation  at  Rome,  sailed
into  Asia,  tailing  Crete  in  his  way;  that  from
Asia  and  from  Ephesus,  the  capital  of  that  country,
he  proceeded  into  Macedonia,  and  crossing  the
peninsula  in  his  progress,  came  into  the  neigh-
Dourhood  of  Nicopolis ;  We  have  a  route  which
nils  in  with  every  thing.  It  executes  the  inten-
tion expressed  by  the  Apostle  of  visiting  Colosse
and  Phdippias  soon  as  be  should  be  set  at  liberty
at  Rome,  ft  allows  him  toJeave"  Titus  at  Crete/'
and  "  Timothy  at  Ephesus,  as  he  went  into  Mace-
*'  and  to  write  to  both  not  long  after  from  the
ila  of  Greece,  and  probably  the  neiffhbour-
i  of  Nieopolis:  thus  bringing  together  the
dates  of  these  two  letters,  and  thereby  accounting
for  that  affinity  between  them,  both  in  subject  and
language,  which,  our  remarks  have  pointed  out
I  confess  that  the  journey  which  we  have  thus
traced  out  for  St  Paul-,  is,  in  a  great  measure,  hy-
pothetic: but  it  should  J>e  observed,  that  it  is  a
species  of  consistency,  which  seldom,  belongs  to
falsehood,  to  admit  at  an  hypothesis,  which  in-
cludes a  £reat  number  of  independent*  circum-
-* 1  without  contradiction.


CHAPTER  XIV.

,  TVie  Epistle  to  Philemon. •

No.  I.

Ths  singular  correspondency  between  this
epistle  and  that  to  the  Colossians  has  been  remarkv
ed  already.  Ah  assertion  in  the  Epistle  to  the
Colossians,  viz.  that "  Onesimus  was  one  of  them,"
is  verified,  not  by  any  mention  of  Colosse,  any
the  most  distant  intimation  concerning  the  place
of  Philemon's  abode,  but  singly  by  stating  Onesi-
mus to  be  Philemon's  servant,  and  by  joining  in
the  salutation  Philemon  with  Archippus ;  for  this
Archippus,  when  we  go  hack  to  the  Epistle  to  the
Colossians,  appears  to  nave  been  an  inhabitant  of
that  city,  and,  as  it  should  seem,  to  have  held  an
office  or  authority  in  that .  church.  The  case
stands  thus.  'Take  the  Epistle  to  the  Colossians
alone,  and  no  circumstance  is  discoverable  which
makes  put  the  assertion,  that  Onesimus  was  "  one
of  them."  Take  the  Epistle  to  Philemon  alone,
and  nothing  at  all  appears  concerning  the  place  to
which'  Philemon  or  nis  servant  Onesimus  belong-
ed. For  any  thing  that  is  said  in  the  epistle,


•  Philemon  might  have  been  a  Theesalonian,  a
Pbilippian,  or  an  £phesian,  as  well  as  a  Colos-
sian.  Put  the  two*  epistles  together,  and  the
-  matter  is  clear.  Thtf  reader  perceives  ^junction
of  circumstances,  which  ascertains  the  conclusion
at  once.  Now,  all  that  isjiecessaryrto  be  added  in
this  place  is/ that  thU-correspondency  evinces  the
genuineness -of  one  epistle,  as  .well  as  of  the  other.
It  is  like  comparing  the  two  parts  of  a  cloven  tally.
Coincidence  proves  the  authenticity  of  both.

No.  .II.

And  this  coincidence  Is  perfect ;  not  only  in  the
main  article  of  showing,  by  implication,  Onesi-
mus to  be  a  Colossian,  hut  in  many  dependent
circumstances.

1.  u  I  beseech  thee  for  my  son  Onesimus,  Whom
I  have  sent  again,"  ver.  10--12.  It  appears  from
the  Epistle  to  the  Colossian*,  that,  in  truth.  One-
simus was  sent  at  that  time  to  Colosse :  "  All  my
state  shall  Tychicus  declare,  whom  I  have  sent
unto  you  for  the  same  purpose,  with  Onesimus,  a
faithful  and  beloved  brother,"  Colos.  chap.  iv.  7 — 9.

2.  "I  beseech  thee  for  my  son  Onesimus,
whom  I  have  begotten  in  my  bonds,''  vex.  10.  It
appears  from  the  preceding  quotation,  that  Onesi-
mus was  with  St.  Paul  when  he  wrote  the  Epistle
to  the  Colossians ;  and  ttyat  he  wrote  that  epjstje
in  imprisonment  is  evident  from  his  declaration
in  the  fourth  chapter  and  third  verse :  "  Praying
also  for  us,  that  God  would  open  unto  us  a  door
of  utterance,  to  speak  the  mystery  of  Christ,  for
which  [  am  also  in  bonds.

3.  St.  Paul  bids  Philemon  prepare  for  him  a
,  lodging :  "  For  I  trust/*  says  he, "  that  through  your
prayers  I  shall'  be  given  unto  you."  This,  agrees
with  the  expectation  of  speedy  deliverance,  which
he  expressed  in  another  epistle  written  during  the
same  imprisonment:  "Him"  (Timothy)  "I  nop*
to  send  presently,  so  soon  as  I  shall  see  how  it
will  go  with  me ;  bull  trust  in  the  Jjord  that  I
alto  myself  shall  come  shortly"  Phil.  chap,  ii
33,24.

4.  As  the  letter  to  Philemon,  and  that  to  the
Colossians,  were  written  at  the  same  time,  and
sent  by  the  same  messenger,  the  one  to  a  particu-
lar inhabitant,  the  other  to  the  church  ot  Colosse,
it  may  be  expected  that  the  same  or  nearly  the
same  persons  would  be  about  St  Paul,  and  join
with  him,  as  Was  the  practice,  in  the  salutations
of  the  epistle.  Accordingly  we  find  the  names*
of  Aristarchus,  Marcus,  Epaphras,  Luke,  and
Demas,  in  both  epistles.  •  Timothy,  who  is  joined
with  St.  Paul  in  the  superscription  ofthe  Epistle  '
to  the  Colossians,  is-  joined  with  him  in  this.
Tychicus  did  not  salute  Philemon,  because  he  ac-
companied the  epistle  to  Colosse,  and  would  un-
doubtedly there,  see  him.  Yet  the  reader  of  tne
Epistle  to  Philemon  will  remark  one  considerable
diversity  in  the  catalogue  of  saluting  friends,  and
Which  shows  that. the  catalogue  was  not  copied
from  that  to  the  Colossians.  hrthe  Epistle  to  the
Colossians,  Aristarchus  is  called  by  St.  Paul  his
fellow:prisoner,  Colos.  chap.  iv.  10;  in  the  Epistle
to  Philemon,  Aristarchus  is  mentioned  without
any  addition,  and  the  title  of  fellow-prisoner  is
given,  to  Epaphras.  *  -


.*  Dr.  Benson  ooserves,  and  perhaps  truly,  that  ths
appellation  of  fellow- prisoner,  as-  applied  by  St.  Paul
to  Epaphras,  did  no!  imply  that  they  were  imprisoned
together  at  ia*  tinU ;  any  more  than  your  catting  ^psr*


AM


HORJE  PAtJLlNJE.


And  let  H  also  b©  observed,  thai  notwithstanding
thtf  close  and  circumstantial  agreement  between
the  two-epistles,  this  is  not  the  caae  of  an  opening
left  in  a  genuine  writing,  which  an  impostor  is
induced  to  fill  up ;  nor  of  a  reference*  to  some
writing  not  extant,  which  sets  a  sophist  at  work
to-supply  the  loss,  in  like  manner  as,  because  St.
Paul  was  supposed,  Colos.  chap.  iv.  16,  to  allude
to  an  epistle  written  by  him  to  the  Laodiceans,
some  person  has  from  thence  taken  the  hint  of
uttering  a  forgery  under  that  title.  The  present,
I  say,  is  not  that  case ;  for  Philemon's  name  is  not
mentioned  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Colossians;  One-
aimus'  servile  condition  is  no  where  hintedat,  any
more  than  his  crime,  his  flight,  or  the  place  or
time  of  his  conversion.  The  story,  therefore,  of
the  epistle,  if  it  be  a  fiction,  is  a  fiction  to  which
the,  author  could  not  have  been  guided  by  any
thing  he  had  read  in  St.  Paul's  genuine  writings.

No.  III.

Ver.  4,  5.  "  I  thank,  my  Qod,  making  mention
of  thee  always  in  my  prayers,  heating  of  thy  love
and -faith,  which  thou  hast  toward  the  Lord  Je-
sus, and  toward  all  saints."

"  Hearing  qf  thy  love  and  faith."  This  is  the
form  of  speech  wluch  St  Paul  was  wont  to  use
towards  those  churches  which  he  had  not  seen,  or
then  visited :  see  Rom.  chap.  L  8 ;  Ephes.  chap.  i.
15;  Col.  chap,  i.4,  4.  Toward  those  churches
ana  persons,  with  whom  he  was  previously  ac-
quainted, he  employed  a  different  phrase ;  as,  "I
thank  my  God  always  on  vour  behalf,"  1  Cor.
chap.  14;  2  Thess.  chap,  l  3;  or,  "upon  every
remembrance  ofyou,"  Phil.  chap,  i.3;  1  Thess.
chap.  i.  5, 3;  2  Tim.  chap.  i.  3;  and  never  speaks
of  hearing  qf  them.  Yet  I  think  it  must  be  con-
cluded, from  the  nineteenth  verse  of  this  epistle,
that  Philemon  had  been  converted  by  St  Paul
himself:  "  Albeit*  I  do  not  say  to  thee  how  thou
otoest  unto  tne  even  thine  own  self  besides."  Here
then  is  a  peculiarity.  Let  urinquire  whether  the
epjstle  supplies'any  circumstance  which  will  ac-
count for.  it  We  have  seen  that  it  may  be  made
out,  not  from  the  epistle  itself,  but- from  a  compa-
rison of  the  epistle  with  that  to  the  Colossians,
that  Philemon  was  an  inhabitant  of  Colesse :  and
it  farther  appears,  from  the  Epistle  to  the  Colos-
aians,  that  St.  Paul  had  never  been  in 'that  city":
"  1-  would  that  ye  knew  what  great  conflict  I  have
for  you  and  for  them  at  Laodicea,  and  for  as  many
as  have  not  seen  my  face  in  the  flesh,"  Col.  ch.
M.  1.  Although,  therefore,  j3t.  Paul  had  formerly
met -with  Philemon  at  some  other  place,  and  had
been  the  immediate  instrument  of  his  conversion,
yet  Philemon's  faith  and  conduct  afterwards,  in-
asmuch as  he  lived  in  a  city  which  St.  Paul  had
never  visited,  could  only  be  known  to  him  by  fame
and  reputation*

No.  TV.

The  tenderness  and  delicacy  of  this  epistle  have
long  tieen  admired :  "  Though  I  might  be  much
bold  in  Christ  to  enjoin  thee  that  wluch  is  conve-
nient, yet  for  love's  sake  1  rather  beseech  tfiee,
being  such  an  one  as  Paul  the  aged,  and  now  also
a  prisoner  of  Jesus  Christ ;  I  beseech  thee  for  my

son  "your  fellow-traveller  imports  thai  you  are  then  upon
your  travalg.  If  be  had,  upon  any  former  occasion,
travelled  wifli  vou,'  vou  might  afterwnrris  speak  of  him
under  that  tide.  -It  hi  jtut  ao  with  the  term  fellow-
.  pawner.


son  Onesimus,  whom  I  hare  Vgotten  in  my
bonds.'1  Then  is  something  certainly  very  melting
and  persuasive  in  this,  and  every  part  of  the  epis-
tle. '  Vet,  in  my  opinion,  the  character  of  St.  Paul
prevails  in  it  throughout.  The  warm,  affectionate,
authoritative  teacher  is  interceding  with  ao  absent
friend' for  a  beloved  convert  fie  urges  bis  suit
with  an  earnestness,  befitting  perhaps  not  samuch
the  occasion,  as  the  ardour  and  sensibility  of  bis
own  mind.  Here  also,  as  every  where,  he  shows
himself  conscious  of  the  weight  and  dignity  of  his
mission ;  nor  does  he-suffer  Philemon  for  a  mo-
ment to  forget  it:  "I  might  be  much  bold  in
Christ  to  enjoin  thee  that  which  is  convenient"
He  is  careful  also  to  recall,  though  obliquely,  to
Philemon's  memory,  the  sacred. obligation  under
which  he  had  laid  him,  by  bringing  to  him  the
knowledge  of  Jesus  Christ:  "  I  do  not  say  to  thee
how  thou  owest  to  me.  even  thine  own  self  be-
sides." Without  laying  aside,  therefore,  the  apos-
tolic character,  our  author  softens  the  imperative
style  of  his  address,  by  mixing  with  it  every  sen-
timent and  consideration  that  could  move  the  heart
of  his  correspondent Aged  and  m  prison,  he  is

Onesimu


content  to  supplicate  and  entreat
rendered  dear  to  him  by  his  conversion  and  his
services:  the  child,  of  his  affliction,  and  "  minis-
tering unto  him  in  the  bonds  of  theOospel."  This
ought  to  recommend  him,  whatever  had  been  his
fault,  to  Philemon's  forgiveness:  "Receive  bin
as  myself,  as  my  own  bowels."  Every  thing,
however,  should  be  voluntary.  St  Paul  was  de-
termined that  Philemon's  compliance  should  flow
from  his  own  bounty :  "  Without  thy  mind  would
I  do  nothing,  that  thy  benefit  should  not  be  as  it
were  of  necessity,  but. willingly ;"  trusting  never-
theless to  his  gratitude  ana  attachment  for  the
performance  of  ail  that  he  requested,  and  for  more }
?<  Having  confidence  in  thy  obedience,  t  wrote
unto  thee,  knowing  that  thou  wilt  also  do  mora
than  I  say."

St.  Paul's  discourse  at  Miletus ;  his  speech  be-
fore Agrippa ;  his  Epistle  to  the  Romans,  as  hath
been  remarked,  (No.  VIII.)  that  to  the  GalaUana,
chap.  iv.  H — 20;  to  the  PhiUppians,  chap.  L  29—
chap.  iL  2  \  the  Second  to  the  Corinthians,  chap,
vi.  1 — 13 ;  and  indeed  some,  part  or  other  of  al-
most every  epistle,  exhibit  examples  of  a  similar
application  to  the  feelings  and  affections  of  the
persons  whom  he  addresses.  And  it  isobservable,
that  these  pathetic  effusions,  drawn  for  the  most
part  from  his  own  sufferings  and  situation,  usually
precede  a  command,  soften  a  rebuke,  or  *  mitigate
the  harshness  of  some  disagreeable  truth.


CHAPTER  XV.
The  Subscriptions  of  the  Epistles.

Six  of  these  subscriptions  are  false  or  improba-
ble; that  is,  they  are  either  absolutely  contradicted
by  the  contents  of  the  epistle,  or  are  difficult  to  be
reconciled  with  them.

I.  The  subscription*  of  the  First  Epistle  to  the
Corinthians  states  that  it  was  written  from  Phi*
Uppi,  notwithstanding  that,  in  the  sixteenth  chap-
ter and  the  eighth  veAe  of  the  epistle,  St  Paul
informs  the  Corinthians  that  he  will  "tarry  at
Ephesuft  until  Pentecost ;"  and  notwithstanding
that  he  begins  the  salutations  in  the  epistle  by


SUBSCRIPTIONS  OF  THE  EPISTLES.


fltf


teikhg  them  "the  enurcheTof  Asia  salute  youj
a  pretty  evident  indication  that  he  himself  wu  in
Asia  at  this  time/

IL  The  Epistle  to  the  Gelattans  is  by  the  sub-
scription dated  from  Rome;  yet,  in  the  epistle
itself,  fit  Pan)  eipi  eases  his  surprise  "that  they
were  so  *«m  removing  from  hiiutnat  called  them  p
whereas  his  journey  to  Rome  was  ten  years  pos-
terior to  the  conversion  of  the  Galatjans.  *  And
what,  I  think,  is  more  conclusive,  the  author,
though  speaking  of  himself  in  'this  more  than  any
other  epistle,  does  not  once'  mention  his  bends,  or
call  himself  a  prisoner:  which  he  had  not  failed
to  do  in  every  one  of  the  four  epistles  written  from
that  city,  and  during  that  imprisonment

III.  The  First-  Epistle  to  the  Thesselonian*
was  written,  theYubscription  tell*  us,  from  Athens:

?*  the  epistle  refers  expressly  to  the  coming  <ot
imotheus  from  Thessalonicd,  ch.  hi.  6\and  the
history  informs  us.  Acts  xviii.  5,  that  Timothy
came  out  of  Macedonia  to  St.*  Paul  at  Corinth.

.IV.  The  Second  Epistle  to  the  Thesealonians
b  dated,  and  without  any-  discoverable  reason,
from  Athens  also:  If  H  be  truly  the  second  ;  if  it
refer,  as  it  appears  to  do,  eh.  ii.  2.  to  the  first,  and
the  first  was  written  from  Corinth,  the  place  must
be.  erroneously  assigned,  for  the  history  does  not
allow  us  to  suppose  that  St  Paul,  after  he  had
reached  Corinth,  went  back  to  Athens.

Y.  The  First  Epistle  to  Timothy  the  subscrip-
tion asserts  to  have  been  sent  from  Laodicea ;  yet,
when  St.  Paul  writes,  "  I  besought  thee  to  abide
•all  at  Epbesos,  ■'•fivo/urof  »«f  M«iJer««ir(when  I
set  out  for  Macedonia,")  the  reader  is  naturally
led  tff  conclude,  that  he  wrote  the  letter  upon  his
arrival  in  that  country.

YL  The  Episfle  to  Titus  is  dated  from  Nico-
pofip  in  Macedonia,  whilst  no  city  of  that  name  is
Known  to  have  existed  in  that  province.

The  use;  and  the  only  use,  which  I- make  of
these  observations,  1s  to  show  how  easily  errors
and  contradictions  steal  in  where  the  writer  is  not
guided 'by  original  knowledge.  There  are  only
eleven  distinct  assignments  of  date  to  St  Paul's
Epistle*  (for  the  four  written  from  Rome  may  be
considered  as  plainly  contemporary ;)  and  of  these,
six  seem  to  be  erroneous.  1  do  not  attribute,  any
authority  to  these  subscriptions.  I  believe  them
to  have  been  conjectures  founded  sometimes  upon
loose  traditions,  out  more  generally  upon  a  con-
>  sicWafekai  of  some  particular  text,  without  suffi-
ciently comparing  it  with  other  parts  of  the
epistle,  with  different  epistles,  or  with  the  history.
Suppose  then  that  the  subscriptions  had  come
down  tor  ne  as  authentic  parts  of  the  epistles,  there
would  have  been  more  contrarieties  and  difficulties
arising  oat  of  these  final  verses,  than  from  all  the
rest  of  the  volume.  Yet,  if  Che  epistles  had  been
forged,  the  whole  must  have  been  made  up  of  the
same  elements  as  those  of  which  the  subscriptions
are  composed,  vis.  tradition,  conjecture,  and  infer-
ence: and*  it  would  have  remained  to  be  accounted
for  how,  whilst  so  many  errors  were  crowded  into
the  concluding  clauses  of  the  letters*  so  much  con-
sistency should  be  preserved  in  other  parts.

The  same  reflection  arises  from  observing  the
oversights  and  mistakes  whkWearned  men  have
committed,  when  arguing  upon  allusions  which
relate  to  time  and  place,  or  when  endeavouring  to
digest  scattejed  circumstances  into  a  continued
story.  It  is  mdeed  the  same  case;  for  these  sub-
f itHiuHfy  aw*  hi>  regarded  as  finnm*  flr^ti*)  a(n^


as  nothing  more. Of  this  liability  to  error  I  can
present  the  reader  with  a  notable  instance;  and
which  I  bring  forward  for  no  other  purpose  than
that'to  which  I  apply  the  erroneous  subscriptions.
Ludovicus  Capellus,  iftthat  part  of  his  Historia
Apostoiica  Illustrate,  which  is  entitled  De  Ordbm
Epist.  Paul.,  writing  upon  the  Second  Epistle  to
the  Corinthians,  triumphs  unmercifully  over  the
want  of  sagacity  in  Baronius,  who,  it  seems,
makes  St.  Paul  write  his  Epistle  to  Titus  from
Macedonia  upon  his  second  visit  into  that  pro-
vince; whereas  it  appears  from  the  history,  that
Titus,  instead  of  being  at  Crete,  where  the  epsta*
places  him,  was  at  that  time  sent  by  the  apostle
from  Macedonia  ttr  Corinth.—"  Animadverted
est,"'  says-  Capellus, "  magnam hominis  ilhus
•Cxi  »*••,,  mii  vuft  Titum  a  Paulo  in  Cietam  ab-
ductum,  ilficque  relktum,  cum  inde  Nicopohm
navigaret,  quern  tamen  agnoscit  a;Pauk>  ex  Mace-
donia missum  esse  Corinthum." This  psobaWy
will  be1  thought  a  detection  of  inconsistency  in  Ba>
roniua: But  what  is  the  most  remarkable  is,  that
in  the  same  chapter  in  which  he  thus  indulges  ms
contempt  of  BarbnkiB's  judgment,  Capellus  himself
fella  into  an  error  of  the  same  kind,  and  more  gross
and  palpable  than  that  winch  .he  reproves. For
he  begin*  the  chanter  by  stating  the  Second  Epjs* .
tie  to  the  Corinthians  and  the  First  Epistle-to  Ti-
mothy to  be  nearly  contemporary:  to  have  been
both  written' during  the  apostle's  second  visit  into
Macedonia ;  and  that  a  doubt  subsisted  concerning
the  immediate  priority  of  their  dates:  "Posterior
ad  eosdem  Cormtmos  Epktola,  et  Prior  ad  ?imo»
theum  certant  de  prioritate,  et  sub  judke  lis  est';
utraoue  autem  senpta  est  pautoJ>ostquam  Pauroa
Epheso  discessisset,  adeoque  dum  Maeedoniam
peragraret,  sed  utra  tempore  prsjeedat,  noiu1quetrt
Now,  in  the  first  place,  it  is  highly  improbable
that  the  two  epistles  should  have  been  written
either  nearly  together,  or  during  the  same  journey
through  Macedonia  j  for,  in  the  Epistle  to  the
Corinthians,  Timothy  appears  to  have  been  with
St  Paul;  in  the  epistle  addressed  to  hinvto  have
been  left  behind  at  Ephesus,  and  net  only  left  be-
hind, but  directed  to  continue  there  till  St.  Paul
should  return  to  that  city,  In  the  second  place  it  la
inconceivable,  that  a  question  should  be  proposed
concerning  the  priority  of  date  of  the  two  epistles  *
for,  when  St  Paul  ~  Li-  w--^  -  ^ — »•--
opens  his  address  to
thee  to  abide  still  at  Epjii
Macedonia,"  no  reader  can  doubt  but  that  ho  here
refers  to  the  loaf  interview  which  had  passed  be-
tween them :  that  he  had  not  seen  him  since;
whereas  if  the  epistle  beposterior  to  that  to  the
Corinthians,  vet  written  upon  the  same  visit  into
Macedonia,  this  could  not  be  true ;  fores  Timothy
was  along  with  St  Paul  when  he  wrote  to  the  Co-
rinthians, he  must,  upon  this  supposition,  have
passed  over  to  St.  Paul  in  Macedonia  after  he  had
been  left  by  him  at  Ephesus,  and  must-haver**
turned  to  Ephesus  again  before  the  epistle  was  writ-
ten. What  iniajed  Ludovicus  CapeDus  was  simply
this,— that  he  had  entirely  overlooked  Timothy's
name  In  the  superscription  of  the  Second  Epistle  to
the  Corinthians. Which  oversight  appears  not
only  in  the  quotation  which  we  have  given,  but
from  his  telling  us,  as  he  does,  that  Timothy  came
from  Ephesus  to  St.  Paul  at  Corinth,  whereas  the
superscription,  proves  that  Timothy  was  already
with  St  Paul  when  he  wrote  to'  the  Corinthians
from  Macedonia,


ooniY  ox  oase  oi  una  two  cuuhmh  ,
auL  in  bis  Epistle  to  Timothy,
i to  him  by  Baying,  "  asl  besougQt
I  at  Ephesus  when  1  went  into


HORJE  PAULINA.


CHAPTER  XVd

In  the  outset  of  this  inquiry,  the  reader  was  di-
rected to  cooader  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles  and  the
thirteen  epistles  of  St.  Pauk  as  certain  ancient
manuscripts  lately  discovered  in  the  closet  of  some
celebrated  library.  We  hrfvc  adhered  to  this  view
of  the,  subject  External  evidence  of  every  kind
has-been  removed  out  of  sight ;  and  our  endeavours
have  been  employed  to  collect  the  indications  of
truth  and  authenticity,  which  appeared  to  exist  in
the  writings  themselves,  and  to  result  from  a  com-
parison o/their  different  porta.  It  is  not  however
necessary  to  continue  this-  supposition  longer.
The  testimony  which  other  remains  of  contempo-
rary, or  the  monuments  of  adjoining  ages  aflbrd  to
the  receptk>nr notoriety,  and  public  estimation  of  a
hook,  form,  no  doubt,  the  first  proof  of  its  genuine-
ness. And  in  no  books  whatever  is  this  proof
iaoi»  complete,' than  in  those  at  present  under  our
consideration.  The  inquiries  of  learned  men,  and,
above  aH,  of  the  excellent  Lardner,  who  never
overstates  a  point  of  evidence,  **d  whose  fidelity
in  citing  his  authorities  has  in  no  one  instance
been  impeached,  have  established,  concerning
these  writings,  the  fcltowiiig  propositions :-

I.  That  in  the  age  immediately  posterior  tojhat
in  which  St  Paul  Uved,  his  letters  were  publicly
read  and  acknowledged.

{Some  of  them  are  quoted  or  alluded  toby  almost
evert  Christian  writer  that  followed,  by  Clement
of  ttom^hy  Hennas,  by  Ignatius,  by  Polycarp,
ArapleaorcotitemporarmBoftheaposUes;  by  Jus-
tin Martyr,  .by  the  churches  of  Gaul,  by  Irensus,
bvAthenagoras,  by  Theophilus,  by  Clement  of
Alexandria,  by  Hermies,  by  TertuJUan,  who  oc-
cupied the  succeeding  age.  Now  when  we  find  a
book  quoted  or  referred  to  by  on  ancient  author,
we  are  entitled  to  conclude,  that  it  was  read  and
received  in  the  age  and  country  in  which  that  au-
thor lived.  Ana  this  conclusion  does  not,  in  any
degree,  Test  upon  the  judgment  or  character  of  the
author  making  such  reference. .  Proceeding  by  this
rule,  we  have,  concerning  the  First  Epistle  to  the
Corinthians  in  particular,  within  forty  years  after
-  the  epistle  was  written,  evidence^  not  only,  of  its
being,  extant  at  Corinth,  but  of  its  being  known
and  read  at  Rome. — Clement,  bishop  of  that  city,
writing  to  the  church  of  Corinth,  uses  these  words  :
"-Take  into  your  hands  the  epistle  of  the  Blessed
Paul  the  apostle.  What  did.ne  at  first  write  unto
.  you  in  the  beginning  of  the  Gospel  1  Verily  he
did  by  the  Spirit-admonish  you  concerning  him-
self, and  Cephas,  and  Apollos,  because  that  even
then  you  did  form  parties."*  T|iis  was  written  at
a  time  when  probably  some  must  have  been  living,
at  Corinth,  who  remembered  St.  Paul's  ministry
there  and  the  receipt  of  the  epistle.  The  testimony
is  still  more  valuable,  as  it  spews  that  thejepistles
were  preserved'  in  the  churches  to  which,  they
were  sent,  and  that  they  were  spread  and  propa-
gated from  them  to  the  rest  of  the  Christian  com-
munity;. Agreeably  to  which  natural  mode  and
order  pf  their  publication,  Tertullian,  a  century
afterwards,  for  proof  of  the  integrity  and  genuine-
ness of  the  apostolic  writings,  bids  any  one,  who
is  Wilfing  to  exercise  his  curiosity  profitably-in  the
*~ ' " of  their  salvation,  to  visit  the  apostolical


•  Set  Lardaerr  vol.  xii.  n.  22.


churches,  jn  which  their  very-authentib  letters  are

recited,  ipse  authentic*)  liters  eerum  reritantur."
Then  he  goes  on:  "  Is  Achaia  near  you1  You
have  Corinth.  If  you  are  not  far  from  Macedonia,
you  have  Philippi,  you  have  Thessalonica.  If  you
can  go  to  Asia,  you  have  Ephcsus ;  "but  if  you  are
near  to  Italy,,  you-  have  Rome."*  I  adduce  this
passage  to  show,  that  "the  distinct  churches  or
Christian  societies,  to  which  St.  Paul's  epistles
were  sent,  subsisted  for  some  age*  afterwards;
that  bis  several  episflcswere  all  along  respectively
read  in  those  churches;  that  Christians  at  large
received^them  from  those  churches,  and  appealed
to  those  churches  for  their  originality  and  authen-
ticity.

v  Arguing  in  Hke  manner  from  citations  and  al-
lusions, we  have,  within  the -space  of  a  hundred
and  fifty  years  from  the  time  that  the  first  of  St
Paul's  epstles  was  written,  proofs  of  almost  all  of
them  being  read  v  in  Palestine,  Syria,  the  countries
of  Asia  Manor,  in  Egypt,  in  that  part  of  Africa
which  used  the  Latin  tongue,  in  Greece,  Italy.and
tjrauLt  I  do  .not  mean  «imply  to  assert,  that  with-
in the  space  of  a  hundred  and  fifty  years,  St.  Paul's)
epistles  were  read  in  those  countries,  for  I  believe
that  they  were  read  and  circulated  from  the  begin-
ning ;  but  that  proofs  of  their  being  so  read  occur
within  that  period.  ^  And  when  it  is  considered
how  few  of  the  primitive  Christians  wrote,  and  of
what  was  written  how  much  is  lost,  we  are  to -ac-
count it  extraordinary,  or  rather  as  a  sure  proof
of  the  extensiveneas  of  the  reputation  of  these
writings,  and  of  the.  general  respect  in  which  they
were  held,  that  so  many  testimonies,  and  of  such
antiquity,  are  still  extant  "  In  the .  remaining
works  of  Irensus,  Clement  of  Alexandria,  and
Tertullian.  there  are  perhaps  more  And  larger  quo-
tations of  the  small/volume  of  the  New  Testament,
than  of  all  the  works  of  Cicero,  in  the  writings  of
all  characters  for  several  ages.  *-  We  must  add,
that  all  the  epistles  of  Paul  .come  'm  for  their  full
share  of  this  observation ;  and  that  all  the  thirteen
epistles,  except  that  to  Philemon,  which  is  not
quoted  by  Irensus  or  Clement,  and  which  proba-
bly escaped  notice  merely  by  its  brevity,  are  -seve-
rally cited,  and  expressly  recognised  as  St.  Paul's
by  each  of  these  Christian  writers.  T,to  Ebion-
ites,  an  early  though  inconsiderable  Christian  sec^
rejected,  St.  Paul  and  his  epistles  ;§  that  is,  they
rejected  these  epistles,  not  because  they  were  not,
but  because  they  were  St.  Paul's ;  and  because,
adhering  to  the  obligation  of  the  Jewish"  law,  the^f
chose  to  dispute  his  doctrine  and  authority.;  Then*
suffrage  as  to  the  genuineness  of  the  epistles  does
qot  contradict  that  of  other  Christians.  Marcion.
an  heretical  writer  in  the  former  part  of  the  second
century,,  is  said  by  Tertullian  to  have  rejected
three  of  the  epistles  which  we  now  receive,  viz.  the
two  Epistles  to  Timothy  and  the  Epistle  to  Titus.
It  appears  to  me  not  improbable,  that  Marcion
might  make  some  such  distinction  as  this,  that  no
apostolic  epistle  was  to  be  admitted  which  was  not
read  or  attested  by  the  churdi  to  which,  it  was
sent;  for  it  is  remarkable  that,  together  with  these
epistles  to  private  persons,  he  rejected  also. the
catholic  epistles. .  IN  ow  the  catholic  epistles  and
ttie  epistles  to  private  persons  agree  in  the  circum-
stances of  wanting  this  particular  species  of  attest-


*  Lardner,  vol.  ik  p.  505.
t  See  Lardner's  Recatstulatfon,  vol.  xii.  p.  53.
i  Ibid,  vol.  xii.  p.  53.
.  ^  Lardner,  vol.  li.  p.  808.


THE  CONCLUSION.


227


Marcfcm,  -it  sedms,  acknowledged  the
Epistle  to  Philemon/ and.  ifl  upbraided  for  his  in-
consistency in  doing  so  •  by  Tertultian,*  who  asks
u  why  when  he  received  a  letter  written. to  a  sin*-
gle  person,  he  should  refuse  two  to  Timothy  and
one  to  Titos  composed  upon  the  affairs  of  the
church  ?"  This  passage  so  far  favours  our  account
of  Mercian's  objection,  as  it  shows  that  the  objec-
tion was  supposed  by  Tertuilian  to  have  been
founded  in  something  which  belonged  to  theLna-
ture  of  a  private  letter.,

Nothing  of  the-  works  of  Maroion  remain*.  Pro-
bably hs  was,  after  all,  a  rash,  arbitrary,  licentious
critic,  (if  he  deserved  indeed  the  name  of  critic,)
and  who  offered  no  season  for  his  determination.
What  St  Jerome  says  of  him  intimates  this,  and
is  besides-  founded  in  good  sense :  ^peaHng  of  him
axid  Basffldes,  "If  they. assumed  any. reasons,"
says  he,  "  why  they  did  not  reckon  these«pi8tleB,n
viz.' -the  First  and  Second  to  Timothy,  and  the
Epistle  to  Titus,  "to  be  the  apostle's,  we  would
have  endeavoured  to  have  answered  them,  and
perhaps  might  have  satisfied  the  reader :  but  When
they  take  upon  them,  by  .their  own  authority,  to
pronounce  one  epistle  to  be  Paul's  and  another
not;  they  can  only,  be  replied  to  in  the  same  man-
ner, "t  Let  h  be  remembered,  however,  that  Mar-
eiort  received  ten  of  these  epistles:  *  His  authority,
therefore,  even  if  his  credit  had^een  better  than
it  is,  forms  a  very,  small  exception  to  the  uniformity
of  the  evidence.  Of*  Basiliues  we  know  still  less
than  we  do  of  Marcion.  The  samd  observation,
however;  belongs  to  him,  vis.  that  his  objection,  as
for  as  appears  from- this  passage  of  St.  Jerome,  was
confined  to  the  three  private  epistles.  Yet  is  this
the  only  opinion  which  ean  be  said  to  disturb  the
consent  or  the  first  two  centuries  of  the  Christian
em:  for  as  to  Tatian,  who  is  reported  by  Jerome-
atone  to  have  rejected  someof.St.  Paul's  epistles,
the  extravagant  or  rather  delirious,  notions  into
which  he  fell,  take  away  all  weight  and  credit  from
his  judgment-—-— If,  indeed,  Jerome's  account  of
this*  circumstance  be  correct :  for  it  appears  from
much  older  writers  than  Jerome,  ihat  Tatian
owned  and  used  many  of  these  epistles.* .
•  U.  Tber,  who  in  those  ages  disputed  about
so  many  other  points,  agreed  in  acknowledging
the  Scriptures  now  before  us.  Contending  sects
appealed  to  them  in  their  controversies  with  equal
and  unreserved  submission.  When  they  were
urged  by  one  side,  however  they  might  be  inter-
preted or  a^smterpretod  by  the  other,  their  autho-
rity wwTici^uestkmed.  "  Retiqui  omnes,"  says.
IrensBS,  speaking  of  Mareion,  "falso  ecicotie
nomine  innati,  senpturas  quidem  conjitentur,  in-
terpretationes  vero  convertunt."§-

IIL  When  the  genuineness  of  some  other,
writings  which' were  in- circulation,  and  even  of  a
km  which  are  now  received  into  the  canon,  was
contested,  these  were  never  called  into  dispute.
Whatever  waa  the  objection/ or  whether  in  truth-
there  ever  was  any  real  objection,  to  the  authen-
ticity of  the  Second  Epistle  of  Peter,  the  Second
and  Third  of  John,  the  Epistle  of  James,  or  that
of  Jude,  or  to  the  book  of  the  Revelation  of  St.
John;  the  aeubts'that  appeared  to  have  been  en-
tertained concerning  them,  exceedingly  strengthen
the  force  of  the  testimony  as  to  those  writings
about  which  there  was  no  ooubt ;  because  it  shows,


that  the  matter  was  a  subject,  amongst  the  early*
Christians,  of  examination  and  discussion ;  and
that  where  there  was  any  room  to  doubt  they  did
doubt.  '  —, J*-,

What  Eusebius  hath  left  upon  the  subject  is
directly  to  the  purpose  of  this  observation.  Euse-
bius, it  is  well  known}  divided  the  .ecclesiastical
writings  which  were  extant  in  his- time  into  three
classes:  the  "•VVt«mi,i,.,  uncontradicted,"  as  he
calls  them  in  one  chapter j  or,  "scriptures  uni-
versally acknowledged,  as  he  calls  them  in  ano-
ther; the  "controverted, yet  weli known  and  ap-.
preyed  by  manj;"  and  the  "spurious."  What
Were  the  shades  of -difference  in  tlrt  books  of  the
second,  or  of  those  in  the  third  class;  or  what  it
was  precisely  that  he  meamVey  the  term  spurious,
it  ia  not  necessary  in  this  place'  to  inquire.  It  is
sufficient  for  us  to  find,  that  the  thirteen  epistles
of  St.  Paul  are  placed  by  him  in  the  fust  class
without  «nv  sort  of  hesitation  or  doubt.

It  is  farther valso  to  be  collected  from  the  chap-
ter in  which  this  -distinction  is  laid  down,  "that
the  method  made  use  of  by 'Eusebius,  and -by  the
Christians  of  his  time,  viz.  the  close  of  the  third
century,  in  judging  concerning  the  sacred  aju-  .
tbority  vof  any  books,  was  to  inquire-  after  and
consider  the  testimony  of  those  who  liyed  near
the  age  of  the  Apostles."*

IVT  That  Ho  ancient  writing^which  is  attested
asJhesc  epistles  are,  hath /had  its  authenticity  dis-
proved, or  is  in  fast  questioned.  The  controver-
sies which  have  been  moved  concerning  suspected
writings,  as  the  epistles,  for  instance,  of  Phalaria,
or  the  eighteen  epistles  of  Cicero,  begin  by  show?
ing  that  this  attestation  is  wanting/  ,  That  being
proved,  the  question  is  thrown  back  upon.in(ernal
znarjks.  ef  spuriousness,  or  authenticity ;  and  in
these  the  dispute  is' occupied.  In  which  clisputes
his  to  be  observed,  that. the  contested  writings
are  commonly  -attacked  byaxruments  drawn  from
some  opposition  which  they  betray  to  "  authentic
history,'*  to  "true  epistles,"  to  the  "real  senti-
ments or  circumstances  of  the  author  whom  they
personate ;"+  which  authentic  history,  which  true,
epistles,  which  real  sentiments  themselves,  are  no  '
other  than  ancient  documents,  whose  early  ex-
istence and  reception  can  be  proved,  in  the  man-
ner in  which  the  writings  before  us  are  traced  up
to- the  age  of  their  reputed  'author,  or  to  ages.hear
to  his. '  A  modern  wno  sits  down  to  compose  the
history  of  some  ancient  period,  has-  no  stronger
evidence  to  appeal  to  for  the  most  confident  asser-
tion, or  the  most  undisputed  feet  that  he  delivers,
than  writings, -whose  genuineness  is  proved  by
the  same  medium  through  which  we  evince  the
authenticity  of  ours.  Nor,  whilst  he  can  have  re-
course to  such  authorities  as  these,  does  he  appre-
hend any  uncertainty  in  his  accounts,  from  the.
suspicion  ef  spuriousness  or  imposture  in  his  ma-
terials.

V.  It  cannot  be  showruthat  any  forgeries,  pro-
perly so  catted,*  that  is,  writings  published  under
the  name  of  the  person  who  did  not  compose  them,
made  their  appearance  in  the  first  century  of  the


♦  Lardner„vsl.  xiv.  p.  4&.. t  Ibid.  vol.  xiv.  p.  458.
1  Ibid.  vol.  I.  p.  3}fr .  . /

I  lien,  advent.  Hav.  quoted  by  Lerdaer,  vol.  zv.  p.  436.


*  Lardner,  vol.  viii.  p;  AM.

t  See  the  tract*  written  in  the  controversy  between
Tunstal  and  JMiddleton  upon  certain  suspected  epistles
ascribed  to  Cicero.  •  .  %

.  1 1  believe,  that  there  is  a  great  deal  of  truth  in  Dr.
LardneTa  observation;  that  comparatively  few  of  those
books  which  we  ca41  apocryphal  were  strictly  and  origin
nally  forgeries.— See  Lardner,  vol.  Mi.  p.  10?.


H0&£  PAULINA


Christian  arm,  in  which  eentury  these  epistles  un-
otabtedly  existed.-^  shall  set  down  wider  this
proposition  the  guarded  words  of  Laidner  him-
self r  "  There  are  no  quotations  of  any  hooks  of
them  (spurious  and  apocryphal  books)  jn  the
snostoheal  fothers,  by  whom  1  mean  Barnabas,
Clement  of  Rome,  Hermas,  Ignatius,  find  Poly-
carp,  whose  writings  reach  fsom  the  year  of  our
Lord  70  to  the  year  106.  /  say  this  confidently,
beeaime  I  think  it  has  -been  proved."— Lardner,
vul.  xiL  p.  158.

Nor  when  they  did  appear  were  ther  much
Used  by  the  primitive  Christians,  "Ireneus
quotes  not  any  of  these  books.  He  mentions  some
of  them,  but  he  never  quotes  them.  The  same
may  be  said  of  TertuUian:  he  has  mentioned  a
book  called  '  Acts  of  Paul  and  Thee  la  ;'*but  it  is
only  to  condemn  it  Clement  of  Alexandria  and
Ongenhave  mentioned  and  quoted  several  such
books,  but  never  as  authority,  anAsometimes  with
empress  marksof  dislike.  Eusebins  quoted  no  such
books  in  any  cf  his  works.  He  Das'  mentioned
them  indeed,  but  how  ?  Not  by  way  of  approba-
tion, but  to- shew  that,  they  Were  of  little  or  no

.  value ;  and  that  they  never  were  received  by  the
sounder  part  of  Christians."  Now  if  with  this,
Which  is  advanced  after  the  moat  minute  and-dili-
t  examination,  we  compare  what  the  same  cau-
i  writerhad  before  said  of  our  received  Scrip-
tures, "  that  in  the  works  of  three  only  of  the
above-mentioned  fathers,  there  are  more  and  Ikrger
quotations  of  the  small  volume  of  the  New  Tes-
tament, than  of  all  the.  works  of  Cicero  in  the
writers  of  all  characters  for  several  ages  ;rf  and  if
With  the  marks  of  obscurity  or  condemnation,
which  accompanied  the 'mention  of  the  several
apocryphal  Christian  writings,  when  they  hap-
pened to  be  mentioned  at  all,  we  contrast  what
Dr.  Lardner'e  work  completely  and  in  detail
mates  out  concerning  the  writings  which  we  de-
fend, and  what,  hiring  so  made  out,  he  thought
himself  authorized  in  his  conclusion  to  assert,
that  these  books  were  not  only  received  from
.the  beginning,  but  received  with  the  greatest
respect;  have  been  publicly  and  solemnly  read
in  the  assemblies  of  Christians  throughout  the

x  world,  in  every  age,  from  that  time  to  this;  early
translated  into  the  languages  of  divers  countries
and  people;  commentaries  writ  to  explain  and  il-
lustrate them;  quoted  by  way  of  pnof  in  all  ar-
guments of  a  religious  nature ;  recommended  to
tile  perusal  of  unbelievers,  as  containing  the  au-
thentic account  of  the  Christian  doctrine ;  when
we  attend,  I  say,  to  this  representation,  we  per-
ceive in  it  not  «nly  full  .proof  of  the.  early  no-
toriety of  these  books,  hut  a  clear  and  sensible
fane  of  discrimination,  which  separates  these  from
tliepretensions  of  any  others.
.  The  epistles  of  St  Paul  stand  particularly  free
of  any  doubt  or  confusion  that  might  arise  from
this  source.  Until  the  conclusion  of  the  fourth
century,  no  intimation  appears  of  any  attempt
whatever  being  made  to  counterfeit  these  writings ;
and  then  it  appears  only  of  a  single  and*obscure
instance.  Jerome,  who  flourished  in  the  year  392,
has  this  expression : '"  Legunt  quidam  et  ad  Lao-
dfcenses ;  eed  ab  omnibus  explodttur ;"  there  is  also
an  Epistle  to  the  Laodicean*,  but  it  is  rejected  by
every  body.*  Theodore*,  who  wrote  in  the  year
493,  speaks  of  this  epistle  in  the  same  terms.t


►Lardner,  vol.  x.  p.  103.


t  Ibid.  vol.  xi  p  88.


Beside  these,*  knew  not  whether  any
writer  mentions  it  ft  was  certainly  unnoticed
during  the  first  three  centuries  of  the  churah ;  and
when-  it  came  afterwards  to  be  mentioned,  it  was
mentioned  only  to  show,  that,  .though  such  a
writing  did  exist,  it  obtained  no  credit.  It  is  pro-
bable that  the  forgery  to  which  Jerome  alludes,  is
-the  epistle  which  we  now  mive  under  that  title,
if  so,  as  hath  been  already  observed,  it  is  nothing
more  than  a 'collection  of  sentences  from  the
genuine  epistles;  and  was  perhaps,  at  fisst,  mther
the  exercise  of  some  idle  pen,  than  any  serious  at-
tempt to  impose  a  forgery  upon  the  public.  <  Of
an  Epistle  to  the  Corinthians  under  St  Paul's
name,  which  was  brought  into  Europe  in  the
present  century,  antiquity  is  entirely  silent.  It
waa  unheard  of  for  sixteen  centuries ;  and  at  this
day,  though  H  be  extant,  and  was- first  found  in
the  Armenian  language,  it  is  not,  by  the  Chris-
tians of  that  country,  received  into  their  Scrip-
tures. I  hope,  after  this,  that  there  is  no  reader
who  will  think  there  is  any  competition  of  credit^
or  of  external  proof,  between  these  and  the  re-
ceived Epistles.;  or  rather,  who  will  not  acknow-
ledge the  evidence  of  authenticity  to  be  con-
firmed by  the  want  of  sure*—  which  attended  im-
posture.

When  we  take  into  our  hands  the  letters
which,  the  suffrage  and.  consent  of  antiquity
hath  thus  transmitted  to  us,  the  first  tlyng  that
strikes  our  attention  is  the  air  of  reality  and  bu-
siness; as  well  as  of  seriousness  and  conviction,
which  pervades  the  whole.  Let  the- sceptic  lead
them,,  if  he  be  not  sensible  of  these  qualities  hi
tiiem,  the  argument  can  have  no  weight  with
him.  If  he  be;  if  he  perceive  in  almost  every
page  the  language  jo(  a  mind  actuated  by  real
occasions,  and  operating  upon  real  circumstances,
\  would  wish  it  to  be  observed,  that  the  proof
which  arises  from  this  perception  is  not  to  be
deemed  occult  or  imaginary,  because  it  is  incapa-
ble of  being  drawn  out  in  words,  orofbeing  con-
veyed to  the  apprehension  of  the  reader  in  any
other  way,  than  by  senchng  him  to  the  books
themselves.

And  here,  in  its  proper  place,  comes  in  the  ar-
gument which  it  has  been  the  ofhoeof  these  page*
to  unfold.  St  Paul's  epistles  are  connected  with
the  history  by~their  particularity,  and  by  the  nu-
merous encumstances  which  are  found  in  them.
When  we  descend  te  an-  examination  and  com-
parison of  these  circumstances,  we  not  only  ob-
serve the  history  and  the  epistles  to  be  indepen-
dent documents  unknown  to,  or  at;  least  oncon-
sutted  by,  each  other,  but  we  find  the  substance,
-and  oftentimes  very  minute  articles,  c£  the  history,
recognized  in  the  epistles,  by  allusions  and  re-
ference which  can  neither  be  imputed  tbdeaign.
nor,  without  a  foundation  in  truth,  be  accounted
for  by  accident;  by  hints  and  expressions,  and
single  word*  dropping  as  it  were  fortuitously  from
the  pen  of  the  writer,  or  drawn  forth,  each  by  some
occasion  proper  to  the  place  in  whkh  it -occurs,
"but  widely  removed  from  any  view  to  consistency
or  agreement.  These,  we' know,  are  effects  which
reality  naturally  produces,  but  which,  without
reality  'at  the  bottom,  can  hardly  be  conceived^to
exist.,.

When  therefore,  with  a  body  of  external  evi-
dence, Which  is  relied  upon,  and  which  experience
proves  may-safely  be  relied  upon,  in  appreciating
the  credit  of  ancient  writings,  we  combine  charac-


THE  CONCLUSION*


torn  of  geneinenesj  and  originality  which  are  not
found,  and  which,  in  the  nature  and  order  of
firings,  cannot  be  expected  to  be  found  in  spurious
compositions;  whatever  difficulties  we  may  Meet
with  to  ether  topic*  of  the  Christian  evidence,  we
can  haw/  ltttfc  in  yielding  our  assent  to  the  fol-
lowing oottcrueions:  That  there  was  iuch  a  per-
son as  St  Paul;  that  he  lived  in  the  age  which
we  ascribe  to  him ;  that  he  went  about  peaching
the  religion  of  which  Jesus  Christ  was  the  founder ;
and  that  the- tetters  which  we  now  read  were  ac-
tually written  by  him  upon  the  subject,  and  in  the
course  of  that  his  ministry.
I  And  if  it  be  true  that  we  are  in  possession  of
die  wav  letters  which  St.  Paul  wrote,  let  us  con-
sider what  confirmation  they  afford  to  the  Chris-
tian history.  In  myopwion'tbeyeubstantiate'the
whole  transaction.  The  greatobject  of  modern  re-
seaach  as  to  come  at  the  epistolary  eonespondence
of  the  times.  Amidst  the  obscurities,  the  silence,
or  the-coptraxfictioiis  of  history,  if  a  letter  can  be
fpund,  we  regard  it  as  the  discovery  of  a  land-
ssark,;  a*  that  by  which  we  can  correct  ^  adjust,  or
supply  tbeiinpeffections  and  uncattainties  of  other
accounts.  One  cause  of  the  superior  credit  which
is  attributed  to  letters  is  this,  that  the  facts  which
they  disclose  generally  eome  out  incidentally,  and
therefore  without  design  to  nusleadthe  public  by
false  or  exaggerated  accounts. This  reason  may


i  may
be  applied  to~&t  Paufs  epistles  with  as  much  jus-
ties  as  to  any  letters  whatever.  Nothing  conld  be
fcrtber  from  the  intention  of  the  writer  than  to
leeord  any  port  of  his  history.  That  his  history
Was  in  fact  made  public  by  these  letters,  and  has
by  the  same  means  been  transmitted  to  f btureages,
is  a  secondary  and  unthought-of  effect  The  sin-
ccrity  therefore  of  the  apostle'*  declarations  cannot
reasonably  be  disputed;  at  least  we  are  sure  that
it  was  not  vitiated  by  any  desire  of  setta^  himself
off  to  ttopubncat  large.-  But  these  letters  form
apart  ofthe  munhnentw  of  Christianity,  as  much
to  be  valued  for  their  contents,  es  for  their  origi-
riahty.  A  n»re  mestunabte  treasure  the  cartf  of
aati^oiry  couU  not  have  sent  down-  to  us.  Beside
the  proof  they  afford  of  the  general  reality  of  St
PauPs  history,  of  the  knowledge  which  thaauthor
ofthe  Aets  of  tfee  Apostles  had  obtained  of  that
history,  and  the  consequent  probability  that  he
was,  wha^on  profoajia  himself  to  have  been,  a
cnsjnanhm  of  the  apostles;  be«*k  the  support  ttej
lend  to  these  important  inferences,  they  meet  spe-
rWffslj  sums  of  fte  principal  objections  upon
wnmltthe  adversaries  of  Christianity  have  thought
projpsrtorely. In  particular  they  ahow,~

£  That  Chrirt^tyv^  not  a  story  set  on  foot
anridst  the  confusions  whidLattended  sndinune-
diately  preceded  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem;
whe^saanv  extravagant  reports  were  circulated,
when  men%  minds  were  broken  by  terror  and  dis-
tress, when  amidst  the  tumufta  that  surrounded
them  infuoy  was  impracticable.  These  letters
show  mccsitestably  that  the  lehgion  had  fixed  and
established  itself  before  this  state  of  things  took

li/ Whereas  it  hath  been  insinuated,  that  our
Gospels  may  .have  been  made  up  of-  reports  andf
stones,  which  were  cunent  at  the  time,  we  may
•  observe  that,  with  reapect.tothe  Epistles,  this  is
Impossible;  A  man  cannot  write  the  history  of  his
own  fife  from  reports;  nor,-  what  is  the  same  thing,
be  led  by  reports  to  refer  to  passages  and  transac-
tions m  which  he  states  himself  to  have  been  im-


mediately  present  and  active. I  do  not  allow  that
this  insinuation  is  apptted  to  the  historical  part  of
the  New  Testament  with  any  colour  of  justice  or  s
probability;  bu$  I  say,  that  to  the  Epistles  it  is  not
applicable  at  all.

HI,  Tbese  tetters  prove  that  the  converts  to
Christianity  were  not  drawn  from  the  barbarous,  .
the  mean,  or  the  ignorant  set  of  men  which  the  re*
presentations  of  infidelity  would  sometimes  make
them.  We.  learn  from  letters  the  character  not
only  ef  the  writer,  but,  in  some  measure;  of  the
persons  to  whom  they  are  written.  To  suppose
that  these  letters  were  addressed  to  a  rude  tribe,
incapable  of  thought  or  reflection,  is  just  as  rea-
sonable as  to  suppose  Locke's  Essay  on  the  Ha-
ssan Understanding  to  have  been  written  for  the
instruction  of  savages.  Whatever  may  bethought **
«f  these  letters  in  other  respects,  either,  of  dictis**
or  argument,  they  are  certainly  removed  as  for  as*
possible  from  the  habits  and  comprehenaioo  of  a
barbarous  peoi


IV.  St.  Tsui's  history,  Lmean  so  much  of  it  as
may  be  collected  from  hs>  tetters,  is  so  instated
with  that  of  the  other  apostles,  and  with  the  tub*
stance  indeed -bf  the  Christian  history  itself,  that
I  apprehend  it  wiU  be  found  impossible  to  admit
St  Paul's  story  (I  dtfnot  speak  of  the  numoulous
part  of  it)  to  be  true,  and  yet  to  reject  the  rest  as
fabulous.  For  instance,  can  any  one  believe  that
there  was  such  a  man  as  Paul,  a  preacher  of  Chris-
tianity in  the  age  which  we  assign  to  him,  and

*  itherei "


not  believe  that  there  was  also  at  the  same  tune
•such  a  man  as  Peter  and  James,  and  other  apos-
tles, who  had  been  companions  of  Christ  during
his  life,  and  who  after  his  death  published  and
avowed  the  same  things  concerning  mm-  which
Paul  taught?  Jodea,  and  especially  Jerusalem,"
was  the  scene  of  Christ's  ministry.  The  witnesses
ofbiajnlmclee  lived  there.  St  Paul,  by  his  own
account-,  as  well  as  that  of  bis  historian,  appears
to  have  frequently  visited  that jciry ;  to  have  car-
ried on  a  conimunication  with  the  church  there:
to  have  associated  with  the  rulers,  and  elders  of
that  church,  who  were  some  of  them  apostles;  to
have  acted,  as  occasions  offered,  in  correspoiidence,
and  sometimes  in  conjunction  with  them.  Can
it,  aite*  this,  be  doubted,  but  that  the  religion  and
the  general  facts  relating  to  it,  which  St  Paul  ap-
pears by  his  letters  to  have  delivered  to  the  seve-
ral churches  which  he  established  at  -a  distance,
were  st  the  same  rime  taught  and  published  at  Je-
rusalem itself,  the  place  where  the  business  was
transacted;  and  taught  and  published  by  those
who  had  attended  the  founder  of  the  institution  m
bjs.ndraculous,  or  pretendedly  miraculous,  minis-
try? ' .

It  is  observable,  for  so*  it  appears  both  in  the
Epistles  and  from  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  that
Jerusalem,  and  the  society  of  believers  in  that  city,
long  continued  the  centre  from  which  the  mission-
aries of  the  religion  issued,  with  which,,  all  other
churches  maintained  a  correspondence  and  con-
nexion, to  which,  they  referred  their  doubts,  and
to  whose  relief,  in  limes  of  public  distress,  they
remitted  their  charitable  assistance.  This  obser-
vation I  Uiink  material,  because  ft  proves  tfiat  this
was  not  the  case  of  giving  our  accounts  in  one
country  of  what  is  transacted  in  another,  without
affonftng  the  hearers  -an  opportunity  of  knowing
whether  the  things  related  were  credited  by  any,
or  even  published,  in  the  place  where  they  are  re-
ported to  have  passed.  -


flSO


HORJE  PAUfctNJE.


V.  fift.  Paul's  letters  furnish  evidence  (and  what  j  deeply  unpiessed,  but -not  more  so  than  the  ocas*
better  evidence  than  a  man's  own  letters  can  be sioh  merited,  wjth  a


denied?)  of  the  soundness  and  sobriety  of  his
Judgment  Hi*  caution  in  distinguishing  between
the  occasional  suggestions  of  inspiration,  and  the
ordinary  exerciae  of  his  natural  understanding,  is
without  example  in  the  history  of  human  eni


tts  morality  is  every  where  calm,  pure,
and  rational;  adapted  to  the  condition,^he  activity,
and  the-husiness  of  social  lift,  and  pf  its.  various
relations;  free  from  the  oversorupulouaness  and
austerities  of  superstition,  and  from  what-  was
more  perhaps  to  be  apprehended,  the  abstractions
of  quietism,  and  the  soarings  and  extravagancies
of  fanaticism.  His  judgment  concerning  a  hesi-
tating conscience  fhis  opinion  of  the  moral  indifle-
rency  of  many  actions,  vet  of  .the  prudence  and
even  the  duty  of  compliance,  where  non^oonapti-
ance  would  produce  evil' effects  upon  the  minds  of
the  persons  who  observed  it,  is,  as  correct  and  just
as  the  most  liberal  and  enlightened  moralist  cooil


form  at'  this  day.  The  accuracy  of  modern  ethics
has  round  nothing  tolamend  in  these  determina-
tions.

What  LordLyttleton  has  remarked  of  the  pre-
forence  ascribed  by  /St.  Paul  to  inward  rectitude
of  principle  above  every  other  religious  accomplish-
ment, is  very*  material  to  euf  present  purpose.
MIn  his  First  Epistle  to  the  Corinthians,  ehap,
xni.  1—3,  St.  Paul  has  these  words:  .Though  I
apeak  vrtth  the  tongue  of  men^and  qf angels,  and
have  not  charity,  I  am  become'  aa  Bounding  bran
or  a  tinkling  cymbal.  And  though  I  have  the
gift  qf  prophecy,  and  understand  all  mysteries,
and  aM  knowledge  ;  and  though  I  have  all  faith,
m  that  I  could+emove  mountains,  and  have  not
charity,  I  am  nothing. And  though  1  bestow  all

.  my  goods  to  feed  the  poor,  arid  though  I  give  my
body  to  be  burned,  and  have  not.  charity,  it  pro-'
fteth  me  nothing: "  Is  this  the  language  of  en-
iBMiasm?  •  Did  ever  enthusiast  prefer  that  uni-
versal benevolence  which  compreheikdeth  all  moral
virtues, 'and  which,  as  appeareth  by  the  following
verses,  is  meant  by  chanty  here ;  did  ever  enthu-
siast, I  say,  prefer  that  benevolence"  (which  we
may  add  is  attainable  by  every  man)  "  to  faith  and
to  mtraciea,  to  those  tefigious  opinions,  which  he

.  had  embraced,  and  to  those  supernatural  graces
and  gifts  which  he  imagined  he  had  acquired;  nay,
even  to  the  merit  of  martyrdom?  Is  St  not  the
genius  of  enthusiasm  to  set  moral  virtues  infinitely  <
below  the  merit  of  fidth ;  and  of  all  moral  virtues
to  value  that  least  which  is'  most  particularly  en-
forced by  St.  Paul,  a  spirit  of  candom\  moderation,
and  peace  1  Certainly  neither  the  temper  nor  the
opinions  of  a  man  subject  to  fanatic  delusions  are
to  be  found  in  this  passage." — L&rcl  Lyttleton's
Considerations  on  the  Conversion,  4*:

I  see  no  reason  therefore  to  question  the  inte-
grity of  his  understand!  ng.  To  call  him  a  vision-,
ary,,  because  he  appealed  to  visions;- or  an  enthu-
siast, because  he  pretended  to  inspiration,  is  to
take  the  whole  question  for  granted.  It  is  to  take
for  granted  that'  no  such  visions  or  inspirations
existed :  at  least  it  is  to  assume,  contrary  to  his
own  assertions,  that  he  had  no  other  proofed  than
these  to  offer  of  his  mission,  or  of  the  truth  of  his
relations.


sense  of  its  importance.  Tms
produces  a  corresponding  animation  and  «nli«gffidf
m  the  exercise  of  his  ministry.  -But  wpuld  not
these  considerations,  supposing  them  to  be  well
founded,  have  hohlcn  the  same  place,  and  produced
the  same  effect,  in  a  mind  the  strongest  and  the
most- sedate  1

VI.  These  letters  are  decisive  as  to  the  su£er-
inga  of  the  author:  also  as  to  the  distressed  state
of  the  Christian  church,  and  the  dangers  which
attended  the  preaching  of  the  Gospel.

"  Whereot  I  Paul  am  made  a  vntnister;  who
now  rejoice  in  my  sufferings  fat  you,  and  fill  up
that  which  is  'behind  of  the  afflictions  of  Chrht  in
my  flesh,  for  his  body's  sake,  which  is  the  crouch,"
Col.  ch.  i.  34.

"  If  in  this  life  only  we  haveJbope  in  Christ,  we
are  of  alimen  moat  miserable,"  1  Cor.  ch.  xv.9.

"  Why  stand  we  in  jeoDardycnery  hour  ?  1  pro
test  by  your  rejoicing,  which  1  have  in  Christ  Je-
sus our  Lord,  I  die  daily .  If,  after  the  manner  of
men,  I  have  fought  with  beasts  at  Ephesue,<whaa
advantageth  it  me,  if  the  dead  rise  notl"  1  Cor.
ch.  xv.  30,  Ac • ' .  >

a  If  children,  then  heirs;  heirs  of God,  and  joint
heirs  with  Christ:  if  so  he  that  we  suffer  with
him,  that  we  may  be  also  glorified  together.  -For  .
I  reckon  that  the  sufferings  of  this  present  time
an  not  worthy  to  be  compared  with  the-  gmrr
which  shall  belevealed  in  us,"  Rom.  chap.  via.
17,18.  s -  •.

"  Who  shall  separate  ua  from  the-loveof  Christ*?
shall  tribulation.-  or  distress,  or  .persecution,  -or.
fomine,  or  nakedness,  or  peril,  or  swerd  ?  Aa  it
is  'written,  for  thy  sake  we  are  killed.  aH  the  day
long,  we  are  accounted  as  sheep  for  the  staughtet, v
Rom.  ch.  vni.  35,  36.  • /

"Rejoicing  in  hsipe,  patient  in  tribulation,
continuing  instant  in  prayer,"  Rom.  ch.xn.lS.

"  Now  concerning  virgins  I  have  no  commsmd-
ment  of  the  Lord :  yet  I  give  my  judgment  aa  one
that  hath  obtained  mercy  of  the  Lord  to  be  frith*
fill,  I'suppose  therefore  thai  this  isjood  for  the
present  distress  r  I  say,  that  it  is  good  for  a  man
Jo  to  be,"  1  Cot.  ch.  vii.  25,  96.

•  "Fornntoyou.it  is  given,  in  the  behalf  of  Christ,
not  only  to  believe  on  him,  but  also  to  suffer  for
his  sake,  having  the  same  conflict  which  ve  saw
in  me,  and  new  hear  to  be  In  me,'-'  PhiL  ch.  L
99,  30.

"  God  forbid  that  I  should  glory,  save  in  the
cross  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  by  whom  the
world  is  crucified  unto  me,  and  I  unto  the  world.1*

•  "From  henceforth  let  no  man  trouble  me,  for  1
bear  in  my  body  the  marks  of  the  Lord  Jesus,"
Gal.  ch.  vi.  14,  U -<

"  Ye  became  followers  of  us,  and  of  the  Lord,
having  received  the  word  in  much  affliction,  with
joy  of  the  Holy  Ghost,"  1  These,  oh.  i  6.

"  We  ourselves  glory  in  you  in  the  churches  of '
God,  for  your  patience  and  faith  in  all  your  perse-
cutions aW  tribulations  that  ye  endure,"  2  These,
chap.  L  4.

We  may  seem  to  have  accumulated  texts  un-
necessarily i  but  beside  that  the  point  which  they
are  broutfnt  to  prove  is  of  great  importance,  tnere
is  this  also  torn  remarked  in  every  one  of  the


discover  great  zeal  and  earnestness  in  the  cause  in
which  he  was  engaged:  that  is  to  say,  he  was
convinced  of  the  truth  of  what  he  taught ;  he  was


One  thing  I  allow,  that  his  letters  every  where passages  cited,  that  the  allusion  is  drawn  front  the


writer  by  the  argument-  or  the  occasion;  that  the
notice  which  is  taken  of  his  sufferings,  and- of  the
suffering  condition  of  Christianity,  is  perfectly  in-


THE  CONCLUSION.


S31


cltfebtal,  and  b  ificttfed  by  no  design  of  stating
the  facto  themselves.  Indeed  they  axe  not  stated
at  all';  they  may  lathe*  be  said  to  be  assumed.
Thi*  ii  a'  distinction  upon  which  we  have  relied
a  good  deal  in  former  parts  of  this  treatise ;  and,
where  the  writer's  information  cannot  he  doubted,
UValwaya,  in  my  opinion^  adds  greatly  to  the  value
and  credit  of  the  testimony.
.  if  any  reader  require  from-  the  apostle  more  di-
rect and  explicit  assertions  of  the  same  thing,  he
will  receive  full  satisfaction  in  the  following  gfto-


•  "  Are  they  ministers  of  Christ  1  (I  speak  as  a.
fool)  i  aril  mores  in  labours  more  abundant,- in
stripes  above  measure,  in  prisons  more-  frequent,
in  deaths  oft.  Of  the  Jews  iive  tunes  received  I
forty  stripes  save  one..  Thrice  was  1  beaten  with
rods,  once  was  I  stoned;  thric*  I  suffered  ship-
wreck, anight  and  a  day  I  have  been  in  the  deep ;
in  journeying*  often,  in  perils  of  waters j  in  penis
of  robber*,  in  perils  by  mine  own  countrymen^  in
perils  by  the  heathen,  in  perils, in  the  city,  in
perils  in  the  wilderness,  in  perils  in  the  sea,  in
"'  e  brethrej


perils  among  false  brethren :  in  weariness  and
peinfulneas,  jn  watching*  often,  in  hunger  and
thirst,  in  fastings  often,  incofcl  and  nakedness, *
9  Car.  ch.  xi  SB— 88.

Can  it  be  necessary  to  add,  morel.  "  I  think
that  God  hath  set  forth  us  the  apostles  last,  as  it
were  appointed  to  death:  for  we  aremade^a  spec-
tacle unto  the  world,  and  to.  angels:  and  to  men.
Even  unto  this  present  hour  we  both  hunger  and
thirst,  and  are  naked,  and  are  buffeted,  an)  have
no  certain  dwelling-place;  and  labour,  working
with  oar  own  hands':  being  reviled,*  we  bless;
being  persecuted,  we  suffer  it;  being  defamed,  we
entreat :  we  are  made  as  the  filth  of  the  earth.
and  are  theoflscouring  of  all  things  unto  this  day,
1  Cor.  ch.  iv.  9 — 13.  I  subjoin  this  passage  to
the  former,  because  it  extends  to  the  other  apostles .
of  Christianity  much  of  that  which  St  Paul  de-
clared concerning  himself

In  the  following  (quotations,  the  reference  to  the
anthoris  sufferings  m  acconipaniedhwith  a  specifi-
cation of  time  and  place,  and  with  an  appeal  for
the  truth  of  What  he-declares  to  the  knowledge  of
the  persons  whom  he  addresses:  "Even  after  {hat
we  had  .suffered  before,  and  were  shamefully  en-
treated, as  ye  know,  at  Philippiy  we  were  bold  in
our  God  to  speak  -unto  you  the  Gospel  of  God
with  much  contention,"  1  These,  ch.  h.  2.

"But  thou  hast  fully  .known  my  doctrine,
manner  of  life,  purpose,  faith,  long-suffering,  per-,
seditions,  afflictions,  which  came  unto  me  at  An-
tioeh.at  lamium,  at  Lystra:  what  persecutions
I  endured :  but  out  of  them  all  the  Lord  delivered
me,"  2  Tim.  ch.  hi.  10, 11.

I  apprehend  that  to  this  point,  as  far  as  the  tes-i
timony  of  St.  Paul  is  credited,  the  evidence  from
ma  letters  is  complete  and  full.  It  appears  under
every  form  in  which  it  could  appear,  t>y  occasional
allusions  and  by  direct^  assertions,  by  general  de-
clarations, and  by  specific  examples.

VII.  St  Paul  in  these  letters  asserts,  in  posi-
tive >and  unequivocal  terms,  his  performance  of
miracles  strictly  and  properly  so  called.

"He  therefore  that  ministereth  U  you  the
Spirit,  and  worketh  miracles  (t*wt  fovajunc)
among  you,  doth  he  it  by  the  works-  of  the
law,  or  by  the  hearing  or  faith  V*  Gal.  chap.
in.  5.  •

M  For  1  will  not  dare  to  speak  of  any  of  those


things  which  Christ  hath  not  wrought  by  me,  *
to  make  the  Gentiles  o)>edient,  by  word  and  deed,
through  mighty  signs  and  wonders  (**  5w*/tt*
<mM****  .«**  «e*rw,)  by  the  power  of  the  Spirit  of
God' :  so  that  from  Jerusalem,  and  round  about
unto  Hlyricumi  I  have  fully  pitached  the  Gospel
of  Christ,"  JRom.  ch.  xv.  ft,  19.

. (<  Truly  the  signs  of  an  aposjtle  were  wrought
among  you  in  all  patience,  in  signs  and  wonders
and  mighty  deeds,  (»» '**<"*£  »«*  Ti(«r<  «•«  toy**
tHTufi  3  Con  ch.  xii.  12.

•  These  words,  signs,  Wonders/and  nughty  deejJs,
(rnpitmvKBt  t^mti*,  jc«t  &v¥mim(>y  are  the  specific
appropriate  terms  throughout  the  New  Testament,
employed  when  public  sensible  mjracles  are  in-
tended: to  be  expressed.  This  will  appear  by  con-
sulting, amongst  other  places,  the  texts  referred
to-  in  the  note  j  t  and  jt  cannot -be  known  thai  they
are  ever  employed  to  exuress  any  thing  else.  ^ .

.  Secondly,  these  words  not  only  denote  mini'
cles  as  opposed  to  natural  effects,' but  they  denote
visible,  and  what  may -be  odle4  external,,  miracles,
as  distinguished, "

First,  from  inspiration.  If  St  Paul  had  meahi
to  refer  only  to  secret  illuminations  of  his  under-
standing, or  secret  influences  upon  his-  wULor
affections,  he  could  not,  with  truth,  have  repre-
sented them  as  "  signs  and  wpndejr*  wrought  by
him,'''  or  "  signs  and  wonders  and  k  mighty  deeds
wrought  amongst  ,them."
,  Secondly,  from  vision*.  These  would  not,  by
any  means,  satisfy  the  force  of  the  terms,  "signs,
wonders,  and  mighty  deeds ;"  still  less  could  they
be  said  to  be  "wrought  by  him,"  Q*  "  wrought
amongst  them:"  nor  are  these  terms  and  expres-
sions any  where '  applied  to  visions.  When  our
author  alludes  to  the  supernatural  communica-
tions which  he.; had  received,  either  by  vision  or
otherwise,  he  uses  expressions  suited  to  the
nature  or  the  subject,  out  very  different  from
the  words  which  we  have  quoted.'-  He  calls
them  revelations,'  but  never  signs,  wonders,  or
mighty  deeds.  "I  will  come?'  says  he,  "to
visions  and  revelations  of  the  Lord ;"  and  then
proceeds  to  describe  a  particular  instance,  and
afterwards  adds.  "  lest  I  should  be  exalted  above
measure  through  the  abundance  of.  the  revela-
tions, there  was  given  me  a  thorn  in  the  flesh."


•  i.  *  *  I  will  speak  of  nothing  but  what  Christ  hath
wrought  by  m* ;"  or,  as  Grotlus  interprets  It,  "  Christ
hath  wjooght  so  great  things  by  me,  that  I  will  not  dare
to  say  what  he  hath  not  wrought."

t  To  these  may  be  added  the  following  indirect  allu-
sions, which,  though  if  they  had  stood  alone,  i.  e.  with-
out plainer  texts  in  the  same  writings,  they  might  have
been  accounted  dubious  ;  yet,  when  consideredin'  con-
junction with  .the  passages  already  cited,  can  hardly  re-
ceive any  other  interpretation  than  that  which  we  give


mem.

"  My  speech  and  my  preaching  wasnot  with  enticing
words  of  men's  wisdom,  but  in  demonstration  oY  the
spirit  and  of  power ;  that  your  faith  should  not  stand  in
the  wisdom  of  men,  but  in  the  power  of  God;"  1  Cor.
ch.  ii.  4—6.  '  - ^  ,

1  *  The  Gospel-,  whereof  I  was  made  a  minister,  accord-
ing to  the  gift  of  the  grace  of  God  given  unto  roe  by  the
effectual  working  of  his  power,"  Ephes.  ch.  iii.  7.

u  For  be  that  wrought  effectually  in  Peter  to  the
aposileship  of  the  circumcision,  the  same  was  mighty
is  me  towards  the  Gentiles,"  Gal.  ch.  fl.  8.
-  "  For  our  Gospel  came  not  unto  you  in  word  only,
but  also  in  power  and  in  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  in  much
assurance,"  1  Thess.  ch.  i.  5.

tMark  xvi.  20.  Jjuke  xxiii.  8.  John  Ji.  11,0;  jji.
S;  iv.  48, 34;  xi.  40.  Acts  ii.  0;  iv.  3;  v.  18;vi.  8;  Vii.
16;  xiv.3;zv.  155. Heb.u.  4.


HORJE  PAULINJB.


Upon  the  whole,  the  metier  admits  of  no  eoft-
ening  qualification,  of  ambiguity  whatever.  If  St
JHufldid  not  work  actual,  sensible  public  miracles,
be  baa  knowingty,  in  these  letters,  borne  hi*  tes-
timony to  a  atisenood.  1  need  not  add,  that,  in
twe  abo  of  the  quotations,  he  hae  advanced  his
assertion  in  the  face  of  those  persons  amongst
whom  lp  declares  the  fturacka  to  hate  been
wrought


hands ;  we  have  alao  a  history  purporting  to  bs
written  by  one  of  his  feUow-tmveuers,  and  appear-
ing, by  a  comparison  with  these  letters,  certainly
to  bave  been  written  by  some  person  well  ae»

raDnultedwiththetmnsaetionaof  iuahJe.  From
le  letters,  aa  well  as  from  the  history,  we  gamer
not  only  the  account  which  we,  have  stated  of  &iak
but  that  he  was  one  out  of  many  who  acted  and
suffered  in  the  same  manner;  and  that  of  those


terms  and  expressions  which  we  hate  seen  to  be
used  by  St.  Paul  simsei£


.  Here  then  we  hate  a  man  of  liberal  attain-
ments, and  in  other  points  of  sound  judgment,  who
had  addicted  his  life  to  the  sen?ce~of  the  Gospel.
We  see  him,  in  the  prosecution  of  his  purpose,
travelling  from  country  to  country  enduring  every
•pedes  of  hardship',  enconnterinff  every,  extremity
of  danger,  assaulted  by  the  populace,  punished  by
the  magistrates,  scourged,  beat,  stoned,  left  for
dead;  expecting,  wherever  he  came,  a  renewal  of
the  same  treatment,  and  the  same  dangers,  yet,
When  driven  from  one  city^  preaching  in  the  next;
spending  hk  whole  time-in  the  employment,  sa-
crificing to  it  bis  uluaamui,  his  ease,  his  safety;
persisting  in  this  coarse  to  old  age,  unaltered  by
the  experience  of  perveraeness.  ingratitude,  preju*
dice,  desertion;  unsubdued  by  anxiety,  want,
labour,  persecutions;  unwearied  by  long  confine-
ment, undismayed  by  the  prospect  of  death.
&uch  was  St  Rut We  have  his  letters  in  our


resurrection. We  moreover  find  this  same  per-
son referring  in  his  letters  to  his  supernatural  con-


version, the  particulars  and  accompanying  drd
stances  of  which  are  related  in  the  "history,  and
which  accompanying  "circumstances,  if  all  or  any
of  them  he  true,  render  it  impossible  to  have  been
a  delusion.  We  also  find  him positively,  and  unap-
propriated terms,  asserting  that  he  hknself  worked
miracles,  strictly  and  properly  so  called,  m-eun-
port  of  the  miesion  which  he  executed ;  the  his-
tory, meanwhile,  recording  various  passages  of  his
anmstry,  which  come  up  to  the  extent  of  this  aa*
seitkm.  The  question  is,  whether  falsehood  was
ever  attested  by  evidence  like  this.  Falsehoods,
we  know,  have  found  their  way  into  reports,  into
tradition,  into  books;  but  is  an  example  to  be  met
with,  of  a  man  voluntarily  >  undertaking  a  Urn  of
wrfnt  and  pain,  of  incessant  frtajgue,  of  continual
peril;  submitting  to  the  loss  of  bis  home  and  conn-
try,  to  stripes  and  stoning,  to-  tedious  imprison-
ment) and -the  constant  expectation  of  a  violent
death,  for  the  sake  of  carrying  about  a  story  of
what  was  fob*,  and  of  what,  if  fiuee,  ho  must
have  known  to  oe  sol


THE  '

CLERGYMAN^  COMPANION^
VISITING  THE  SICK:

• CONTAINING,  . '

L  Rules  *»  vismwa  the  sick.— *IL  The  office  foe  the  visitation  or  the  sice.
IE.  TflB  COMMUNION  of  the  sick. — IV.  A  great  variety  of  occasional  prayers

FOE.  THE  SICK;  COLLECTED  FROM  THE  WRITINGS  OF  SOME  OF  THE  MOST  EMINENT
DIYIEES  OF  THE  CHURCH  OF  ENGLAND  :— TO  WHICH  ARE  ADDED',  THE  OFFICES  OF
PUBLIC  AND  PRIVATE  BAPTISM,  WITH  ADDITIONS  AND  ALTERATIONS.


PREFACE.


This  cofcetkm  has  been  to  muck  esteemed,  that  it  has  passed  through  nine  editions.  Having  now
become  fiTr^sjiiigly  scarce,  it  was  thought  proper  to  reprint  it.  .*~ '

The  roles  for  Vkitirig  ne  Skk,  in  five  sections,  are  extracted  chiefly  from  the  works  of  Bishop
Tayto.  The  Occasional  Prayers  are  taken  from  tfee  devotional  tracts,  of  Bishop  -Patrick,  Mr.Ket-
tfeweQ,  and  other  pions  arid  judicious  divines.  Bat  in  this.  Edition,  the  antiquated  style  of  those
enters  k  corrected  and  improved?  at  the  same  time,  a  spirit  of  rational  piety,  and  miafieoted  siinpU*
city,  are  carefully  preserved.

A  prayer  by  Dr.  Storehouse,  and  four  hj  Mr.  Merrick,  the  celebrated  translator  of  the  Psalms,
ewadaVd  to  the  oM  collection. •.■'.-'.

The  offices  of  Public  and  Private  Baptism,  though  no  ways  relating  to  the  Visitation  of  the  Sick,
a*e  retained;  as,  In  the  present  form* they  will  be  convenient  for  the  Clergy  in  the  coarse,  of  their
pat  wihisil  doty.  '■-,<.  ■ -


CAriONL^VLL. .

KIlflSJTSBS  TO  VISIT  TtiCB  SICK*  .  '  ;

Wben  any  person  is  dangerously  sick  in, any  parish,  the  minister  or  curate,  having  kuowle&re  there- '
of,  shall  resort  unto  him,  or  her,  (if  the  disease  be  not  known,  or  probably  suspected  to  be  infectious^
to  instruct  and  comfort  them  in  their  distress,  according  to  the  order  of  Communion,  if  he  be  no
r  j  or,  if  he  be  a  preacher,  then  as  he  shall  think  most  needful  and  convenient.


It  is  recommended  to  the  Clergy  to  write  oat  the  prayers,  which  are  to  be  used~by  the  Sick  them-
selves, or  by,  the  persons  whose  e^votions  they  wish  to  assist,  and  to  kaw


THE

MANNER  OF  VISITING  THE  SICK;

OR,

ASSISTANCE  THAT  ISTO  BE  GIVEN  TO  SICK  AND  DYING  PERSONS  BY
THE  MINISTRY  OF  THE  CLERGY.


SECTION  t

In  all  the  days  of  our  spiritual  warfare,  from
our  baptism  to  our  burial,  God  baa  appointed  bis
.servants  tip  tninisters  of  tbe  church,  to  supply  the
necessities  of  the  .people,  by  ecclesiastical  duties  >
and  prudently  to  guide,  and  carefully  to  judge
concerning,  souls  committed  to  their  charge.

And,  therefore,  they  who  all  their  lifetime  do-
me blessings  from  the  Fountain  of  Grace,  by  the
channels  of  ecclesiastical  ministers,  ought  then
more  especially  to  do  it  in  the  time  of  their  sick-
ness, when  their  needs  are  more  prevalent,  accord-
ing to  that  known  apostolical  injunction:  "Is
any  man  skk  among  you,  let  lum  send  for  the
eloW  of  the  church,  and  let  them  pra>  over
him,"  Ac.

The  sum  of  the  duties  and  offices,  respectively
implied  in  these  words,  may  be  collected  bom  the
following  rules.


.  SECTION  n.

fettles/of  the  Manner  */  VitiUng  the  Sick.

L"  Let  the  minister  be  sent  to,  not  wjien'the
efck  is  In.  the  agonies  of  death,  as  >t  is  usual  to  do,
but  before  his  sickness  increases  too  much  upon
him :  for  when  the  soul  is  confused  and  disturbed
by  the  violence  of  the  distemper,  and  death  begins
to  stare  the  man  in  the  face,  there  is  little  reason
to  hope  for  any  good  effect  from  the  spiritual  man's
visitation.  For  how  can  any  regular  administra-
tion take  place,  when  the  man  is  all  over  in  a  dis-
order 1  how  can  he  be  called  upon  to  confess  his
sins,  when  his  tongue  falters,  and  his  memory
Jails  Jum?  how  can  he  receive  any  benefit  by  the
players  which  are  offered  up  for. him,  when  he  is
not  able  to  give  attention  to  them  1  or  how  can  he
be  comforted  upon  any  sure  grounds  of  reason  or
religion,  when  nis  reason  is  just  expiring,  and  all
his  notions  of  religion  together  with  it  1  or  when
the  man,,  perhaps,  nad  never  any  real  sentiments
of  religion  before  1

It  is,  therefore,  a  matter  of  sad  consideration,
that  the  generality  of  the  world  look  upon  the
minister,  m  the  time  of  their  sickness,  an' the  sure
forerunner  of  death;  and  think  his  office  so  much,
relates  to  another  world,  that  he  is  not  to  be  treated
with,  as  long  as  there  is  any  hope  of  living  in  this.
Whereas  it  is  highly  requisite  the  minister  be  sent
for,  when*  the  sick  person  is  able  to  be  conversed
*rith  and  instructed;  and  can  understand,  or  be
taught  to  understand,  the  case,  of  his  soul,  and  the
234


rules  of  his  conscience,  and  all  the  several  bearing!
of  religion,  with  respect  to  God,  lu>  neighbour,
and  himself.  For  to  prepare  a  soul  for  its  change
is  a  work  of  great  difficulty ;  and  the  intercourses
of  the  minister  with  the  sick  have  so  much  variety
in  them,  that  they  are  not  to  be  transacted  at
once.  Sometimes  there  is  need  of  special  reme-
dies against  impatience,  and  the  fear  of  death :  not
only  to  animate,  but  to  make  the  person  desirous
and  willing  to  die.  Sometimes  it  is  requisite  to
awaken  the  conscience  by  "  the  terrors  of  the
Lord ;"  to  open  by  degrees  all  the  labyrinths  of
sin  (those  innumerable  windings  and  tmmings
which  insensibly  lead  men  into  destruction,)  which
the  habitual  sensualist  can  never  be  able  to  disco-
ver, unless  directed  by  the, particular  grace  of
God,  and  the  assistance  of  a  faithful  and  ju-
dicious guide.  Sometimes  there  is  need  of  the
balm  of  comfort,  to  pour  in  "  oil  and  wine1'  (with
*Jie  good  Samaritan)  into  the  Needing  wound.
by  representing  the  tender  mercies  of  God.  and
the  love  of  his  Son  Jesus  Qhrist,  to  mankind:
and  at  other  times  it  win  be  necessary  to  "reprove,
rebuke,  and  exhort,  with.  aU  long  suffering*  and
doctrine :"  so,  that  a  .clergyman's  duty,  in  the  vi-
sitation of  the  sick,  js  not  over  at  once:  but  at
one  time  he  must  pray;  at  another,  he  nmst  assist,
advise,  and  direct ;  at  another,  he  must  open  to
him  the  nature  of  repentance,  and  exhort  Aim  to
a  confession  of  his  sins,  both  to  God  and  man,  in
all  those -cases  which  require  it:  and,  at  another
time,  he  must  give  him  absolution,  and  the  sacra-
ment of  the  body  and  blood  of  our  Lord.

And,  indeed^  he  that  ought  to  watch  aU  the
periods  of  his  life,  in  the  days  of  his  health,  lest
be  should  be  surprised  -and  overcome,  nad  need,
when  he  is  sick,  be  assisted  and  called  upon,  ana
reminded  of  the  several  parts  of  his  duty  in  every
Instant  of  his  temptation.

The  want  of  this  makes  tye  visitations  of  the
clergy  fruitless,  because  they  are  not  suffered  to
imprint  those  proper  effects  upon  the  siek,  wluch
are  needful  in  bo  important  a  ministration.

S5*.  When  the  minister  is  come,  let  him  discourse
concerning  the  causes  of  sickness,  and  by  a  gene-
ral argument  move  him  to  a  consideration  of  his
condition.  Let  him  call  upon  him  first,  in  general
terms,  "  to  set  his  house  in  order,"  "  to  tnm  and
adorn  his  lamp,". and  "to  prepare  himself  for  an-
other world.;"  aiuUhen  let  him  perform  the  cus-
tomary duties  of  prayer,  and  afterwards  descend
to  other  "particulars,  as  occasion  shall  offer,  and
circumstances  require. *
3,  According  to  the  condition  of  the  man,  and


VISITING*  TfiE  SIOK. .


985


iM  nature  ©T  lUS  sickness*  ©Very  act  01  1

w  fa*  be  proportioned If  hit  condition  I


'  visitation
iberullef
pain  and  infirmity,  the  exhortation  ought-  to  be
shortened,  and  the  minister  Inore  "instant  in
prayer:"  and  the  little  service  the  sick  man  can
'  do  jor  himself  should  be  supplied  by.  the  charitable '
•are  of  his  guide,  who  is  in  such  a  case  to  speak
more  to  God  for  him  than  to  talk  to  him:  "prayer
of  me  righteous,"'  when  it  is  "fervent.11  hath  a
promis©  to  "  prevail  much  in  behalf  of  the  sick"
person?  but  exhortations'  must  prevail  by  their
own  proper  weight,  and  Jiot  by  the  passion  of  the
speaker;  and,  therefore,  should  he  offered  when
the  sfekrw  able  to  receive  them.  And  even'  in  this
assistance  of  prayer,if  the  sick  man  joins  with  the
minister,  the  prayers  should  be  short,  fervent,  and
ejacvfetory,  apt  rather  to  comply  with  his  weak
condition,  than  wearisome  to  his  spirits,  in  tedious
and  long  offices.  '  But  in  cake  it  appears  he  hath
sufficient  strength  to  go  along  with  the  minister;
he  is  then  more  at  liberty  to  oner  up  long  petitions
for  him.

•  After  the  minister  hath  made  this  preparatory
entrance  to' this  work  of  much  time  and  dehr
Deration,  be  may  descend  to  the  particulan
of  ids  duty,  in  toe  following  method.


SECTION  m.

Of  instructing  the- sick  Man  in  the  nature  of
Repentancey  and  Confession  of  his  Sins.

The.  first  duty  to  J!»  rightly  stated  to  the  sick
man,  is  that  of  repentance ;  in  which  the  minister
cannot  be  more  serviceable  to  him  than  by  laying
before  Mm  a  regular  scheme  of  it,  and  exhorting
him  at  the  same  time  to  a  free  and  ingenuous  de-
claration of  the  state  of  his  soul.  For  unless  they
know  the  manner  of  his  life  and  the  several  kind?
and  degrees  of  those  sins  which  require  his  peni-
tential sorrow  or  restitution,  either  they  can  do
nothing  at  all,  or  nothing  of  advantage  and  certain-
ty. Wherefore  the  minister  may  move  him  to
this  in  the  following  manner:

Arguments  and  Exhortations  fo  move  the  sick
'  Man  to  Repentance,  and  Confession  qf  his
Shu.

1.  That  repentance  is  a  duty  Jndispensably  ne-
cessary to  salvation.  That  to  this  end,  all  the
pfiBachings  and  endeavours  of  the  prophets  and
apostles  are  directed.  That  our  Saviour  "came
down  from  heaven,"  on  purpose  "  to  call  sinners  to
leMfttfance.''*  That  as  it  is  a  necessary  duty  at
all  times,  so  more  especially  in  the  time  of  sick-
ness, when  we  are  commanded  in  a  particular
manner  to  "  set  our  house  in  order.*'  That  it  is,  a
work  of  great. difficulty,  consisting  in  general  of  a.
"change  of  mind,"  anda"  change  of  life."  Upon
which  account  it  is  called  in  Scripture, . "a state
of  regeneration,  or  new  birth;"  a  "conversion
from  sin  to  God;"  a  "  being  renewed  hi  the  spirit
•four  minds;"  a  "putting  off  the  old  man,  which
is  corrupt  according  to  the  deceitful  losta  of  the
flesh/1  and  a  ".putting  on  the  new  man,  which  is
erected  in  righteousness  and  tome  holiness."  That
aogreat  a  change  as  this,  is  not  to  be  effected  at


once,  but  requires  the  utmost  self-denial  and  reso-
lution to  put  h  in  execution,  consisting  in  general
of  the  following  particulan  2— J.^  A  sorrowful
sense  of  our  sins:  2.  An-  humble' confession  of  _
them :  3.  An  unfeigned  abhorrence  and  forsaking
of  them,  and  turning  to^he  Lord  our  God  with  afl
our  hearts:  4.  A  patient  continuance  in  .well-
doing to  the  end  of  our  lives.  - ^ '

These  are  the  constituent  and  essential  parts
of  a  true  repentance^  which  may  severally  b*4is-
plavcd  from  the  following  motives  of  reason  and
Scripture,  as  opportunity  shall  serve,  and  the- sick
many  condition  permit

The  first  .part  of  a  true  repentance  is  a  sorrow-
rot  sense  of  our  sins,  whwh  naturally  produceth
this  good  effect,  as  we  may  learn  from  St.  Paul,
(2  Cor.  vii  10,)  where  he  tefis  us.  that  "  godly  sor-
row worketh  repentance."  Without  it,  to  be  sure,
there  can  be  no  such  thing;  for  Jww  can  a  men*
repent  of  that  which  he  is  not  sorry  for?  or,
how  can  any  one  sincerely  ask  pardon  anjl  for-
giveness for,  what  he  is  not  concerned  or  troubled
about?

A  sorrowful  sense,  then,  of  our  sins,  is  the  first
part  of  a  true  repentance,  the.  necessity  whereof
may  be  seen  from  thejrrievous  and  abominable
nature  of  sin;  as,  1.  That  it  made  so  wide  a  se-
paration betwixt  God  and  man,  that  nothing  but
the  blood  of  his  only  begotten  Son  could  suffice  to
atone  for  its  intolerable  guUt :  2.  That  it  carries
along  with  it  the/basest  ingratitude,  as  betn^dpne<
against  our  heavenly  Father,  "  in  whom  we  live,
and  move,  tfn£  have  our  being :"  3.  That  the  con-
sequence of  it  •  is  nothing  Jess  than  eternal  ruin,
in  that  "the  wrath  or  God  is  revealed  against  all
impenitent  sinners;"  And  ".the  wages  of  suvis^
death,"— not  only  temporal  but  eternal

From  these  and  the  like  considerations,  {he
penitent  may  further  learn,  that  to  be  sorry  for
our  sins  is  a*  great  and  important  duty.  That  it
does  not  consist  in  a  little  trivial  .concern,  a  super-
ficial sigh,  or  tear,  or  ceiling  ourselves  sinners,  &c
but  in  a  real,  ingenuous,  pungent,  and  afflicting
.sorrow:  forrcan  that  which  cast  our  parents  out
of  Paradise  at  first,  that  brought  down  the  Son
of  God  afterwards  from  heaven,  and  put  him  at .
last  to  such  a  cruel  and  shameful  death,  be  ajow
thought  to  be  done  away  by  a  single  tear  ora
groan?  Can  so  base  a  piece  of  ingratitude,  as  re-
belling against  |he  Lord  pf  glory,  who  gives  us  all
we  have,  be  supposed  to  be  pardoned  by  a  slender
submission'?  Or  can  that which  deserves  the  tor-
ment of  hell,  be  sufficiently  atoned  for.  by  a  little,
indignation  and  superficial  remorse  1

True  repentanee^herefore,  is  ever  accompanied
with  a  deep  and  afflicting  sorrow;  a  sorrow  that
will  make  us  ,so- irreconcilable  to  sin,  as  that  we
shall  choose  rather  to  die  than  to  live  in  it.  For
so  the  bitterest  accents  of  grief  are  all  ascribed  to


•ltattix,13»


a  true  repentance  in  Scripture;  suchi
ing  sorely,"  or  "Utterly;"  a  "weeping  day  and
night;"  a ■  "repenting  in  dust  ana  ashes $"  a
"putting  on  sackcloth;"  "bating  and  prayer,''
4k:.  Thus  holy  David:  "lam  troubled,  1  am
bowed  down  .greatly,  I  go  mourning  all  the  day
long,  and  that  by  reason  of  mine  iniquities,  which
are  gone  over  my  head,  and,  as  a  heavy  burden,
are  too  heavy  for  me  to  bear::*  Ps.  xxiviii.  4,  6.
Thus  Ephsaim  could  say:  "  After  that  I  was
instructed^  emote  upon  my  thigh  :.I  was  ashamed,
yea,  even  confounded,  because  I  did  bear  the  re-
l  proach  of  my  youth;"  Jer.  xxxi  19.


S90


THE  CLERGYMAN'S  COMPANION.


And  this  fa  Ike  proper  safcisftction  far  sm  which
God  expects,  and  hath  prantsed  to  accept;  as,
Fe.h\  17:  ^  ThiHsMamees  of  (W  aie*  a  broken
spirit:  a  broken  and  contrite  heart,  0  God,  thou
wilt  not  despise."

3.  The  next  thing  requisite  in  a  tree  repent-
ance, is  Confession,  of  sins,  which  naiaiailj  fel-
lows the  other;  for  if  a*  man  be  so  deeply  afflicted
with  sorrow  for  his  sins,  he  w|U  he  glad  to  he  rid
of  them  as  soon  as~he~can ;  and  the  way  for  this,
is  humbly  to  conies*  them  to  God,  who  hath  pro-
mised to  forgive  us  if  we  do.  «*  I  said,  I  will  con-
fess my  sins  unto  the  Lord,**  saith^the  Psalmist;
"and  so  thou  forgaveat  the  wickedness  of  my
sin,"  Ps.  xxxii  6.  So,  Prov.  xxviii.  13,  and
1  John  L  9:  "If  we  confess  our  sins/  God
foithful  and  Just  to  forgive  us  our  sins,  and  to
cleanse  lis  from  all  unrighteousness."  So  the  je-
taming  prodigal  went  to  his  frther  with  an  hum*
Me  confession  of  his  baseness,  and  wi
into  favour  again.— Luke  xv„  18,  19.

And  because  the  number  of.  our  sins  are  like
the  hairs  of  our  need,  or  the  sand  of  the  sea*  and
.  almost  as  various  too  In  t^eir  kinds  as  their  num-
bers; confession  must  needs  be  a  very  extensive
duty,  and  require  the  strictest  can  and  examina-
tion of  ourselves:  for  "  who  can-tell  how/oft  he
eftndeth?"  sahh  David;  "  O,  cleanse  thou  me
from  my  secret  fruits!"

'The  Bsjutent,  therefore,  should  be  reminded,
that  his  confession  be  as  minute  and  particular  as
k  can;  since  the  more  particular  the confession
is,  to.be  sure,  the  more  sincere  and  safe  the  re-


3.  A  U^  thing  requisite  in  a  trae  repentance;
Is  an- unfeigned  abhorrence  and  forsaking  of  sin,
and  turning  to  the  Lord  our  God  with  all  our
hearts/^

For  so  we  find  them  expressly  Joined  together
by  St  Paul,  when,  he  charges  tnose  whom  by
▼won  he  was  sent  to  convert,  to  change*  thejr
mind,  and  "turn  to  God,  and  do  Works  meet  for
repentance:"  Ads  xxvi  90.  And  a  little before,
he  says,  he  was  sent  "  to  open  their  eyes,  and  turn
them  from  darkness  to  light,  and  from  the  power
of  Satan  unto  God,  that  they  may  receive  for-
giveness of  sin:"  vet.  18.  And  we  shall  always
und,  when  we  are  commanded  to  cease  from  evil,
ft  is  in  order  to  do  good.

-  -The  penitent,  therefore;  must  be  remmded,  not
only  to  confess  'and  be  sorry  for  his  sins,  but  like-
wise to  forsake  them.  For  it  is  he  only  "whocon-
fooseth  and  forsaketh  his  sins,  that  shall  have
mercy :"  Prov.-xxviiL  13.  And  this  forsaking  must
not  be  only  for  the  present,  during  his  sickness,
or  for  a  week,  a  month,  or  a  year ;  but  forbis
Whole  life,  be  it  never  so* protracted:  which  is.

4.  last  thing  requisite  in  a  trae  repentance,
to.  "a  patient  continuance  in  weU-domg  to  the
end  of  our  lives."  For  as  the  holy  Jesus  sssures
*s,  that  "he  that  endureth  unto  the  end  shall  be
saved ;"  so  does  the  Spirit  of  Qpd  profess,  that
"if  any  man  draw  back,  his  soul  shall  have  no
pleasure  in  him:1'  Heb.  X  38.  .  Hence  we  are
said  to.  "be  partakers  of  Christ,  if  we  hold  the
beginning  of  our  confidence  steadfast  to  the  end,"
Heb.  in.  14,  but  not  else;  for  it  is  to  "him  only
that  overcometh,  and  keepeth  his  works  to  the
end*  that  our  Saviour  hath  promised  a  reward:


►  moiyyiXXtr  furptUtv. '


Rev.  &  96.  Hence  our  religion  Is  Slid  tehee
continual  warfare,  and. we  must  be  constantly
."pnessing  forward  toward  the  mark  of  our  high
calling;"  with  the  apostle,  lest  we  fail  of  the
prise. <

And  this  it  is  which  makes  a  -deatipbed  re-
pentance so  justly  reckoned  to  be  very  foil  of
hazard ;  such  as  none  who  defer  it  till  then,  can
depend  upon  with  any  real  security.  For  lot  a
man  he  never  so  seemingly  penitent  in  the  day  of
his  visitation,  yet  none  but  Gddcan  tett  whether
it  .be  sincere  or  not;  since  nothing  is  more  com-
mon than  for  those  who  expressed  the  greatest  >
signs  of  a  lasting  repentance  open  a  sick  bed,  to
foiget  aH  their  vows  and  promises -of  amendmenL
as  soon  as  God  had  removed  the  judgment,  and
restored  them  to  their  former  health.  "It  hap-
pened to  them  according  to  the  tnie  i


St  Peter  says,  "  The  dog  is  turned  to  his  own
vomit  again,  and  the  sow  that  was^washed  to  her
Wallowing  in  the  mire,"  3Pet.ii.99.

The  sick  penitent,  therefore,  should  .be  often
reminded,  of  this;— that  nothing  wnl  be  looked
upon  as  true  repentance,  but  what  would  ter-
minate in  a  holy  life :  thai,  therefore,  he  ought  to
take  great  heed,  that  his  repentance  be  not  only
the  effect  of  his  present  danger,  but  that  it  be  last-
ing and  sincere,  "  bringing  forth  works  meet  for
repentance,"  should  it  please  God  merafully  to
prove  him  by  a  longer  life.

But  here  it  is  much  to  be  feared,  that  after  all
his  endeavours  to  bring  men  to  a  sight  of  them-
selves, and  to  repent  them  truly  of  their  sins,  the
spiritual  man  will  meet  with  'out  very  little  en-
couragement ;  for*  if  we  took  round  the  world,  we
shall  find  the  generality  of  men:  to  be  of  a  rude
^difference,  and  a  seared  conscience,  and  mightily
ignorant  of  their  condition  with  respect  to  another
world,  being  abused  by  evil  customs  and  princi-
ples,, apt  to  excuse  themselves,  and  to  be  content
with  a  certain  genera]  and  indefinite  confession ;
so  that  if  you  provoke-  them  never  so  much  to
acknowledge  their  faults,  you  shall  hardly  ever
extort  any  thing  farther  fronr  them  than  this,  vix.  _
*'  That'  uiey  are  sinners,  as  every onan  hath  his
infirmity,  and  they  as  well,  is  any  ?  but,  God  be
thanked,  they  have  done  no  injury  to  any  man,
but  are  in  charity  with  aU  the  workt"  And,  per-
haps they  wilf  tell  you,  "they  are  no  sweaters;
no  adulterers,  no  rebels,  &c.  but  that,  God  forgive
them,  they  must  needs'  acknowledge  themselves
to  be  sinners  In  the  main^  etc-.  And  if  you  can
open  their  breasts  so  far,  it  will  be  looked  upon,  as
sufficient;  to  go  any  farther; will  be  to-do  the
office  of  an  accuser,  not  of  a  friend.

But*  which  is  yet.  worse,  there  are  a  great  many
.persons  who  have  been  so  used  to  an  'habitual
course  of  sin,  that  the  crime  is  made  natural  and
necessary  to  them,  and  they  have  rto  remorse  of
conscience  for  it,  but  think '  themselves  in  a  state
of  security  very  often  when  they  stand  upon  the
brink  of  damnation/ '  This  havens  in  the  cases
of  drunkenness  and  lewd  practices,  and  luxury,
and  idleness,  and  misspending  of  the  sabbath,  ami
in  lying  and  vain  jesting,  and  slandering  of  others;
and  particularly  in  such  evils  as  the  laws  db  not
punish,  "nor  public  customs  shame,  but  which
are  countenanced  by  potent  sinners,  tit  wicked
fashions,  or  good-nature  and  mistaken  civilities.

In  these  and  the  like  cases,  the  spiritual  men
must  endeavour  <to  awaken  .their  consciences
by  such  means  a* follow:


IN  VISITING  THE  SIGK.


637


i  and  general  Beads  qf  Discourse,  by
\qf  Consideration,  to  awaken  a  stupid
Conscience!  and  the  carries*.  Sinner.

1.  And  here  let  the  minister  endeavour  toaffect
hie  conscience,-  hy  representing  to  him,—

Thai  Christianity  is  a  holy  and  strict  religion:
that  the  promises  of  heaven  are  so  great,  that  it  is
not  reasonable  to  think  a.  small  matter  and  a  little
doty  will  procure  it  for  us:  that  religious  persons
are  always  the  most  scrupulous;  and  that  to  feel
nothing;  is  dot  a  sign  of  life,  but  of  death:  that
we  live  in  an  age  in  which  that  which  is  called
and  esteemed  a  Aoly  life,  in  the  days  of  the  apos-'
ties  and  primitive  Christianity  would  have  been
esteemed  indifferent,  sometime*  scandalous,  and
always  cold:  that  when "we  have  "done  our  best
all  ow~  righteousness  is  but  as  filthy  «gs;w  and
we  can  never  do  too  much  to  make  our  "calling
and  election  sure:"  that  every  good  man  ought  to
be  suspicious  of  himself  fearing  the  worst,  that
lie  may  provide  for  the  best:  that  even  St  Paul,
and  several  other -remarkable  saints,  had  at  some
tones  great  apprehensions  of  failing  of  the  "  mighty
prize  of  their  high'  calling-:"  that  we  are  .com-'
manded.  to- "  work  out  our  salvation  with  fear  and
trembling ',"  inasmuch  as  we  shall  be  called  to  an
account,  not  only  for  our  sinful  words  and.  deeds,
'but  even  for  our  very  thoughts:  that  if  we  keep
all  the  commandments  of  God,,  and  "  yet  offend
in  one  point  (Le.  wilfully  and  habitually,)  we  are
guilty  of  all,"  James  ii.  10 :  that  no  man  can  tell
now  oft  he'offendeth,  the  best  of  lives  being  full  of
innumerable  blemishes  in  the  sight  of  God,  how-
ever they  may  appear  before  men;  that  no  man
ought  to  judge  or  the  state  of  his  soul  By  the  cha-
racter he  has  in  the  world ;  for  a  great  many  per-
sons go  to  hell,  who  have  lived  in  a  fair  reputation
here;  and  a  great  many,  on  the  other  hand,  go  io
Iwrnven,  who  have  been  loaded  with  infamy  and
reproach :  that  the  work  of  religion  is  a  work  of
gnat  difficulty,  trial,  and  temptation :  that  "  many
ere  called,  but  few  are  chosen;"  that  "strait  is  the
gate,  and  narrow,  is  the.  way,  that  leadeth  to  life,
and  few  there  be  that  find  it:"  and  lastly,  that,
"if  the  righteous  themselves  shall  scarcely  be
aaved/'  there  will  be  no  pjaor  for  the  unrighteousand
sinner  tp  appeal  in,  but  of  horror  and  amazement
By  these  and  suchrlike  motives  to  consideration,
the  spiritual  man  is  to  awaken  the  careless  sinner,
and  to  tttins.him'tp  repentance  and  confession  of
tab  sins;  and  if  either  of  himself,  or  by  this  means,
the  sick  man  is  brought  to  a  right  sense  of  his
condition:  then,

2.  Let  the  minister  proceed  to  assist  him  in  m>
demanding  the  number  of  his  sins,  i.  e.  the  seve-^
ami  kinds  of  them,  and  the  various  ways  of  preva-

f  with  the  Divine  commandments.  Let  him
.  _im  sensible  how  every  sin  is  aggravated,
i  or  less,  according  to  the  different  circum-
ses  of  it;  as  by  the. greatness  or  smallness  of
the  temptation,  the  scandal  it  gives  to  others,  the
dishonour  it  does  to  religion,  -the  injury  it  brings
along  with  it  to  those  whom  it  more  immediately
concerns;  the  degrees. of  boldness  and  impudence,
the  choice  in  acting  it,  the  continuance  in  it,  the
■expense,  desires,  and  habit  of  it,  &c.

3.  Let  the  flick  man,  in  the  scrutiny  of  his  con-
science and  confession  of  his  sins*,  be  carefuHv  re-
minded to  consider  those'  sins  which  are  no  where
condemned  DUt  in  the  court  of  conscience:  for  there
are  certain  secret  places  of  darkness,  artificial
Hindi  of  the  devil/which  he  uses  to  nidc  our  sins


from  us*  and  to  incorporate  them  into  out  affections,
by  the  general  pracuce^of  others,  and  the  mistaken
notions  of  the  world :  as,  1.  Many  sins  before
men  are  accounted  honourable;  such  as  fighting
a  duel,  returning  evil  for  evil,  blow  for  blow,  <Slc

2.  Some  things  are  not  forbidjlen  by  the  law  of
man,  as  lying  m  ordinary  discourse,  jeering,  scoff* .
ing,  intemperate  eating,  ingratitude,  circumvent-
ing another  in  contracts,  outwitting  and  overreach-
ing in  bargains;  extorting  and  taking  advantage
ofthe  necessities  or  ignorance  of  other  people,  im-
portunate entreaties  and  temptations  of  persona
to  many  instances  of  sin,  as  intemperance,  pride*
and  ambition,  <ie.;  all  which,  therefore,  do  strange-
ly blind  the  understanding  and  captivate  the  affec-
tions of  sinful  men,  and  lead  them  into  a  thousand
snares, of  the  devil  which  they  are  not  aware  of.

3.  Some  "others  do  not  reckon  that  they  sin  against
God,  if  the  laws  have  seized  upon  the  person :  and
.many  who  are  imprisoned  for  debt,  think  them-
selves disengaged  from  payment ;  and  when  they
pay  the  penalty,  think  they  owe  nothing  for  the
scandal  and  disobedience.  4.  Some  sins  are
thought  not  considerable,  but  go  under  the  titles
of  sins  of  infirmity,  or  Inseparable  accidents  of
mortality ;  such  as  idle  thoughts,  foolish  talking,
loose  rcvelling8,  impatience,  anger,  and  all  the
events  of  evil  company.  5.  Lastly;  many  things
are  thought  to  be  no- sins :  such  as  mispenjling  of
their  time,  whole  days  or  months  of  useless  or  im-
pertinent employment,  long  gaming,  winning
men's  money  m  great  portions,  censuring  men's
actions,  curiosity,  equivocating  in  the  prices  of  buy-
ing ana  selling,  rudeness  in  speech  or  behaviour,
speaking  uncharitable  truths,  and  the  like.

These  are  some  of  those  artificial  veils  and  co-
verings, under  the  dark  shadow  of  which  the  ene-
my of  mankind  makes  very  many  to  He  hid  front
themselves,  bunding  them  with  false  notions  of
honour,  and  the'  mistaken  opinions  and  practice*
of  the  world,  with  public  permission  and  impunity,
or  (it  may  be)  a  temporal  penalty;  or  else  with
prejudice,  or  ignorance  and;  infirmity,  and  direct
error  in  judgment.

Now,  in  all  these  cases,  the  ministers  are  to  be
inquisitive  and  strictly  careful,  that  such  kind  of
fallacies  prevail  not  over  the  sick ;  but  that  those
things,  which  passed  without  observation  before,
may  now  be  brought  forth,  and  pass  under  the
severity  of  a  strict  am)  impartial  censure,  religious
sorrow,  and  condemnation.  , '

4.  To  this  may  be  added  a  general  display  of
'the  neglect  and  omission  of  our  duty ;  Tor  in  them  -
lies  the  bigger  half  of  our  failings  >  and  yet,  in
many  instances,  they  are  undiscerned;  because
our  consciences  have  not  been  made  tender  and
perceptible  qf  them.  But  whoever  will  cast  up  his
accounts,  even  with  a  superficial  eye,  will  quickly
find  that  he  hath  left  undone,  for  the  generality,  as
many  things  which  he  ought  to  have  done,  as  be
hath  committed  those  he  ought  not  to- have  done:
such  as  the  neglect  of  public  or  private  prayer,  of
reading  the  Scriptures,  and  instructing  his  family,
or  those  that  are  under  him,  in  the  principle*  of
religion:  the  not  discountenancing  sin  to  the
utmost  of  hjs  power,  especially  in  the  personages
of  great  (men:  'the  "not  redeeming  /the  time,"
and  "  growing  in  grace,,,  and  doing,  all  the  jjood
he  can  in  his  generation :  the  frequent  omissions
of  the  great  duty  of  charit^,  in  visiting  the  sick,
relieving  the  needy,  and  comforting  the  afflict-
ed :  the  want  of  obedience,  duty,  and  jospect,  to


THE  CLERGYMAN'S  COMPANION'


parents:  the  doing  the  work  of  God  negligently,
ox  not  discharging  himself  with  that  £deFrty,  care,
and  exactness,  which  is  incumbent  upon  him,  in
the  station  wherein. the  providence  of  God  hath
placed  him,  &c.

5-  With  respect  to  those  sins  which  are  com-
mitted against  man,  let  the  minister  represent  to
the  sick  man  that  he  can  have  no  assurance  of  his
pardon,  unless  he  is  willing  to  make  all  suitable
amends  and  satisfaction  to  hjs  offended  and  in-
jured brethren;  as  for  instance,  if  he  hath  lived
m  enmity  with  any?  that  he  should  labour  to  he
reconciled  to  them ;  if  he  is  in  debt,  that  he  should
do  his  utmost  to  discharge  it  j  or  if  he  hath  injured
any  one  in  his  substance  or  credit,  that  he  should
endeavour  to  make  restitution  in  kind  for  the  one,
and  all  possibly  satisfaction  for  the  other,  by  hum-
bling himself  to  the  offended  person,  ana  beseech-
'  inghim  to  forgive  him.

6.  if  the  sick  person  be  of  evil  report,  the  minis-
ter shotld  take  care,  some  way  or  other,'  to  make
him  sensible  of  it,  so  as  to  show  an  effectual  sor-
row ancj  repentance.  This  will  be  best  done  by
prudent  hirsts;  and  insinuations,  of  recalling  those
things  to  his  mind  whereof  he  is  accused  by  the
voice  of  feme,  or  to  which  the  temptations,  perhaps,
of  his  calling,  more  immediately  subject  him.  -  Or
if  he  will  not  understand,  when  he  is  secretly
prompted,  he  must  be  asked  in  plain  terms  con-
cerning these  matters.  He  must  be  told  of  the
evil  things  which  are  spoken  of  him  in  public,  and
of  the  usuARemptations  of  his  calling.

•And  it  concerns  the  minister  to  follow  this  act
vice,  without  partiality,  or  fear,  or  interest,  or  re-
spect of  persons,  in  much  simplicity  and  prudence,
having  no  other  consideration  before  him.  but  the
conscientious  discharge  of  his  duty,  and  the  salva-
tion-' of  the  person  under  his  care.

7.  The  sick  person  is  likewise  to  be  instructed
concerning  his  faith,  whether  he  has  a  reasonable
notion  of  the  articles  of  the  Christian  religion^  as
they  are  excellently  summed  up  in  the  Apostle's
Creed.

8.  Witl)  respect  to  his  temporal  concerns,  the  sick
is  to  he  advised  to  set  every  thing  in  order,  and  (if
he  hath,not  already)  to  make  his  will  as  soon  as  he
can.  For  if  he  recovers,  this  cannot  be  detri-
mental; bu^  if  he  dies,  it  will  be  of  great  comfort
and  satisfaction  to  him.  And  here  it  must  be  re-
membered that  he  distribute  every  thing  according
to  the  exact  rules  of  justice,  and  with  such  a  due
care,  as  to  prevent  ail  law-suits  and  contentions
for  the  future:  and,  if  he  he  able,  he  is  to  be  ad-
monished to  do  something  likewise  out  of  charity,
and  for  the  sake  of  his  poor  brethren.

9.  In  all  the -course  of  his  visitation,  the  minis-
ter should  frequently  be  exhorting  the  sick  man
to  patience  and  a  blessed  resignation  to  the  will -of
God ;  and  not  to  look  upon  his  sickness  as  barely
the  effect  of  second  causes,  but  as  inflicted  on  him
by  Divine  Providence  for  several  wise  and  good
ends :  As,  for  the  trial  of  Mb  faith ;  the  exercise  of
patience ;  the  punishment  of  his  sins;  the  amend-
ment of  his  life ;  or  for  the  example  of  others,  who,
seeing  his  good  behaviour  in  -such  a  day  of  cala-
mity, may  glorify  their  Father  which  is  in  heaven :
or  else,  that  it  is  for  the  increase  of  his  future  wel-
fare, in  order  to  raise  him  the  higher  in  glory
hereafter,  by  hew  much  the  lower  fie  hath  been
depressed  here.

10.  When  the  spiritual  man  hath  thus  dis-
charged his  doty,  and  the  sick  hath  made  himself


capable  of  it,  by  a-  refiriona  and  hory  conformity  to
all  the  forementioned  particulars  respecting  his
condition,  and  circumstances,  he  may  then  give
him  the  sacrament  of  the  Lord's  Supper:  And
.it  is  the  minister's  office  to  invite  sick  and  dying
persons,  to' this  holy  sacrament^provided  they  dis-
cover a  right  sense  of  iheir  duty. And,

Note,  That* the  Holy  Sacramentis  not  to  lie  ad-
ministered to  dying  persons/  when  they  have  no
use  of  their  reason  to  join  with  the  Tfiinigter  in'hi*
celebration  of  it.  For  the  sacraments  operate  not
of  themselves,  but  as  they  are  made  efrtcacious  by
the  jaint  consent  and  will,  and  •  religious  acts  and
devotion  of  the  party  that  receives  them.  And
therefore  all  fools,  find  distracted  persons,  and  chil-
dren, and  lethargical  and  apoDlecticaJ  people,  or
that  are  any  ways  senseless  and  •incapable  of  hu-
man and  reasonable- acts,  are  to  be  assisted  only  by
prayers. . v

No(c  also,  That  m  cases  of  necessity,  where  the
sacrament  cannot  be  so  conveniently  administered,  -
the  sick  may  be  admonished  to  receive  it  spiritu-
ally,!, e.  by  representing  the  symbols  of  the  body
and  blood  of  our  Load  to  his  mjnd,  and  applying
them  to  himself  by  faith,  with  the  same  prepara-
tions of  faith  and  repentance,  as  if  they  were  real-
ly present.  For  no  doubt  but  God,  in  such  a  case,
who  considers  all  things  with  exact  justice,  and
chiefly  respects  the  sincerity  of  our  hearts  and  in-
tentions, wilt  excuse  the  absence  of  the  outward
and  visible  sign,  when  necessity,  and  not  contempt
or  neglect,  was  the  occasion  of  it


SECTION  IV.

Of  applying  spiritual  Remedies  to  the

able  Fear*  and  Dejections  of  the  Sick.

1%  sometimes  happens  that  good  men,  especially
such  as  have  tender  consciences,  impatient  of  the
least  sin,  to  which  they  are  arrived  by  a  Jong  habit
of  grace,  and  a  continual  observation  of  their  ways,
overact  their  part,  and  turn  their  .tenderness  into
scruples,  and  are  too  much  dejected  and  doubtful
concerning  their  future  salvation,  in  such  a  case,
the  minister  is  to  represent  to  them,  that  the  man
who  is  jealous  of  himself,  is  always  in  the  'safest
condition :  that  if  he  fears  on  his  death-bed,  it  is
but  what  happens  to  most  considering  men ;  and
that  therefore  to  fear  nothing  then,  is  either  a  sin-
gular felicity,  or  a  dangerous  presumption.

But  to  restrain  the  extravagance  of  fear,  let  hint
be  reminded  of  the  terms  of  the  Gospel  :-r-that  it
is  a  covenant  of  grace  and  mercy  to  all:  that
"  Christ  Jesus  came  into  the  world  '.to  save  sin-
ners:" that  he  continues  our  "  Advocate  m  heaven,"
and  daily  "  intercedes"  with  his  Father  for  ua:
that  the  whole  heavenly  host  rejoices  at  the  con-
version of  a  sinner:  that  the  angels  are  deputed  by
God,  to  be  our  guardians  against  violent  surprises
and  temptations :  that  there  are  different  degrees,
of  glory  in  heaven ;  so  that,  if  we  arrive  not  at  the
greatest,  we  may  yet  hope,  by  divine  mercy,  that
we  should  not  be  excluded  the  less :  that  God  hath
promised  to  hear  'the . "  prayers  of  the  righteous"
for  his  servants :  that  he  labours  with  us  by  bis
Spirit,  and  as  it  were-  "  beseeches  us,  in  Christ's
ptead,  to  be  reconciled  to  him,"  2<5or.  v.  20 :* that,
of  all  his  attributes,  he  glories  in  none  so  much  as


JN  VISITING  THE  SICK.


8S9


tm  the  titfes  of  mercy  *id  forgiveness :  that  there-
*  fore  we  do  injusticejo  the  Father  of  mercies,  if  we
t  retain  such  hard  thoughts*  and  suspicions  of  him :
'  thaJL  God  calls  upon  us  to  forgive  our  brother  "  se-
venty times  seven ;"  and  yet  all- that  is  but  like,  the
forgiving  aen  hundred  pence,"  for  his  sake,  who
forgives  us  "  ten  thousand  talents :"  arid  therefore
if  we  are  ordered. to  show  such  an'  unrestrained
temper  of  forgiveness,  it  is  only  to  animate  us  to
Arwst  in  God's  'much  more  unbounded  mercy. .

By  these  and  the  like  arguments,  the  spiritual
man  may -raise  the  drooping  spirits  of  good  men,
in  their  causeless  dejections.  But  because  there
.  ere  many  other  cases  of  the  like  nature,  which  the
physician  of  souls  will  ineet  with  in  visiting  .bis
neighbours,  especially  such  as  are  of  melancholy
dispositions,  it  may  not  be~improper  to  .mark  the
principal  of  them 'here,  and  to  prescribe  the  reme-
dies.

'  Qmrideration*  to  be  offered  to  Person*  under
Religious  Melancholy.

1.  Some  truly  religious  persons  are  under  sad
apprehensions  of  not  being  in  the  favour  of  God,
because- they  find  their  devotions  to  be  very  often
cold,  their  prayers  distracted,  and  their  delight  in
spiritual  matters  not  to  be  so  ([rest  and  permanent
as  their  pleasure  and  satisfaction  are  in  the  things
«*j  the  world.

Now  to  such  as  have  made  religion  the  great
business  of  their  lives,  who  have  endeavoured  to
core  those  distracted  thoughts  they  complain  of,
and  to  inflame  their  soulswith  divine  love,  it  may
be  offered,  that  the  different  degrees  of  affection
with  which  men  serve  God,, do  very  often  depend
upon  the  difference  of  their  tempers  and  constitu-
tions', since  some  are  naturally  so  dul}  and  heavy/
as  to  be  little  affected  with  any  thing ;  whilst  others
an  of  such  a  tender  make,  as  to  be  affected  almost
.with  every  thing,  so  as  to  be  soon  exalted  with  joy ,
or  oppressed  with  sorrow:  that  sickness,  lossesyand
ail  afflictions,  .and  even  religion  itself,  in  its  long
and  continual  exercise  of  aefedenial  and  thought
fulne*$  do  naturally  produce  such  a  tenderness  of
spirit,  that  the  best  of  men  have  never  been  able
at  all  times  to  keep  their  affections  at  an  equal
height:  that  the  seal  and  warmth  'with  which
some  are  affected,  is  not  always  an  argument  of
their  goodness :  that  a  sensible  pleasure  in  religious
exercise*,  wherein  the  passions  are  affected,  is.  not
so  acceptable  to  God  as  a  reasonable  service :  that
distraction  of  thought'  in  the  service  of  God  is
•wing,  for  the  most  parVto  bodily  weakness :  and
therefore,  if  we  do  not  give  way  to  it,  but  do  all
we  can  to  suppress,  those  wandering  thoughts,  we'
may  be  assured  weohall  never  be  Warned  for  being
subject  to  that  which,  by  season  of  the  weakness
of  our  nature,  we  cannot  help:  that  the  first  mo-
tions of  our  mind,  as  it  is  impossible  to  hinder
them,  are  reckoned  by  all  divines  not  to  be  sinful,
provided  we  do  not  encourage  them.

2.  Some  are  extremely  dejected,  because,  upon
strict  examination  of  themsefvesl  they  find,  as  tney
think,  all  their  idigion  to  be  owing  to  their  fears ;
and  fear  being  a  slavish  and  sordid  passion,  they
are  apt  to  conclude,  that  all  those  services  which
are  not  Che  result  of  a  more  noble  principle,  will
be  rejected,  by  God,  since,  as  he  is  all  love,. and
goodness,  and  perfection,  he  will  not  be  pleased,
they  think,  witji  any  sacrifice,  but  what  is  offered


And  to  this  sad  purpose,  some  have  mternretec!
Rev.,  xxl  8,  to.  belong  torthem,  whom  the  fearful
are  joined  together  with  the  most  abominable,  who
shall  have  their  part  in  the  lake'  which  burnetii
with  fire  afid  brimstone.

To  cure  the  depraved  anjl  unhappy  notions  of
such  as  these,  \i  may  be  arguech  thpt  it  is  plain
from  Scripture,  that  the  first  beginnhun-  of,  or
movements  towards,  an  holy  life,  are  usuafiY  owing
to  the  passion  of  fear :  thaf  to  this,  both  our  Saviour
and  his  apostles  do  all  along  address  themselves  uv
their  earnest  entreaties. of  mankind  to  turn  from
the  ways  of  sin  to.  God. — "Fear  him."  saith  our
Saviour,  "who  is  able  to  destroy  botn  soul  and
body  .in  hell,"  Matth.  x.  .28 ;  so  chap.  vi.  IS;
Mark  xvi.  lG.  And  to  this  purpose  the  apostle
says,  "  Wosk.  out  your  salvation  with  fear  and
trembling,"  Phil.  UV 12,  and  2  Cor.  v.  1 1,  "  Know-
ing the  terrors  of  the  Lord,"  saith  he,  "we  per-
suade men."  .  And  in  most  of  the  Scripture  proofs,
we  shall  find  the  chief  ar^ume'nt  of  relicipn  to  be
urged  from  a  fear  of  punishment  for  the  neglect
thereof:  so-  that  to  be  dejected,  and  render  our  fives
comfortless  on  this  account,  were  the  most  unrea-
sonable extravagance*;  since  this  were  to  suppose,  -
that  God  hath  implanted  the  passion  of  fear-in  as
in  vain ;  or,  what  is  worse,  only  to  vex  and  torment
us;  aivdthatc4irSavioiurajidb^apo€tlea,persuaor
ing  us  to  be  religious  from  the  terrors  of  toe  Lord,
bsd  deceived  and  misled  us.

And  as  for  that  text,  Rev.  xxl  &— "  The  fear-
ful, and  unbelieving,  and  the  abominable,  and  mur-
derers, and  whoremongers,  and  sorcerers,  and  idol-
aters, and  all  liars,  shall  have  their  part  in  the
lake  which  ,burneth  with  fire  and  brimstone,"  &c
it  is  plain,  that  by  the  fearful  in  this  place  iB  meant,
either  such  as  refuse  to  embrace  the  Christian  re-
ligion, or  who.  having  embraced  it,  are  afraid  to
continue  steadfast  to  the  end,  on  account  of  the
cross;  and  therefore  cannot  be  supposed  to  have
any  reference  to  those  who  are  "  working  out  their
salvation  with  fear  and  trembling,"  according  to
the  direction  of  the  Gospel  Not  but  that  we  are
to  intermix  with  this  fear  an  entire  love  and  affec-
tion to  God,  to  the  .utmost  of  our  powers,

3.  Some  very  pious  but  unhappy  persons,  are
grievously  tormented  with  wicked  and  blasphem-
ous thoughts,  so  as  to  fell  under  the  greatest  ago-
nies of  mind :  and  often  to  be  so  near  distraction,
as  to  choose  death  rather  than  life.

For  the  relief  and  comfort  of  these,  the  minister
should  puggest  to  them,  that  such -horrid  and  frightr
fid  thoughts  are  either  occasioned  through  melan-
choly prevailing  over  their  spirits,  and  disordering
the  frame  of  their  minds;  or  else  from  the  malice
of  the  devil,  and  the  spirits  of  darkness,  whoxdo
all  they  can  to  shake  our  faith,  and  to  embitter  the
Christian  life.  . .

If  to  the  former  we  ascribe  such  horrid  thoughts,
they  may  be  comforted  upon  assurance,  -that  they
will  not  be  imputed  to  them  as  their  sin,  any  more
than  a.  fever  or  any  bodily  distemper  will,  which
they  did  not  willingly  procure,  and  which  they
have  tried  all  means  to  remove. <*

If  to  the  latter,  they  may  be  encoyraged  rather
to  rejoice;- as  nothing  is  a  greater  sign  of  their
being  high  in  the  favour  of  God,  than  when  they
are  under  the  most  violent  temptations  of  the
devil.  "  My  brethren,  count  it  all  joy,"  saith  St
James.  "  when  ye  fell  into  divers  temptations ;"
chap,  l  2.  To  that  effect,. they  may  be  tapght  to
consider,  that  the  way  to  heaven  is  jjistly  said  to  be


MO


THE  CLERGYMAN'S  COMPANION


by  the  gate* of  he!!:  that  the  "same  afflictions  are
accomplished  in  their  brethren  which  are  in*  the
world;'  w^o  in  various  kinds  are  tempted  of  the
tempter;  1  Peter  v.  9:  that  Satan."  desued  to  hate
St.  Peter  to  sift  him  as  wheat;"  Luke  xxii.  31 :
that  our  Saviour  himself  was  tempted  by  him,  and
the  best  of  men  have  always  been  most  obnoxious
to  his  malice ;  and  that  to  live  in  carnal  security,'
Without  any  molestations  from  him,  is  the  most
dangerous  state :  that  the  being  so  much  concerned
and  afflicted  at  such  evil  thoughts,  is  a  certain  ar-
gument of  a  good  disposition,  since  the  wicked
and  -profuto  are  rather-  pleased  than  4ormented
with  them.

Ajgruments  of  this  kind  are  the  most  proper  to
he  oflered  to  such  unhappy  persons:  but  in  case
their  frith  and  hope  be  totally  overcome  by  the
devil,  and  they  fall  into  direct  despair,  it  will  be
necessary  then  to  endeavour  the  cure  of  so  great
an  evil  and  temptation,  by  fee  addition  of  the  fol-
lowing exercise;

An  Exercise  against  Despair.

Let  the  minister  suggest  to  them,  that  God  is
not  willing  that  any  should  perish,  but  desirous
tint  all  should  come  to  his  glory:  that  for  this  end
we.  were  created :  that  he  is  so  far  from  being  "  ex-
treme to  mark  what  is  done  amiss,"  that  he  will
not  refuse  the  returning  "brodigal,  nor  reject  the
worst  of  criminals,  upon  tneir  sincere  repentance :
that  the  thief  upon  the  cross  is  a  demonstrable
proof  of  this,  and  a  standing  example  io  prevent
the  greatest  sinner  from  despair :  that  if  God  is  so
merciful  and  coni1'' J! —  *"*' — :| — **


on,  much  rather  may  we  hope  to  be  pardoned  for  our
weakness  and  infirmities :  for  he  "  knoweth  where-
of we  are  made,  he  remembereth  that  we  are  but
dust:"  nay,  he  hath  assured  us,  that  he  "will  not
break  the  bruised  reed,  nor  quench  the -smoking
flax :"  that  all  sins  shall  be  forgiven  the  sons  of  men,
except  one,  which  is  the  sin  against  the  Holy
Ghost ; ,"  the  sin  Unto  death,"  as  Saint  John  calls  it
But  that  no  man  commits  a  sin  against  the  Holy
Ghost,  if  he  be  afraid  he  hath,  or  desires  that  he
may/not ;  for  such  penitential  passions  are  against
the  very  nature  and  definition  of  that  sin:  that  al-
though forgiveness  of  sins  is  consigned  to  us  in
baptism,  and  baptism  is  but  ortce";  vet,  forgiveness
of  sins  being  the  •special  grace  of  the  Gospel,  it  is
secured  to  us  for  our  life,  and  ebbs  and  flows  ac-
cording as  we  discompose  or  renew  the  perform-
anoe  of  our  baptismal  vow ;  therefore  it  is  certain,
that  no  man  ought  to  despair  of  pardon,  but  he  who
faath  voluntarily  renounced  his  baptism,  or  wil-
lingly estranged  himself  from  that  covenant-:  that
if  5  were  not  so,  then  all  preaching  and  prayers
were  in  vain,  and  all  the  conditions  of  the  Gospel
invalid,  and  there  could  be  no  such  thing  as  repent-
ance, nor  indeed  scarce  a  possibility  of  any  one's
toeing  saved,  if  all  were  to  be  concluded  in  a  state
of  damnation,  who  had  committed  sin  after  hap-


To  have  any  fears,  therefore,  on  this  account,
Were  the  most  extravagant  madness :  for  Christ
u  died 'for  sinners/'  and  "  God,  hath  comprehended
all  under  sin,  that"  through  him  ."  he  might  have
mercy  upon  all-"  Rom.  xi.  32.  And  it  was  con-
cerning baptised  Christians,  that  Saint  John  said,
*  If  any  man  sin  we  have  have  an  Advocate  with
the  Father,  and  He  is  the  propitiation  for  our  sins ;"
and  concerning  lapsed  Christians,  Saint  Paul  gave


instruction,  that  "if  any  man  be  overtaken  in  a
fault,  ye  which  arc  spiritual  restore  such  a  man  in
the  spirit  of  meekness,  considering  lest  ye  also  be
tempted." The  Corinthian  Chfasoan  com


incest,  and  was  pardoned:  and  Simon  Magus,
after  he  was  baptized,  oflered  to  commit  the  out
we  call  simony,  and  yet  Peter  bade  him  prey  for
pasdon;  and  Saint  James  tells  us,'  that  "if  the
sick  man  send  for  the  elders  j*f  the  church,  and
they  pray  over  him,  and  he  confess  his  sins,  they
shall  ne  forgiven  him ;"  chap.  ▼.  14.
.  That  even  in  the  ease  of  very  great  sins,  -and
great  judgments  -inflicted  upon  sinners,  wise  and
good  men  diavauleclared  their  sense  to  be,  that
God  vindicated  his  justice  in  that  temporal- pa*
nishment;  and  so  it  was  supposed  to  have  been
-done  in  the  case  of  Ananias,  Sue. :  that  nothing
canbemore  absurd  than  to  think  that  sbgreat  and
good  a  God,  who  is  so  desirous  of  saving  all,  as
appears  by  his  word,-  by  his  sending  his  Son,  by
hts  oath*  and  promises,  by  his  very  nature  ana
daily  overtures  of  mercy,  should  condemn  any,
without  the  greatest  provocations  of  his  majesty,
and  perseverance  in'them*

Upon  the  strength  of  these  arguments,  the  des-
pairing person  may  be  further  taught  to  argue
thus  with  himself:

I  consider  that  the  ground  of  my  trouble  is  my
sin ;  and -were  it  not  for  that,  I  should  have  no
reason  to  be  troubled ;  but  since  the  "  whole  world
lieth  in  wickedness,"  and  since  there  .cannot  he  a  -
greater  demonstration  of  *  man's  abhorrence  of
sin,  than  to  be  so  deeply  affected  with  sorrow  for
it;  I  therefore  will  erect  my  head  with  a  holy
hope,  and  think  that  God  will  also  be  n^erciful  to
me  a  sinner,  as  he  is  to  the  rest  of  mankind.  I
know  that  the  mercies  of  God  are  infinite ;  that  ha
sent  His  Son  into  the  world  on. purpose  to  redeem
such  as  myself;  and  that  he  hath  repeatedly  pro-  »
raised  "  to  give  to  them  that  ask,  and  to  be  found  of
them  that  seek  him-;"  and4herefore  I  will  not  dis-
trust his  goodness,  nor  look  upon  the  neat  God

Ins  w


of  heaven  and  earth  to  be  worse  than  <
Indeed,  if  from  myself  I  were  to  derive  my  title  to
heaven;  then  my"  sins  were  a  just  argument  of
despair:  but  now  that  they  bring  me  to  Christ,
that  they  drive  me  to  an  appeal  to  God's  mercy,
they  cannot  infer  a  just  cause  of  despair.-  I  am
sure  it  is  a  stranger  thing,  that  the  Son  of  God
should  come  down  from  heaven,  and  take  upon
him  our  nature,  and  live  and  die  in  the  moat  ig-
nominious state  Of  it,  than  that  a  sinful  man,
washed  by  the  blood  of  Christ,  and  his  own  mare
and  humiliation,  should  be  admitted  to  pardon,  and
made  "  partaker  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven :"  and
it  were  stranger  yet,  that- he  should  do  so  much
for  man,  and  that  a  man  that  desires,  that  labours
after  it  to  the  utmost  of  his  power,  that  sends  up
strong  cries  and  prayers,  and  is  still  within-  the
covenant  of  grace,  should  inevitably  miss  that  end
for  which  our  Saviour  did  and  suffered  so  much.
It  is  certain,  that  of  allthe  attributes  that  be-
long to  God,  there  is  none  more  essential  to  his
nature,  and  Which  he  takes  more  delight -in,  than
his  mercy ;  and  it  rs  as  certain  also,  there  must  be
proper  ofriccts  for  this  boundless  and  immense  at-
tribute of  God ;  and  the  most  proper,  if  not  only,
objects  of  mercy  in  the  creation,  are  the  children
of  men ;  and  of  men,  surely  those  who  are  most
grieved  and  wearied  with  the  burthen  of  their
sins,  I,  therefore,  who  am  as  pitiful  an  object
of  mercy  as  any,  will  cheerfully  hope,  that  God


IN  VISITING  THE  SICK.


ttt


will  both  forgive  me  here,  and  give  me  the  bleat-
ing of  eternal  Mfe  hereafter:  far  I  know  that
eternal  Qfe  t»  purely  the  gift  of  God,  and  there-
free  have  leas-mason  etfli  to  despair.  Par  if  my
sins  were  fewer,  and  my  unworthiness  of  such 'a
glory  were  less,  yet  still  I  could  not  .receive  it  but
as  a  free  sift  and  donation  of  God,  and  so  I  may
now;  ancfit  is  not  expectation  beyond  the  hopes ,
of  possibility,  to  look  and  wait  for  such  a  gift  at
the  hands  of  the  God  of  mercy.  The  best  of  men
deserve  it  not ;  and*  I,  who  am  the  worst,  may
have  it  given  me.  I  know  that  I  have  sinned
grievously  and  frequently  against  my  heavenly
Father :  but  1  have  repented,  I  have  begged  par-
don, I  have  confessed  and  forsaken  my  sins,  and
have  done  all  .that  is  possible  for  me  to  make
aionement.  I  cannot  undo  what  is  done ;  and  I
perish,  if  there  he  no  such  thins  as  a  remedy,  or
remission  of  sins.  But  then  1  know  my  religion
must  perish,  together  with-my  hope,  and  the  word
of  G&od  itself  must  fiil  as  well  as  T.  But  I  cannot,
I  dare  not  entertain  such  a  thought.  I  firmly
believe  that  most  encouraging  article  of  faith,  the
remission  of  tins ;  and  since  I  do  that  which  all
good  men  call  repentance,  I  will-  also  humbly  hope
far  a  remission  of  mine,  and  a  joyful  resur-
rection.

I  know  that  the  devil  is  continually  lying  in
wait  to  seduce  and  destroy  the  souls  of  men ;
wherefore  I  will  fortify  my  'spirits,  and  redouble
my  guard\  and  call  upon  God  to  enable  me  to  re-
sist all  the  fiery  dart*  of  this  malicious  adver-

Or  perhaps,  this  exceeding  dejection,  or  malady
of  mind,  may  arise  from  the  distemper  and  weak-
ness of  my.  body ;  or  at  most,  I  hope,  it  is  only  a
disease  of  judgment,  not  an  intolerable  condition,
I  am  fatten  into  r  and  since  I  have  heard  of  a
great  many  others  who  have  been ,  in  the  same
condition  with  myself,  and  yet  recovered,  I  will
also  take  courage  to  hope,  that  God  will  relieve  roe*
in  hie  good  time,  and  not  leave  my  soul  for  ever
in  this  hell  of  depraved  fancy  and  wicked  imagin-
ation. In  fine,  I  will  raise  up  my  dejected  spirits,
and  cast  all  my  care  upon  God,  and  depend  upon
him  for  the  event,  which  I  am  sure  will  be  just ;
and  I  cannot  but  think,  from  the  same  reason,
foil  of  mercy.  However,  now  I  will  use  all  Qie
spiritual  arts  of  reason  and  religion,  to  make  me
more  and  more  desirous  of  loving  God :  that  if  I
miscarry,  charity  also  shall  fail,  and  something
that  loves  God  shall  perish,  and  be  damned  :
which  if  it  be  impossible  {as  I  am  sure  it  is,)  then
I  may  have  just  reason  to  hope  I  shall  do  well.

These  considerations  may  be  of  service  to  "  bind
up  the  broken  hearted,"  and  to  strengthen  the
"bruised  reed,"  of  a  good  man's  spirit,  in  so  great
and  terrible  a  dejection.  But  as  cases  of  this
nature  are  very  rare,  so  the  arguments  here  made
use  of  am  rarely  to  be  insisted  upon ;  and  never,
but  to  well-disposed  persons,  or  reformed  penitents,
or  to.  such  as  in  the  general  course  of  their  life,
have  hved  pretty  strictly,  and  conformably  to  the
rales  of  religion.  For  if  the  man  be  a  vicious
person,  and  hath  gone  on  in  a  continual  course  of
sin,  to  the  time  of  his  sicklies*,  these  considera-
tions are  not  proper.  Let  him  inquire,  in  the
words  of  the  first,  disciples  after  Pentecost,  "  Men
and  brethren,  what  snail  we  do  to  be  saved  T
And  if  we  can  but  entertain  so  much  hope,  as  to
enable  him  to  do  as  much  of  his  duty  as  he  can
fcf  the  present,  it  is  all  that  ean  be  provided  fox
3H


him.  And  the  mimster  must  be  innin^ly  careful
that  he  does  hot  attempt  to  comfort  vicious  per-
sons with  the  comfort  oi  (rod's  elect,  lest  he  pros-
titute holy  things,  and  encourage  vkje,  and  render
bis  discourses  deceitful  ;*  and  the  man  unhappily
find  them  to  be  so  when  he  descends  into  the  re-
gions of  darkness.

But  because  very  few  are  tempted  with  too
great  fears  of  miscarrying,  but  the  generality  even
of  the  most  profligate  sort,  are  rather  inclined  to
unwarrantable  assurances  of  their  future  salvation,
it  will  highly  concern  the  ministers  to  prevent  in
time  so  great  and  reigning  an  imposition  of  the
devil.

Wherefore,  to  the  former  considerations  to
awaken  the  careless  sinner  and  a  stupid  conscience,
the  following  may  be  added,  upon  .occasion^  to
check  the  overweening  thoughts  of  the  presump-
tuous.


SECTION  V.
Cbnsideraiums  agairut  Presumption.

And.  here,  let  the  bold  and  arrogant  sinner  far-
ther know,  that  a  man  cannot  think  too  meanly
of  himself,  but  may  very  easily  run  into  the  con-
trary extreme :  that  the  growths  in  grace  are  long,
difficult,  uncertain,  often  interrupted,  consisting
of  great  variety,  and  almost  innumerable  parts
and  distinctions,  which  a  careless  person  can
never  discover;  that  -the  more  a  man  presumes,
the  greater  reason  he  hath  to  fear;  because  the
confidence  of  such  men  is  generally  like  that  of
children  and  young  people,  who  have  no  other
reason,  but  that  they  understand  not  the  dangers
and  foliiesof  their  self-conceits :  that "  the  heart  of
man  is  deceitful  above  aU  things,  and  desperately
wicked ;"  deceiving  itself,  and  deceiving  others,  in
innumerable  instances ;  and  being  often  "  in  the
gall  of  bitterness,"  when  the  man  appears  with
the  fairest  outside  to  the  world:"  that  it  is  certain,
all  "  have  sinned  and  come  short  of  the  glory  or
God ;"  but  not  so  certain,  that  any  one's  repent-
ance is  real,  and  effective- to,  salvation :  that  virtue
and  vice  are  oftentimes  so  near  neighbours,  that
we  pass  into  each  other's  borders  without  observa-
tion, and  think  we  do  justice,  when  we  are  cruel:
or  call  ourselves  liberal,  when  we  am  loose  ana
foolish*  in  our  expenses,  &c.

That  the  self-accusing  publican  Was  justified,
rather  than  the  self-confident  Pharisee:  that  if
Adam  in  Paradise,  David  in  his  house,  Solomon
in  the  temple,  Peter  in  the  family  of  Christ,  Judas
among  the  twelve  apostles,  and  Nicholas  among
the  deacons,  and  if  the  angefe  in  heaven  itself,
did  fall  so  atrociously,  then  we  have  all  the  reason
iii  the  world  "  not  to  be  high  minded,  but  to  fear f
and  when  .we  are  most  confident  of  ourselves, ."  to
take  heed  lest  we  fell;"  there  being  nothing  so
likely  to  occasion  it,  as  pride  and  a  great  opinion
of  ourselves,  which  ruined  the  angels,  which  God
resists,  which  all  men  despise,  and  which  betray
us  into  carelessness,  and  a  wretched,  undiscerning,
and  unwary  spirit.  '

These  are  the  main  parts  of  ecclesiastical  duties
and  oflices  in  the  visitation  of  the  sick ;  which
being  severally  performed,  as  occasion  requires,,  it
remains  only  that  the  minister  pray  over  the  sick,
and  remind  him  to  do  all  the 'good  actions  ha  is


m


THE  CLERGYMAN'S  COMPANION


eapal
who!


able  of;  to  call  upon  God  far  pardon;  to  put  his

loie  tract  in  him ;  to  be  patient  .and  resigned ;
and  even  to  renounce  every  ill-thought  or  word,
or  indecent  action,  which  the  violence  of  his
sickness  may  have  caused  in  him ;  to  beg  of  God
to  give  him  his  Holy  Spirit  to  guide  him  in  his
agony,  and  to  send  jus  holy  angels  to  guard  him
in  his  passage.

Whatsoever  is  besides  this,  concerns  the  stand-
ers-by,  that  they  do  all  in  their  respective  offices
.  diligently  and  temperately ;  that  they  join  in
prayer  with  the  minister,  with  much  charity  and
devotion ;  that  they  man  no  outcries  or  exclama-
tions on  the  departure  of  the  soul,  nor  any  posi-
tive judgment  concerning  the  dying  man,  by  his
dying  quietly  or  .violently,  with^  great  fears  or  a
cheerful  confidence,  with  sense  or  without,  like  a
lamb  or  like  a  lion,  with  convulsions  and  terrible
agonies,  or  like  the  silent  and  well-spent  flame  of
an  expiring  taper.  For  these  may  happen  seve-
rally, according  to  the  constitution  of  the  persons,
and  the  nature"  of  the  distemper  that  befalls  them ;
or  else  according  as  -God  pleases  to  dispense  the
grace,  or  the  punishment,  for  reasons  only  known
to  himself.

Let  us  lay  our  hand  upon  our  mouth,  and  adore
the  mysteries  of  the  divine  wisdom  and  providence,
and  pray  to  God  to  give  the  dying  man  rest  and
pardon ;  fcnd  to  ourselves  grace  to  live  well,  and
tfle  blessings  of  a  holy  and  nappy  death.


THE  ORDER


VISITATION  OF  THE  SICK.

When  any  Person  in  sick,  notite  shall  be  given  thereof
to  the  Minister  of  the  parish,  who  coming  into  the
sick  Person's  bouse,  shall  say,

Peace  be  to  this  house,  and  to  all  that  dwell  in  it.

When  he  eonjeth  into  the'sick  man's  presence,  he  shall
say,  kneeling  down;

Remember  not,  Lord,  our  iniquities,  nor  the  ini-
■  putties  of  our  forefathers.  Spare  us,  good  Lord,
spare  thy  people,  whom  thou  hast  redeemed  with
thy  most  precious  'blood,  and  be  not  angry  with  us
forever. -

Ann*.  Spare  us,  good  Lord.

Then  the  Minister  shall  say,
Let  us  pray.

Lord,  have  mercy  upon  us.
Christ,  have  Mercy  upon  us.
.  Lord,  have  mercy  upon  us.

Our  Father,  which  art  in  heaven ;  Hallowed
be  thy  name.  Thy  kingdom  come.  Thy  will  be
done  in  earth,  as  it  is  in  heaven.  Give  us  this
day  our  daily  bread.  And  forgive  us  our  tres-
passes, as  we  forgive  them  that  trespass  against
us.  And  lead  .us  not  into  temptation ;  but  deliver
Us  from  evil. Amen.

Minuter.  O  Lord,  save  thy  servant,
'  Answer:  Which  putteth  his  trust  in  -thee.

Min.-  Send  him  help  from  thy  holy  place ;

An*.  And  evermore  mightily  defend  him.

Min.  Let  the  enemy  have  no  advantage  of
him;

Answ.  Nor  the  wicked  approach  to  hurt  him.


Min.  Be  unto  kirn,  O  Lord,  a  strong  tower,
Answ.  FronTthe  face  of  hit  enemy.
Min.  O  Lord,  hear  our  prayers:
Anno.  And  let  our  cry  come  unto' thee.

.Minister.

O  Lord,  look  down  from  heaven;  behold,  visit,
and  relieve  this  thy  servant  Look  upon  Asm  with
the  eyes  of  thy  mercy:  give  him  comfort  and  aim
Confidence  in  thee;  defend  him  from  the  danger
of  the  enemy,  and  keep  hint  in  perpetual  peace,
and  safety,  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.
Amen,

Heir  us,  Almighty  and  Most  Merciful  God
and  Saviour;  extend  thy  accustomed  goodness  to
this  thy  servant,  who  h  grieved  with  sickness.
Sanctify,  we  beseech  thee,  this  thy  rather! r  cor-
rection to  him;  that  the  sense  of  hi*  weakness
may  add  strength  to  his  faith,  and  seriousness  to
Ai<  repentance :  that,  if  it  shall  be  thy  good  plea-
sure to  restore  him  to  his  former  health,  he  may
lead  the  residue  of  his  life  in  thy  fear,  and  to  thy
glory :  or  else  give  him  grace  so  to  take  thy  visita-
tion, that,  after  this  painful  life  is  ended,  he  may
dwell  with  thee  in  life  everlasting;  through  Jesus
Christ  our  Lord. Amen.

Than  shall  the  Minister  exhort  the  sick  Parson  altar
.  this  form,  or  other  like.

Deabxy  beloved,  know''  this,  that  Afcmghty/
God  is  the  Lord  of  life  and  death,  and  of  aft
things  to  them  pertaining  j  as  yout^strength,
health,  age,  weakness,  and  sickness.  Wherefore,
whatsoever  your  sickness  ig,  know  you  certainly,
that  it  is  God's  visitation.  And  for  what  cause
soever  this  sickness  is  sent  unto  you;  whether  it
be  to  try  your  patience ;  for  the  example  of  others;
and  that  your  faith  may  be  found  in  the  day  of  the
Lord,  laudable,  glorious,  and  honourable,  to  the


;  or  else  it  be


increase  of  glory,  and  end
sent  unto  you,  to.  correct  and  amend  in  you  what-
soever doth  offend  the  eyes  of  your  heavenly  Fa-
ther: know  you  certainly,  that  if  you  truly  re-
pent of  your  sins,  and  bear  your  sickness  patiently,
trusting  in  God's  mercy  for  hia  dear  Son  Jesus
Christ's  sake,  and  render  unto  him  humble  thanks
for  his  fathenly  visitation,  submitting  yourself
wholly  unto  his  will,  it  shall  turn  to  your  prosit,
and  help  you  forward  in  the  right  way  that  lead-
eth  unto  everlasting  life.

\Qr  If  the  Person  visited  he  very  sick,  then  the  Corals
may  end  his  exhortation,  in  this  place,  or  else  pre*
eeed.

Take,  therefore,  in  good  part,  the  chastisement
of  the  Lord;  for  fas  St.  Paul  saith,  in  the  twelfth
chapter  to  the  Hebrews,)  "  whom  the  Lord  loveta,
he  chasteneth ;  and  scourgeth  every  son  whom  he
receiveth.  -  If  ye  endure  chastening,  God  dealeth
with  you  as  with  sons ;  for,  what  son  is  he  whom
the  father  chasteneth  not?  But  if  ye  be  without
chastisement,  whereof  ell  are  partaiers,  then  are

Se  bastards,  and  not  sons.  Furthermore,  we  have
ad  fathers  of  our  flesh,  which  corrected  us,  and
we  gave  them  reverence ;  shall  we  not  much  ra-
ther be  in  subjection  unto  the  Father  of  spirits,
and  live  1  For  they  verilyj  for  a  few.days,  chastened
us  after  their  own*  pleasure ;  but  He  for  our  profit
that  we  might  be  partake  ra_  of  his  holiness.*
These  words  (good  brother)  are  written  in  holy
Scriptures  for  our  comfort  and  instruction,  that
we  should  patiently  and  with  thanksgiving  bear
our  Heavenly  Father's  correction,  whensoever,  by


m  visiting  the  sick.


any  muffler  of  adiersity,  ijt  shall  please  his  gra-
cious goodness  to  visit  us.  And  there  should  be
no  greater  comfort  to  Christian  .persons,  than  to
be  made  like  unto  Christ,  by  suffering  patiently
adversities,  troubles,  and  sicknesses.  For  He
himself  went  not  up  to  joy,  but  first  he  suffered
pain:  He  entered  not  into  nis  glory  before  he  was
crucified.  So,  truly,  our  way  to  eternal  joy,  is  to
suffer  here  with  Christ;  and  our  door  to  enter
into  eternal  life,  is  gladly  to  die  with  Christ,  that
we  may  rise  again  from  death,  and  dwell  with
him  in  everlasting  fin.  Now  therefore,  taking
your  sickness,  which  is  thus  profitable,  for  you,
patiently;  1  exhort  you,  in  the  name  of  God,  to
remember  the  profession  which  you  made  unto
God  in  your  baptism.  And  forasmuch  as,  after
this  life,  there  is  an  account  to  be  given, unto  the
righteous-  Judge,  by  whom  all  must  be  judged  with-
out respect  of  persons;  I  require  you  to  examine
yourself  and  your  estate,  both  towards  God  and
man;  so  that,  accusing  and  condemning  your-
self, and  your  own  faults,  you  may  find  mercy  at
your  Heavenly  Father's-  hand  for  Christ's  sake,
and  net  be  accused  and  condemned  in  that  fearful
judgment;  Therefore  I  shall  rehearse  to  you  the
Articles  of  our  Faith,  that  you  may  know  whether
you  believe  as  a  Christian  man  should,  or  no.

Ban  tjto  JQaister  shall  rehear*-  the  Ankles  of  the
Faith,  saying  thus :

Dorr  thou  beueve  in  God  the  Father  Almighty,
Maker  of  heaven  and  earth'?

And  hi  Jesus  Christ  his  only  begotten  Son,'
our  Lord ;  and  that  he' was  conceived  by  the  Holy
Ghost;  born  of  the  Virgin  Mary;  that  he  suf-
fered under  Pontius  Pilate,  was  crucified,  dead,
and  buried;  that  he  went  down  into  heu\and  also
did  rise  again  the  third  day ;  that  he  ascended  into
•  heaven,  and  sitteth  at  the  right  hand  of  God  the
Father  Almighty,  and  from  thence  shajl  come
again,  at  the  end  of  the  world,  to  judge  the  quick
and  the  dead?

And  dost  thou  believe  in  the  Holy  Ghost;  the
holy  Catho|ic  church ;  the  communion  of  saints;
thereiaiflsionofBiria;  the  resurrection  of  the  flesh;
and  everlasting  life  after  death  1

Hie  skk  person  ■hall  answer,

AH  this  r  Btemd&stly  believe.

Then  shall  the  Minister  examine  whether  he  repent
bJm  truly  of  his  sins,  and  be  in  charity  with  all  the
world ;  ^xnortiag  him  to  forgive,  from  the  bottom  of
his  heart,  an  persons  that  have  offended  him,  and,  if  he
bath  odendsd  any  other,  to  ask  them  forgiveness ;  and
where  he  hath,  doae  injury  or  wrong  to  any  man,  that
he  make  amends  to  the  utmost  of  his  power.  And,  if  he
hath  not  -before  disposed  of  his  goods,  let  him  then  be
adstoaiahed  to  make  his  will,  and  to  declare  his  debts,
what  he  oweth,  and  what  is  owing  unto  him ;  for  the
setter  discharge  of  his  conscience,  and  the  quietness  of
Ms  executors.  But  men  should  often  be  put  in  remem-
brance to  take  order  for  settling  of  their  temporal  es-
tates, whilst  they  are  in  beaKh.

These  words,  before  rehearsed,  may  be  said  before  the
sfinister  begins  bis  prayer,  as  he  shall  see  cause.

The  Minister  should  not  omit  earnestly  to  move  such
skk  Persons  as  are  of  ability,  to  be  liberal  to  the  poor.

Bare  shall  the  sick  Person  be  moved  to  make  a  special

^^mian  of  hie  sins,  if  be  feel  his  conscience  trou-
wtth  any  weighty  matter. After  which  confes-
sion, the  Priest  shall  absolve  him  (if  he  humbly  and.
.  heartily  desire  it)  after  this  sort:  i

Otm  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who  hath  left  power
to  hit  church  to  absolve  all  sinners,  who  truly  re-
1  bstssv*  in  hint,  of  his  great  mercy  forgive


thee  thine  offences! And  by  his  authority  com-
mitted to  me,  I  absolve  thee  from  all  thy  sins,
in  the  name  of  the  Father,  and  of  the  Son,  and
of  the  Holy  Ghost*. Amen.
And  then  the  Priest  shall  say  the  collect  "following.
Let  us  pray. .

0  most  merciful  God,  who,-  according  to  (he
multitude  of  thy  mercies,  dost  so  put  away  the
sins  of  those  who  truly  repent  that  thou  remem-
berest  them  no  more ;  open  tnine  eye  of  mercy
upon  this  thy  servant,  who  most  earnestly  de-
sireth  pardon  and  forgiveness.-  Renew  in  trim,
most  loving  Father,  whatsoever  hath  been  de-
cayed by  the  fraud  and  malice  of  the  devil,  or  by
his  own  carnal  will  and  frailness;  preserve  and
continue  this  sick  member  in  the  unity  of  the
church ;  consider  his  contrition,  accept  his  tears,
assuage  his  nun,  as  shall  seem  to  thee  most. ex-
pedient for  him.  And,  forasmuch  as  he,  putteth
his  rail  trust  only  in  thy  mercy,  impute  not  unto
him  his  former  sins,  but  strengthen  him  with
thy  blessed  Spirit :  arid  when  thou  art  pleased  to
take  him  hence,  taxe  him  unto  thy  favour,  through
the  merits  of  thy  most  dearly  beloved  Son  Jesus
Christ  our  Lord. Amen.

• Then  shall  the  Minister  say  this  Psalm. .

bi  U,  Domine,  speravi. — Psalm  lxxL

.In  thee,  O  Lord,  have  I  put  my  trust;  let  me
never  be  put  to  confusion :  but  rid  me,  and  de-
liver me  in  thy  righteousness;  incline  thine  ear
unto  me,  and  save  me.

Be  thou  a  strong  hold,  whereunto  I  may  al  way
resort :  thou  hast  promised  to  help  me,  for  thou
art  my  house  of  defence,  and  my  castle.

Deliver  me,  O  my  God,  out  of  the  hand  of  the
ungodly;  out  of  the  hand  of  the  unrighteous  and
cruel  man.

For  thou,  O  Lord,  art  the  thing  that  I  long
for:  thou  art  my  hope,  even  from  my  youth.

Through  thee,  have  I  been  holden  up  ever
since  I  was  born ;  thou  art  he  that  took  me  out  of
my  mother's  womb ;  my  praise  shall  always  be -of
thee.

1  am  become  as  it  were  a  monster  to  many;  but
my  sure  trust  is  in  thee.

0  let  my  mouth  be  filled  with  thy  praise;  that
I  may  sing  of  thy  glory  and  .honour  all  the  day
long.

Cast  me  not  away  in  the  time  of  age:  forsake
me  not  when  my  strength  fiuleth  me.

For  mine  enemies  speak  against- me ;  and  they '
that  lay  wait  for  my  soul,  take  their  counsel  to-
gether; saying,  God  hath  forsaken  him;  perse-
cute him,  and  take  him,  for  there  is  none  to  de-
liver him.

Go  not  far  from  me,  O  God;  my  God;  haste-
thee  to  help  me.

Let  them  be  confounded  and  perish,  that  are
against  my  soul :  let  them  be  covered  with  shame
and  dishonour,  that  seek  to  do  me  evil.

As  for  me,  I  will. patiently  abide  always;  and
wilj  praise  thee  more  and  more.

My  mouth  shall  daily  speak  of  thy  righteous-
ness and  salvation ;  for  I  know  no  end  thereof.

1  will  go  forth  .in  the  strength  of  the  Lord
God ;  and  will  make  mention  of  thy  righteousness
only.

Thou,  O  God,  hast  taught  roe  from  my  youth
up  until  now :  therefore  will  I  tell  of  thy  wondrous
work*.


M4


THE  CLERGYMAN'S  COMPANION


Forsake  me  not,  O  God,  in  mine  old  age,  when
Iain  gray-headed,  until  I  have  showed  thy  strength
unto  this  generation,  and  thy^  power  to  all  them
that  are  yet  for  to  come.

Thy  righteousness,  O  God,  is  very  high,  and
great  things  are  they  that  thou  hast  done;  O  God,
who  is  like  unto  thee  1

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  and  to  t|ie  Son,  and  to
the  Holy  Ghost;

.  As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  is  now,  and  ever
ahall  be,  world  without  end. Amen.

Adding  this:
6  SatIouh  of  tfce  worjd,  who  by  thy  cross  and
precious  blood  hast  redeemed  us,  save  us,  and  help
us,  wa  humbly  beseech  thee,  O  Lord.

Then  shall  the  Minister  say :
The  Almighty  Lord,  who  is  a  most  strong
iower  to  all  them  that  put  their  trust  in  him ;  to
whom  ail  things  in  heaven,  in  earth,  and  under
the  earth,  do  bow  and  obey ;  be  now  and  evermore
thy  defence,  and  make  thee  know  and  feel,  that
there  is  no  other  name  under  heaven  given  to  man,
in  whom,  and  through  whom,  thou  mayest  receive
health  and  salvation,  but  only  the  name  of  the
Lord  Jesus  Christ Amen.

And  after  that  shall  say :

Unto  God'sgracious  mercy  and  protection  we
commit  thee.  The  Lord  bless  thee,  and  keep  thee.
The  Lord  make  his  face  to  shine  upon  thee,  and
be  gracious  unto  thee.  The  Lord  lift  up  his  coun-
tenance upon  thee,  and  give,  thee  peace,  both  now
and  evermore. Amen.


T&E


COMMUNION  OF  THE  SlCK.

Foa  AMcncn  as  all  mortal  men  be  subject  to  many  sud-
den perils,  diseases,  and  sicknesses,  and  ever  uncertain
What  time  they  shall  depart  out  of  this  4ife;  therefore
to  the  intent  they  may  be  always  in  readiness  to  die
whensoever  it  shall  please  Almighty  God  to  call  them,
the  Curates  shall  diligently,  from  time  to  time  (but  es-
pecially in  time  of  pestilence,  or  other  infectious  sick-
ness;) exhort  their  parishioners  to  the  often  receiving
the  Holy  Communion  of  the  body  and  blood  of  our  Sa-
viour Christ,  when  it  shall  be  publicly  administered  in
the  cliurch;  that,  bo  doing,  they  may,  in  case  of  sudden
visitation,  have  the  less  cause  to  be  disquieted  for  lack

■  of  the  same.  Bat  if  the  sick  person  be  not  able  to  come
to  the  church,  and  yet  is  desirous  to  receive  the  Com-
munion in  his~housc ;  then  be  must  give  timely  notice
to  the  Curate,  signifying  also  how  many  there  are  to

■  communicate  with  him  (which  shall  be  three,  or  two  at
the  least,)  and*  having  a  convenient  place  in  the  sick
man's  bouse,  with  all  things  necessary,  so  prepared,  that
the  Curate  may  reverently  minister,  he  shall  there  cele-
brate the  Holy  Communion,  beginning  with 'the  Collect,
Epistle,  and  Gospel  here  following.

The  Collect.

Almighty  and  everlasting  God,  maker  of  man-
kind, who  dost  correct  those  whom  thou  dost  love,
and  chastisest  every  one  whom  thou  dost  receive ;
we  beseech  thee  to  have  mercy  upon  this  thy  ser-
vant visited  with  thine  hand,  and  to  grant  that  he
may  take  hie'  sickness  patiently,  ana  recover  his
bodily  health,  (if  it  be  thy  gracious  will ;)  and
whenever  Aw  soul  shall  depart  from  the  body,  it
'ruay  be  without  spqt  presented  unto  thee,  through
Jesus  Christ  our  Juord. Amen.


The  Epistle,  Heb.  xiL  5.

Mr  son,  despise  not  thou  the  chastening  of  the
Lord,  nor  faint  when  thou  art  rebuked  of  him:
for  whom  the  Lord  loveth,  he  chastcneth;  and
scourgcth  every  son  whom  he  receiveth.

The  Gospel,  St.  John  v.  24.

Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto  you,  be  that  hcareth
my  word,  and  beUeveth  on  him  that  sent  me,  hath
everlasting  life,  and  shall  not  come  into  condemna-
tipu;  but  is  passed  from  death  unto  life.

After  which,  the  Priest  shall  proceed  according  to  the
form  prescribed  for  the  Holy  Cammanion,  beginning  at
these  words :  [  Ye  that  do  truly.]

At  the  time  of  the  distribution  of  the  Holy  Sacra-
ment, the  Priest  shall  first  receive  the  Communion  him-
self, and  afterward  minister  unto  them  that  are  ap-
pointed to  communicate  with  the  sick,  and  last  of  ail  to
the  sick  person.

But  if  a  man.,  either  by  reason  of  extremity  of  sick-'
ness,  or  for  want  of  warning  in  due  time  to  the  Curate,
or  for  lack  of  company  to  receive  with  him,  or  by  any
other. Just  impediment,  do  not  receive  the  Sacrament  or
Christ's  body  and  blood,  the  Curate  shall  instruct  htm,'
that  if  he  do  truly  repent  him  of  his  sins,  and  steadfast-
ly believe  Jesus  Christ  hath  suffered  death  upon  the  cross
for  him,  and  sned  his  bjood  for  his  redemption,  earnest-
ly remembering  the  benefits  he  bath  thereby,  and  giving
him  hearty  thanks  therefor,  he  doth  eat  and  drink  the
body  and  blood  of  our  Saviour  Christ  profitably  to  his
soul-*  health,  although  be  do  not  receive  the  sacrament
with  his  mouth.

Wben  the  sick  person-  is  visited,  and  receiveth  the
Holy  Communion  all  at  one  timd,  then  the  Priest,  for
more  expedition,  shall  cut  off  the  form  of  the  visitation*
at  the  Psalm  [In  thee,  O  Lord,  have  I  put  my  trust,]  and
go  straight  to  the  Communion.

In  the  time  of  the  plague,  sweat,  or  other  each  like
contagious  times  of  sickness  or  diseases,  when  none  of
the  parish  or  neighbours  can  be  gotten  to  communicate
with  the  sick  in  their  bouses,  for  fear  of  the  infection ;
upon  special  request  of  the  deceased,  the  Minister  only
may  communicate  with  him.

At  the  time  of  the  celebration  of  the  Commnnion,  the
communicants  being  conveniently  placed  for  re-
ceiving of  the  Holy  Sacrament,  the  Priest  shall  say
this  exhortation:

Dearly  beloved  in  the  Lord,  ye  that  mind  to
come  to  the  Holy  Communion  of  the  body  and
Hood  of  our  Saviour  Christ,  must  consider  how
St.  Paul  exhorteth  all  persons  diligently  to  try  and
examine  themselves;  before  they  presume  to  eat
of  that  bread,  and  drink  of  that  cup.  For  as  the
benefit  is  great,  if  with  a  true  penitent  heart  and
lively  faith  we  receive  that  Holy  Sacrament,  (for
then  we  .spiritually  eat  the  flesh  of  Christ,  and
drink  .his  plow};  thens  we  dwell  in  Christ,  and
Christ  in  us ;  we  are  one  with'  Christ,  and  Christ
with  us ;)  so  is  the  danger  great,  if  we  receive  the
same  unworthily :  for  then  we  arc  guilty  of  the
body  and  blood  of  Christ  our  Saviour;  we  eat
and  drink  our  own  damnation,  not  considering
the  Lord's  body ;  we  kindle  God's  wrath  against
us;  we  provoke  him  to  plague  us. with  divers  dis-
eases, and  sundry  kinds  of  death.  Judge  therefore
yourselves,  brethren,  that  ye  be  not  judged  of  the
jLord ;  repent  ye  truly  for  your  sins  past ;  have  a
lively  and  steadfast  raith  in  Christ  our  Saviour;
amend  your  lives,  and  be  in  perfect  charity  with
all  men ;  so  shall  ye  be  meet  partakers  of  these


holy  mysteries. And  above  all  things,  ye  m

five  most  humble  and  hearty  thanks  to  God  the'
'ather,  the  Son,  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  for  the  re-
demption of  the  world  by  the  death  and  passion
of  our  Saviour  Christ,  both  God  and  inan,  who
did  humble  himself  even  to  the  death  upon  the


tS  VISITING  THB  SICK.


N*


cross,  for  us  miserable  Burners,  who  lay  in  dark-
hm  and  the  shadow  of  death,  that  he  might  make
na  the  children  of  God.  and  exalt  us  to  everlasting
life.  And  to  the  end  that  we  should-  always  re-
member the  exceeding  great  love  of  our  Master
arid  only  Saviour  Jesus  Christ,  thus  dying  for  us,
and  the  innumerable  benefits  which  by  bis  pre-
cious blood-shedding  he  hath  obtained  to  us,  he
hath  instituted  vana  ordained  holy  mysteries,  as
pledges  of.  his  love,  and  for  v  continual'  remem-
brance of  his  death,  to  ear  great  and  endless  com-
fctft.  To  Him,  therefore,  with  the  Father,  and
the  Holy  Ghost,  let  us  give  (as  we  are  most
bounden)  continual  thanks;  submitting  ourselves
wholly  to  his  holy  will  and  pleasure,  and  studying
to  serve  him  in  true  holiness  and  righteousness  au
the  days  of  our  life. Amen.

Then  shall  the  Priest  ray  to  them  thateome  to  receive
the  Holy  Communion,

Ye  that  do  truly  and  earnestly  repent  you  of
your  sins,  and  are  in  love  an  J  charity  with  your
neighbours,  and  intend  to  lead  a  new  life;  follow-
ing the  commandments  of  God,  and  walking  from
henceforth,  in  his  holy  ways;  draw  near  with
faith,  and  take  this  Holy  Sacrament  to  your  com-
fort: and  make  your  humble,  confession  to  Al-
mighty God,  meefly  {meeting  upon  your  knees.

Then  shall  this  general  confession  be  made,  in  (he  name
of  alltbose  that  are  minded  to  receive  the  Holy  Com-
■ronton,  by  one  of  the  Ministers,  both  be  and  all  the
people  kneeling  humbly  upon  their  knees,  and-ssying ,

Almighty  "God,  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus
Christ,  maker  of  all  tilings,  judge  of  all  men,  we
acknowledge  and  bewail  our  manifold  sins  and
wickedness  which  we  from  time  to  time  most
usly  have  committed,  by  thought,  word,  and
against  thy  Divine  Majesty,  provoking  most
justly  my  wrath  and  indignation  against  us,  We
do  earnestly  repent,  and  are  heartily  soqy  for
these  our  mtsdorags ;  the.Temembrance  of  them  is

ievous  to  us,  the  burden  of  them  is  intolerable.

ave  mercy  upon  us,  have  mercy  upon  us,  most
merciruJ  Father:  for  thy  Son  our  Lord  Jesus
Christ's  sake,  forgive  us  all  that  is  past ;  and  grant
we  may  ever  hereafter  serve  and  please*  thee  in
newness  of  life,  to^  the  honour  and  glory  of  thy
name,  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord Amen.

Then  shall  the  Priest  (or  the  Bishop  being  present)
stand  up,  and,  turning  himself  to  the  people,  pro-
-nouflee  this  absolution :  -

^  Almighty  God  our  heavenly  Father,  who  of
his  peat  mercy  hath  promised  forgiveness  of  sins
to  afl  them  that  with  hearty  repentance  and  true
faith  turn  unto  him ;  have,  mercy  upon  you,  par-
don and  deliver  you  from  all  your  sins,  confirm
and  strengthen  you  in  all  goodness,  and  bring  you
to  everlasting  life,  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.


griev
Have


Then'  shall  the  Priest  say,

Hear  what  comfortable  words  oar  Saviour
Christ  saith  unto  all  that  truly  turn  to  him:  Come
onto  me.  all  ye  that  travail  and  are  heavy  laden,
and  I  will  refresh  you.— Matt,  zl  28.

So  God  loved  the  world,  that  he  gave  his  only
begotten  Son,  to  the  end  that  all  that  believe  in
him  should  not  perish,  but  have  everlasting  life.—
John  in.  16.

Hear  also  what  St.  Paul  saith:

This  is  a  true  saying,  and  worthy  of  all  men  to


be  received,  That  Jesus  Christ  came  into  the
world  to  save  sinners.— 1  Tim.  i.  15.-

Hear  also  what  St  John  saith :

If  any  man  sin,  wet  have  an  advocate-  with  the
Father,  Jesus  Christ  the  righteous :  and  he  ft  the
propitiation  for  our  ainr.— 1  John  u.  1,  %'

After  which,  the.  Priest  shall  proceed,  saying,  -

'  Lift  up  your  hearts.  - ,

Anew.  We  lift  them  up  unto  the  Lord.
Priest.  Let  us.  give  thanks  unto  our  Lord  God.
Amwi  It  is  meet  and  right  so  to  do.
Then  shall  the  Priest  say,

It  is  very  meet,  right,  and  our  bounden  duty,
that  we  should  at  all  times,  and  in  all  places,  give
thanks  unto  thee,  O  Lord,  Holy  Father/  Al-
mighty, Everlasting  God.

Here  shall  follow  the  propter  preface,  according  to  the
time,  if  there  be  any  specially  appointed ;  or  else  im-
mediately shall  follow,.

Therefore  with  angels  and  archangels,  and
with  the  company  of  heaven,  we  laud  and  magni-
fy thy  glorious  name,  evermore  praising  thee,  and
saying,  Holy,  holy,  holy.  Lord  God  of  hosts!
heaven  and  earth  are  full  of  thy  glory.'  Glory  be
to  thee,  O  Lord  most  high. Amen.

Proper  Prefaces'.
On  Christmas-day,  and  seven  days  after.

Because  thou  dids^  give  Jesus  Christ,  thine
only  Son,  to  be  born  as  at  this  time  for  us,  who  by
the  operation  of  the  Holy  Ghost  was  made  very
man  of  the  substance  of  the  Virgin  Mary  his  mo-
ther, and  that  without  spot  of  sin,  to  make  us  clean
from  all  sin :  therefore  with  angels,  &c.  '•
On  Easter-day,  and  saven  days  after.

But  chiefly  are  we  bound  to  .praise  thee  for  the
glorious  resurrection  of  thy  Son  Jesus  Christ  our
Lord ;  for  He  is  the  very  paschal  lamtrwhich  was
offered  for  us,  and.hathrtaken  away  the  sins  of  the
world ;  who  by  his  death  hath  destroyed  death,
and  by  his  vising  to  life  again,  hath  restored  us  to
everlasting  life:  therefore,  &c

On  Ascension-day,  and  seven  days  after.  '
Through -thy  most  dearly  beloved  Son,  Jesus
'Christ  our  Lord,  who  after  his  most  glorious  re-
surrection, manifestly  appeared  to  all  his  apostles,
and  in  their  sight  ascended  up  into  heaven  to  pre-
pare a  place  for  us ;  that  where  he  is  thither  we
might  also  ascend,  and  reign  with  him  in  glory:
therefore,  &c.

On  Whitsunday,  and  sii  days  after.
Through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord,  according  to
whose  most  true  promise  the  Holy  Ghost,  came
down  as  at  this  time  from  heaven,  with  a  sudden
great  sound,  as  it  had  been  a  mighty  wind,  in  the
likeness  of  fiery  tongues,  lighting  upon  the  apos-
tles, to  teach  them,  and  to  lead  them  to  all  truth,
giving  them  both  the  gift  of  divers  languages,  and
also  boldness,  with  fervent  zeal,- constantly  to  preach
the  Gospel  unto  all  nations,  whereby  we  have  been
brought  out  of  darkness  and  error  into  the  clear
light  and  true  knowledge  of  thee,  and  of  thy  Son
Jesus  Christ :  therefore,  Ac.

On  the  ftast  of  Trinity  only. •
Who  art  one  God,  one  Lord;  not  one  only  Per-


•  These  words  [Holy  Father]  most  be  omitted  on  Tri-
nity Bunday.  ai%


816


THE  CLERGYMAN'S  COMPANION


MB.birttbmFBfMMtaaneiab0taiice.  For  thai
which  we  believe  of  the  glory  of  the  Father,  the
seme  we  Wjeve  of  the  Son,  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost,
without  any  dtferenoeor  inequality :  therefore,  6c

After  each  of  wlikhpWfaeas,  shall  immediately  be  sunf
or  said:

Therefore  with  angels  and  archangels,  and
with  all  the  company  of  heaven,  we  land  and  mag-


nify thy  g»o
endeaymg^
heaven  and  i


•>  Holy,  holy,  holy.  Lord  God
earth  are  mil  of  thy
to  thee,  O  Lord  moat  high. An


glory. Glory  be


Then  ebal!  the  Priest,  taeeKafdown  at  tht  Lord's  uUe,
■ay,  ia  the  aama  of  all  them  that  shall  receive  the
Onmmanini,  this  prayer  following :

We  do  not  presume  to  come  to  thia  thy  table,
O  merciful  Lord,  trusting  in  our  own  righteous-
ness, but  hi  thy  manifokl.aad  great  mercies.  We
axe  nut  worthy  ao  much  as  to  gather  up  the  crumbs
tinder  thy  table.  '  But  thou  art  the  same  Lord,
whose  property  ia  always  t


therefoae,  gracious  Lord,  so  to  eat  the  i
r  Son  Jeans  Chi


lit  us,
i  of  thy
:,  and  to  drink  his  blood,  that
)  made  clean  by  his  body,
and  our  souls  washed  through  his  most  precious
blood,  and  that  we  may  evermore  dwell  in  him,
and  he  in  us. Amen.

When  the  Priest,  standing  before  the  table,  hath  so  or-
sated  the  bread  aad  wiae,  that  be  may  with  the  more
■eadiapss  and  decency  break  the  bread  before  the  peo-
ple, aad  take  the  cap  into  his  hands,  he  shall  say  the
prayer  of  Consecration,  as  fottoweu\:

Almighty  God  our  heavenly  Father,  who  of
thy  tender  mercy  didst  give  thine  only  Son  Jesus
Christ  to  suner  death  upon  the  cross  for  our  re-
demption, who  made  there  {by  his  one  oblation  of
hnnself  once  offered)  a  full,  perfect,  and  sufficient
sacrifice,  oMAnon,  and  satisfaction  for  the  sins  of  the
whole  world,  and  did  institute,  and  in  his  holy  Gos-
pel command  us,  to  continue  a  perpetual  memory
of  that  his  precious  death,  until  nis  coming  again ;
hear  us,  O  merciful  Father,  we  moat  humbly  be-
seech thee,  and  grant  that  We,  receiving  these  thy
creatures  of  bread  and  wine  according  to  thy  Son
our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ's  holy  institution,  m  re-
mimirtranfT  irf  hinr  death  and  passion,  may  be  par-
taken of  his  mosttteased  body  and  blood;  who,  in
the  same  night  that  he  was  betrayed,*  took  bread.
and  when  fie  had  given  thanks^  he  brake  it  and
gave  it  to  his  disciples,  saying,  Take.  eat;t  this  is
my  body,  which  is  given  for  you :  do  this  in  re-
membrance of  me.  '  Likewise  after  supper,*  he
took  the  cup,  and  when  he  had  given  thanks,  he
cave  it  to  them,  saying,  Drink  ye-all  of  this:  .for
thisll  is  my  blood  of  the  New  Testament  which'
is  shed  for  you,  and  for  many,  for  the  remission  of
sins:  do  this, as  oft  as  ye  shall  drink  it,  in  remem-
brance of  me. Amen.

Then  shall  the  Minister  first  receive  the  Communion  in
both  kinds  himself,  and  then  proceed  to  deliver  the
same  to  the  Bishops,  Priests,  and  Deacons,  in  like
manner  (if  any  be  present,)  and  after  that  to  the  peo-
ple also  In  order,  into  their  hands,  all  meekly  '


*  Here  the  priest  is  to  take  the  paten  into  his  Bands,
t  And  here  to  break  the  bread.
I  And  here  to  lay  his  hands  upon  all  the  bread.
$  Here  hs  is  to  take  the  cup  into  his  hand.

rery  vessel  (be  it
than  is  any  wine  to  be  con-


JHere  hs  is  to  take  the  cup  i
And  here  to  lay  his  hand  n
MtteewAnmm)  in  which  thee


lac* Andwheahedanvereththe^raadtonnyone,
he  shall  eay :

The  body  of  out  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  which  was
given  for  thee,  preserve  thy  body  and  soul  unto
everlasting  life!  Take  and  eat  this  in  remem-
brance that  Christ  died  for  thee;  and  feed  on  him
in  thy  heart  by  faith  with  thanksgiving.

Aial  the  Minister  that  deUvereth  the  cap  to  any  one,

shall  eay:

The  blood  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  Which  who
shed  for  thee,  preserve  thy  body  and  soul  unto
life! Drink  this  in  remembrance  that


I  was  shed  for  thee,  and  be  thankful.

If  the  consecrated  bread  or  wine  be  all  spent  before  all
have  communicated,  the  Priest  is  to  consecrate  more,
according  to  the  form  before  prescribed:  beginning  aj
[Our  Saviour  Christ  in  the  same  night,  fee.)  for  the  nines
ing  of  the  bread,  aad  [Likewise  after  eupper,  Jfcc]  for  the
blessing  of  the  cup.

When  all  have  comaanieated,  the  Minister  shall  re-
turn to  the  Lord's  table,  and  reverently  place  upon  it
what  remaineth  of  the  consecrated  elements,  coveriag
the  same  with  a  fair  linen  cloth.


Then  shall  the  Priest  say  the  Lord's  Prayer,  the  peo-
ple repeating  after  him  every  petition.

Our  Father  which  art  in  heaven ;  Hallowed  be
thy  name.  Thy  kingdom  coma.  Thy  will  be
done  in  earth)  as  it  is  in  heaven.  Give  us  this
day  our  daHy  bread.  And  forgive  us  our  trespasses,
as  we  forgive  them  that  trespass  against  us.  Ana
lead  us  not  into  'temptation »,  but  deliver  us  from
evil.  For  thine  is  the  kingdom,  the  power,  and
the  glory,  for  ever  and  ever. Amen.

After  tUe  shall  be  said  as  followeth:

O  Lord  and  heavenly  Father,  we  thy  humble
servants  entirely  desire  thy  fatherly  goodness  mer-
cifully to  accept  this  our  sacrifice  of  praise  and
tbnnkaffiving;  most  humbly  beseeching  thee  to
grant,  that  by  the  merits  .and  death  of  thy  Son  Je-
sus Christ,  and  through  faith  in  Ins  blood,  we  arid
all  thy  whole  church  mar  obtain  remission  of  our  -
sins,  and  all  other  benefits  of  his  passion.  And
here  we  offer  and  present  unto  thee,  O  Lord,  our-
selves, our  souls  and  bodies,  to  be  a  reasonable,
holy,  and  lively  sacrifice  unto  thee ;  humbly  be-
seeching thee,  that  all  we  who  are  partakers  of  {hie
holy  communion,  may  be  fulfilled  with*  thy  grace
and  heavenly  benediction.  And  although  we  be
unworthy,  through  our  manifold  sins,  to  oner  unto
thee  any  sacrifice  ;  yet  we  beseech  tnee  to  accept
this  our  bounden  <Juty  and  service;  not  weighing
our  merits,  but  pardoning  our  offences,  through
Jesus  Christ  our  Lord :  by  whom,  and  with  whom,
in  the  unity  of  the  Ho|y  Ghost,  all  honour  ana
glory  be  unto  thee,  O  Father  Almighty,,  world
without  end. Amen.

Or  this:

Almighty  and  everlasting  God,  we  most  hear-
tily thank  thee,  for  that  thou  dost  vouchsafe  to  feed
us,  who  have  duly  received  these  holy  mysteries,
with  the  spiritual  food  of  the  most  precious  body
and  blood  of  thy  Son  pur  Saviour  Jesus  Christ;
and  dost  assure  us  thereby,  of  thy  favour  and  good-
ness towards  us;  and  that  we  are  very  members
incorporate  in  the  mystical  body  of  thy  Son,  which
is  the  blessed  company  of  all  faithful  people ;  and
are  also  heirs  through  hope  of  thy  everlasting
kingdom,  by  the  merits  of  the  most  precious  death
andrpassjon  of  thy  dear  Son.  And  we  most  hum-
bly beseech  thee,  O. heavenly  Father,  so  to  assist
us  with  thy  grace,  that  we  may  continue  in  that
holy  fellowship,  and  do  all  such  good  works  as


IN  VISITING  THE  SICK.


Mf


thou  hast  prepaid  for  us  to  walk  in,  through  Je-
sus Christ  our  Lord;  to  whom,  with  thee  and  the
Holy  Ghost,  be  all  honour  and  glory,  world  with-
out end. Amen.

Then  shall  be  said  or  sung :

Glory  be  to  God  on  high,  and  in  earth  peace,
good  will  towards  men.  We  praise  thee,  we  bless
tnee,  we  worship  thee,  we  glorify  thee,  we  give
thanks  to  thee,  for  thy  great  glory,  O.  Lord  God,
heavenly  King,  God  the  Father  Almighty.

O  Lord,  the  only-begotten  Son  Jesus  Christ ;
O  Lord  God,  Lamb  of  God,  Son  of  the  Father,
that  takest  away  the  sins  of  the  world,' have  mercy
upon  us:  thou  that,  takest  away  the  sins  of  the
world,  receive  our  prayer :  thou  that  sittest  at  the
right  hand  of  God  the  Father,  have  mercy  upon  us:

For  thou  only  aft  holy,  thou  only  art  the  Lord;
thou  only,  O  Christ,  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  art
most  high  in  the  glory- of  God  the  Father. Amen.

Tata  toe  Prick  or  Bishop  (if  be  be  present,)  shall  let
themdepart  with  this  Messing :

The  peace  of  God,  .which  passeth  all  under-
standing, keep  your  hearts  and  minds  in  the  know-
ledge and  love  of  God,  and-of  his  Son  Jesus  Christ
our-  Lord ;  and  the  blessing  of  God  Almighty,  the
Father,  the  Son,  and  the  Holy  Ghost',  be  among
you,  and  remain  with  you  always. Amen,  .


PROPER  COLLECTS

THAT  MAY  BETJflXD  WITH  ANT  OF  TBS  PEAYEJli
POR  THE  SICK.

Let  thy  merciful  ears,  O  Lord,  be  open  to  the
prayers  of  thy  humble  servants ;  and,'  that  we  may
obtain  our  petitions,  .make  us  to  ask  such  things
as  shall  please  thee,  through  Jesus  Christ  our
Lord.

.In  the  midst  of  life  we  are  in  death:  of  whom
may  we  seek  for  succour,  but  of  thee,  O.X<ord  ' Who
lor  our  sins  art  justly  displeased  1  Yet,  O  Lord
God,  most  holy,  O  Lord  most  mighty,  "O  holy  and
most  merciful  Saviour,  deliver  us  not  into  the
hitter  pains  of  eternal  death.  Thou  knowest,  Lord,,
the  secrets  of  our  heart;  shut  not  thy  merciful  ears
to  our  prayers ;  but  ■Paxe  u*)  ^or^  mo8t  h°ly ,  O
God  most  mighty,  O  holy  and  merciful  Saviour,
thou  moat  worthy  Judge  Eternal,  suffer  us  not  at
the  last  hour,  for  any  pains  of  death,  tp  fall  from
thee. Amen,

f  X)  merciful  God,  the  Father  Of  our  Lord  Je-
sus Christ,  who  is  the  resurrection  and  the  life,
we  beseech  thee  to  raise  us  from  the  death  of  sin
to  the  life  of  righteousness,  that,  at  the  general
resurrection  in  the  last  day,  we  may  be  found  ac-
ceptable in  thy  sight,  and  may  have  our  perfect
consummation  and  bliss,  both  in  body  ana  soul,
in  thy  eternal  glory;  through  Jesus  Christ  our
Lord.  ' ' - ' ,

Grant,  we  beseech  thee,  Almighty  God,  that
we,  who  for  our  evil  deeds  do  worthily  deserve  to
be  punished,  by  the  comfort  of  thy  grace  may  mer-
cifully be  relieved,  through  our  Lord  and  Saviour
Jesus  Christ.

.  O  Most  mighty  God,  and  merciful  Father,  who
hast  compassion  upon  all  men,  and  hatest  nothing
that  the*  hast  made,  who  woukkst  not  the  death


of  a  sinner,  but  that  ha  should  rather  turn  from
his  sin, -and'  be  saved;  mercifully  forgive  us  our
trespasses:  relieve  and  comfort  us,  who  are
grieved  and  wearied  with  the  burden  of  our  sins.
'  Thy  property  is  always  to  have'  mercy;  to  thee
only  it  -appertaineth  to  forgive  sins :  Spare  us,
therefore,  good  Lord,  spare  us  Whom  thou  'hast
redeemed.  Enter  not  into  judgment  with  thy  ser-
vants, who  are  vile  earth,  and  miserable  sinners;
but  so  turn  thine  anger  from  us,  .who  meekly
acknowledge  our  vileness,  and  truly  repent  us  of
our  faults,  and  so  make  haste  to  help  us  in  this
world,  that  we  may  ever  live  with  thee  in  the
world  to  come;  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.  .

O  God.  the  Creator  and  Preserver  of  all  man-
kind, we  humbly  beseech  thee  for  all  sorts  and
conditions  of  men,  that  thou  wouldest  be  pleased
to  make  thy  ways  known  unto  (hem,  thy  saving
health  among  all  nations. '  More  especially  we
pray  for  the  good  estate, of  the  Csthone  church,'
that  it  may.  be  so  guided  and  governed  by  thy
good  Spirit,  that  all,  who  profess  and-catt  them-
selves Christians,  may  be  led  into  the  way  of
truth,  and  hold  the  faith  in  unity  of  spirit  in  the
bond  of  peace,  and  in  righteousness  of  Um.  '  Fi-
nally, we  commend  to  thy  fatherly  goodness  all
those.who  are  any  ways  afflicted  in  mind,  body,
or  estate ;  (especially  him  for  whom  out  prayers
are  desired ;)  that  it  may  piease  thee  to  comfort
and  reneve  them  according  to  their  seven!  ne-
cessities, giving  them  patience  under  t
ings,  and  a  happy  issue  out  of  all  their  i
and  this  we  beg  for  Jesus  Christ  his  sake.

Almighty  and  everlasting  God,  wl*>  art  always
more  ready  to  hear  than  we  to  pray ,  and  art  wont
to  give  more  than  either  we  desire  or  deserve;
pour  down  upon  us  the  abundance  of  thy  mercy ,
forgiving  us  those  things  whereof  our  conscience
is  aii&id^and  giving  us  those  sped  things  which
we  are  not  worthy  to  ask,  but  through  the  merits
and  mediation  of  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.

O  God.  merciful  Father,  that  deftpieeat  not  the
sighing  or  a  contrite  heart,  nor  the  desire  of  such
as  be  sorrowful:  mercifully  assist  our  prayers
that  we  make  hetore  thee,  in  all  our  troubles  anfl
adversities  whensoever  they  oppress  us;  and  gra-
ciously hear,  ua,  that  those  evils  which  the  craft
and  subtlety  of  the  devil  or  man  worketh  i
us  be  brought  to  nought,  and  by  the  proi
of  thy  goodness  they  may  be  dispersed ;  that  we
thy  servants,  being  hurt  by  no  persecutions,  (or
afflictions,)  may  evermore  give  thanks  unto  thee
in  thy  holy  church;  through  Jesus  Christ  our
Lord.  J

We  beseech  thee,  O  Fattier,  rnercifuUy  to  look
upon  our  infirmities,  and  for  theglory  of  thy  name
turn  from  us  all  those  evils  that  we-most  right-
eously have  deserved ;  and  grant  that  in  all  our
troubles  we  may  put  our  whole  .trust  and  con-
fidence in  thy  mercy,  and  evermore  serve  thee  in
holiness  and  pureness  of  living,  to  thy  "honour  and
glory ;  through  ocn>  only  mediator  and  advocate,
Jesus  Christ  our  Lord,

.  Almighty  and  everlasting  God,  who  of  thy
tender  love  to  mankind  hast  sent  thy'  Son  our
Saviour  Jesus  Christ,  to  take  upon  hinrour  flesh,
and  to  suffer  death  upon  the  cross,  that  all  man-,
kind  should  follow  the  example  or  his  great  hu-
mility; mercifully  grant,  that  we  bay  both  follow


948


THE  GLfiRGYMAN'S  COMPANION


the  example  of  his  patience,  and  also  be  made
partaken  of  .hi*  resuroection;  through  Jeans
Christ  our  Lord.

Almighty  God,  the  fountain  of  all  wisdom,
who  knowest  our  necessities  before  we  ask,  and
'  our  ignorance  in  asking,  we  beseech  thee  to  have*
.  compassion  upon  our  infirmities ;  and  those  things
which  for  our  unworthiness  we  dare  not,  and  for
our  blindness  we  cannot  ask,  vouchsafe  to  give  us
for  the  worthiness  of  thy  Son,  Jesus  Christ  our
Lord. Amen. •


PRAYERS  FOR  THE  SICK.

A  general  Prayer  for  the  Acceptance  of  cur
,  Devotion*  for  ike  Sick.

[From  Bishop  Andrew*.]

O  Lord,  it  is  a  -great  presumption  that  one  sin-
ner should  dare  to  commend  another  to  thy  Di-
vine'Majesty.  And  who  would  not  fear  to  uju
dertakeitl  But  thy  commandment  it  is,  "That
we  should  pray  for  the  sick  member*  of  thy
church;  and  mourn  with  them  that  mourn:"  and
thou  hast  promised  that  our  prayers  thus  made,
•  thou  wilt  receive.  And  now  behold,  O  Lord,  we
that  ore  no. way  meet,  but  unworthy,  utterly  un-
worthy, to  ask  for  aught  for  ourselves,  charity
and  compassion  so  binding  us,  are  enforced  to  be-
come suitors  to  thee  for  others,  even  for  this  thy
servant,  now  afflicted  by  thee.  Of  thee  we  hope;
of  thee  we  desire;  to  thee  we  pray,  in  the  most
meek  and  humble  manner,  and  even  from  the  bot-
tom-of  out  hearts.  O  Lord,  that  which  thbu
mighteet  justly  deny  to  our  unworthiness,  deny
not,  we  beseech  thee,  to  thine  own  gracious  good-
ness. O  Lord,  forgive  us  our  sins ;  O  Lord  for-
give us  our  sins,  our  great  and  grievous  sins,  oft
and  many  times  committed,  long  and  many  years
continued ;  so  that  we  may  be  meet  to  pray  for
others,  and  .our  prayers  be  made  unto  thee  in  an'
acceptable  time.

.  Graciously  look  upon  our  afflictions.

Pitifully  behold  the  sorrows  of  our  hearts.

Mercifully  forgive  the  sins  of  thy  people.

Favourably  with  mercy  hear  our  prayers.

Both  now  and  ever  vouchsafe  to  hear  us,  O
Christ.

Gracibusly  hear  us,  O  Christ;  graciously  near
us,  0  Lord  Christ. Amen,

Particular  Prayers  for  the  Sick,

[From  Bishop  Patrick.]

O  most  gracious  God,  who  by  thy  Son  Jesus
Christ  hast  united  us  all  in  one  body,  that  we
ahouty  k>ve  one  another,  and  if  one  member  suf-
fers, all  the  members  should  suffer  with  it ;  we
humbly  implore  thy  tender  mercies  towards  this
thy  servant,  of  whose  afflicted  condition  we  desire
to  have  a  compassionate  sense  and  feeling. .

Look  graciously  upon  him,  O  Lord,  and  visit
him  with  thy-  salvation.  Vouchsafe  htm  such
consolations  from  above,  as  we  should  desire  for
ourselves,,  were  we  in  his  extremity.  Give  him  a
true  penitent  heart  fof  all  the  offences  that  he  hath
at  any  time  committed .  together  with  a  lively
faith  in  thy  Son  Jesus,  who  came  into  the  world
to  save  sinners.  ."Give  him  the  comfort  of  a  holy
pope,  that  thou  acceptest  hie  repentance,  and


faithful  devotion  to  thee.  Support  him  by  this
hope  under  all  his  pain,  and  enable  him  patiently  •
to  submit  to  thy  fatherly  correction.  Send  Am
help  now  in  time  pf  need,  both  for  hie  soul  and  for
kit  body.  Bless  the  means  for  his  recovery ;  and,
if  it  be  thy  good  pleasure,  restore  him  speedily
to  his  former  health,  ano!  inspire  him  with  a  se-
rious resolution  to  serve  thee  more  zealously  all
his  days.

Or  tf  thou  hast  otherwise  resolved  in  thy 'wise
counsels,  deliver  him  from  the  fear  of  death,  a


him  in  tyis  last  agony,  give  him  an  easy  and  cheer-  •
fill  passage  out  of  this  life,  and  send  thy  Holy  an-
gels to  conduct  him  into  rest  and  peace  with  our
Lord  Jesus,  for  the  same  Jesus  Christ's  sake.
Amen. •

[From  Bishop  Taylor.]

L

Almighty  Goft,  Father  of  mercies,  the  God
of  peace  and  comfort,  of  rest  and  pardon,  we  thy
servants,  in  duty  to  thee;  and  charity  to  our  bro-
ther, humbly  beg  mercy  of  thee  for  him,  to  de-
scend upon  his  body  and  his  soul.  We  come  to
thee,  in  the  name  of  Jesus,  praying  thee  to  pardon
the  sins  of  this  thy  servant,  and  to  bury  tnem  in
the  grave  of  Him  that  died  for  us,  that  they  may
never  rise  up  in  judgment  against  himt  nor  bring
him  in  the  day  of  trial,  to  shame  and  confusion
of  face. Amen.

IL

Give  thy  servant,  O  Lord,  patience  in  his  sor-
rows, comfort  in  his  sickness,  and  restore  him  to
health,  if  it  seem  good  to  thee.  And,  however
thou  shait  determine  concerning  him,  yet  make
his  repentance  perfect,  and  /iw_  faith  strong,  and
his  hope  steadfast,  and  his  passage  safe;  that
when  thou  shalt  call  his  soul  from  the  body,  it
may  enter  into  the  rest  of  the  sons  of  God,  and
the  bosom  of  blessedness,  and  be  with  the  holy
Jesus. Amen.

O  Loan,  thou  knowest  all' the  necessitfes,  and
all  the  infirmities  of  thy  servant :  fortifj^At*  soul
with  spiritual  joys,  and  perfect  reslgriatioa;  and,
take  from  him  all  inordinate  inflections  to'  this
world ;  and  enlarge  his  heart  with  desires  of  be-
ing with  thee,  in  thy  heavenly  kingdom,

•IV.
Lord,  let  not  any  pain  or  passion  discompose
the  order  of  his  thoughts,  or  his  duty ;  and  lay  no
more  upon  thy  servant  than  thou  wilt  make  Asm
able  to  bear;  and  together  with  the  temptation^
do  thou  provide  a  way  to  escape;  even  by  the
mercies  of  a  longer  and  more  holy  life,  or  by  the
mercies  of  a"  blessed  death ;  even  as  it  pleaseth
thee,  O  Lord;  so  let  it  be. Amen.


Lord,  let  the  tenderness  of  his  conscience  and
the  Spirit  of  God  call  to  mind  his  sins,  that  they  may
be  confessed  and  repented  of:  and  lei  thy  power-
ful grace  remove  from  his  soul  every  root  of  bit-
terness ;  and  in  the  union  of  the  holy  Jesus,  and
in  the  love  of  God,, and  in  the  communion  of  all
the  saints,  let  his  sou]  be  presented  to  thee  blame-
less, and  entirely  pardoned,  through  Jesus  Christ
our  Lord. Amen.


IN  VISITING  THE  SICK..


dtt


A  larger  Fonnm  qf  Prayer  far  the  Sick.

[Ttem  Bishop.  Patrick.]

O  Lord,  the  Father  ef  our  .spirits,  who'giyest
us  Kfe,  ana  breath,  and  aty  things,  and  halt  not
thought  a  crown  of  everlasting  fie  too  much  to
promise  us,  we  believe  that  thou  wi|t  not  deny  us
what  is  needful  and  fit  for  us,  both  for  our  soul*
and  our  bodies,  in  our  passage  through  this  world,
toJhat  of  honour,  glory,  and  immortality.  In  this
confidence,  we  more  particularly  recommend  this
.  thy  sick  servant  to  thy  infinite  and  most  compas-
sionate mercy.  Settle  in  his  soul  a  steadfast  faith,
that  thou  dost  not  willingly  grieve  the  children  of
men,  but  intendest  good  to  him  by  this  thy  fatherly
correction.  And  now  since  all  other  pleasures  and
enjoyments  fail  Aim,  represent  thyself  more  ef-
fectually unto  A*»,  as  the  only  support  and  stay  of
his  hope,  and  rock  of  salvation. — Whereinsoever
he  hath  neglected  thee,  or  committed  any  offence
against  thee,  make  him  deeply  sensible  of  it,  and
heartily  sorrowful  for  all  Aw  transgressions.  And
as  he  earnestly  desires  pardon  and  forgiveness  of
thee,  so  work  in  him  a  senous^resolution  to  live
more  circumspectly  and  righteously  for  the  time
to  come.  Assist  kim.  graciously,  O  Lord,  that  he
may  give  a  proof  of  his  sincere  intentions  here-
after to  submit  himself  in  all  things  to  thy  will,
by  his  patient  submission  to  thy  fatherly  correc-
tion. 0,  that  he  may  so  (jiiietfy,  so  meekly,  so
humbly,  and  cheerfully  resign  his  will  unto  thee,
to  suffer  w^at  thou  inflictest,  that  he  may  be  the
more  disposed  to  do  readily  whatsoever  thou  com-
mandest.  For  which  end,  make  him  thoroughly
apprehensive  of  thy  sovereign  power  and  authority
over  all- creatures.  Possess  him  with  a  great  re-
verence of  thy  wisdom  and  justice,  with  an  entire
confidence  in  thy  goodness  and  love,  with  a  thank-
ful remembrance  of  all  thy  post  mercies  to  him.
that  so  he  may  the  better  endure  what  thou  layest
^upon  him  at  present,  and  may  ever  follow. thy  di-
-  lections,  and  submit  to  thy  orders,  and  delight  to
do  thy  will,  O  God.

Bless  the  remedies  which  are  used  for  restoring
him  to  his  focmer  health,  that  he  may  live  to  per-
form his  duty  with  greater  care;  or  if  thou  hast
otherwise  appointed,  accept  graciously  of  his  pur-
poses of  amendment,  and  dispose  him  to  return
back  his  spirit  willingly  unto  thee  who  gavest  it ;
and  with,  great  humility  and  deep  sense  of  his  own
nndesefvings,  to  expect  thy  mercy  declared  in
Christ  Testa.  Fix  his  mmd  steadfastly  upon  him,
who  hath  led  the  way  through  the  grave  unto
heaven,  that  ht  may  not  be  affrighted  with  the  ap-
proaches of  death,  out  looking  beyond  it  to  that
nigh  and  holy  place,  where  the  Lord  Jesus  is,
may  rejoice  in  hope  of  eternal  glory.

And  grant  that  every  one  of  us,  in  our  best
state  of  health,  may  consider  perpetually  hew  frail
and  weak  we  are;  that  so  we  may  not  abuse
ourselves  by  an  intemperate  ow  of  any  sensual'
pleasures,  nor  load  our  minds  with  the  cares  of
this  life,  nor  spend  our  days  in  a  vain  pursuit  of
the  honour  and  glory  of  this  world ;  but  may  pass
all  the  tirne  of  our  sojourning  here,  in  fear ;,  and
may  live  so  righteously  and  soberly  in  this  present
.world,  as  becomes  those  who  expect  shortly  to
give  an  account  to  thee,  who  will  judge  all  men
according  to  their  works.  Hear  us,  O  Lord,  we*
most  humbly  .beseech  thee,  through  Christ  Je-
ans, our  merciful  and  compassionate  Redeemer.


ar


Assist  us  mercifully,  O  Lord,  in  u, __

supplications  and  prayers,  and  dispose  the  way  of
thy  servants  towards  the  attainment  of  everlasting
salvation ;  that  among  all  the  changes  and  chances
of  this  mortal  life,  they  may  everbe  defended  by
thy  most  gracious  and  ready  help;  through  Jesus
Christ  our  Lord. Amen.

(From  Doctor  Hammond.)

O  Lord,  bless,  keep,  and  defend  this  thy  ser-
vant with  thy  heavenly  grace  and  benediction,
that  he  may  continue  thine  for  ever,  and  daily  in-
crease in  thy  Holy  Spirit  more  and  more,  unlif  he
comes  to  thy  everlasting  kingdom.

Let  thy  mighty  hand  and  out-stretched  arm.
O  Lord,  be  ever  his  defence;  thy  mercy  and
loving-kindness  in  Jesus  Christ  thy  dear  Son,  his
salvation ;  thy  true  and  holy  word,  his  instruction;
thy  grace  and  Holy  Spirit,  his  comfort  andconr
solation,  both  now  and  at  the  hour  of  death.

Now  the  God  of.  peace,  that  brought  again
from  the  dead  our  Lord  Jesus,  that  -great  Shep-
herd of  the  sheep,  through  the  blood  of  the  ever-
lasting covenant,  make  you  perfect  in  every  good'
work  to  do  his  will,  working  in  you  that  which  is
well  pleasing  in  his  sight,- through  Jesus  Christ;
to  whom  fee  glory  for  ever  and  ever.  * Amen.


PROPER  PSALMS  FOR  THE  SICK.
I. _ .

O  Lord,  rebuke  tne  hot  in*  thine  indigna-
tion: neither  chasten  me  in  thy  displeasure. —
Psalm  vi.  1.

2.  Have  mercy  upon  me7  O  Lord,  for  I  am
weak :  O  Lord,  heal  me,  for  my  bones  are' vexed.
— Psalm  vi.  2.

-3.  My  soul  also  is  sore  troubled:  but  Lord,
how  long  wilt  thou  punish  me?— -.Psalm  vi.  3.

4.  Thine  arrows  stick  fast  in  me:  and  thy
hand  jpresseth  me  sore. — Psalm  xxrviii.  2.

5»  There  is  no  health  in  my  flesh,  because  of
thy  displeasure :  neither  is  there  any  rest  in  my
bones,  by  reason  of  my  sin. — Psalm  xxxviii.  3.

6.  For  my  wickednesses  are  gone  over  my  head,
and  are  like  a  sore  burden  too  heavy- for  me  to
bear. — Psalm  xxxviii.  4.

7.' 1  am  feeble  and  sore  smitten?  I  have  roared
for  the  very  disquietneas  of  my  heart—Psalm
xxxviii.  8.  '

8.  My  heart  panteth,  my  strength  hath  firiled
me,  and  the  sight  of  mine  eyes  is  gone  from  me.
—Psalm  xxxvui.  10.  *

9.  Therefore  is  my  spirit  vexed  within  nie;
my  heart  within  me  is  desolate. — Psalm  cxliu.  4.
'  10.  Turn  thee,  O  Lord,  and'  deliver  my  soul :
O  save  me  for  thy  mercies'  sake. — Psalm  vi  4.

,  11.  Hide  not  thy  face  from  me  in  the  time  of
my  trouble:  incline  thine  cars  unto  me  when  I
call ;  O  hear  me,  and  that  right  soon.— Psalm  cii.  2.

12.  For  my  days  are  consumed  away  like
smoke :  my  heart  is  smitten  down  and  withered
like  grass. — Psalm  cii.  3,  4.

13.  And  that  because  of  thine  indignation  and
wrath :  for  thou  hast  lifted  me  up,  and  cast  me
down. — Psalm  cii.  10.

14.  But  I  said,  O  my  God,  take  ma  not  away


♦  Heb.  xiii.  SO,  2J.


S50


THE  CLERGYMAN'S  COMPANION


In  the  midst  of  my  age;  forsake  me  not  when  mj
strength  feileth  me.— Psalm  cii.  24.

15.  Wherefore  in  thee,  O  Lord,  have  I  pot  my
trust:  let  me  never  he  put  to  confusion.— Pealnl
tai  1:

II.

Psalm  li.

Hate  mercy  upon  me,  O  God,  after  thy  great
goodness :  according  to  the  multitude  of  thy  mer-
cies, do  away  mine  offence*.
'  2.  Wash  me  thoroughly  from  mine  iniquity :
and  cleanse  me  from  my  sin.

3.  For  I  acknowledge  my  faults :  and  my  sin  is
ever  before  me.

4.  Against  thee  only  have  I"  sinned,  and  done
this  evilin thy  sight:  that  thou  mightest  be  justi-
fied in  thy  saying,  and-elear  when  thou  art  judged.

5.  Behold,  I  was  shapen  in  wickedness,  and  in
sin  hath  my  mother  conceived  me.

6.  But,  Jo,  thou  requirest  truth  in  the  inward
parts:  and  thou  shalt  make  me  to  understand  wis-
dom secretly.

• '  7.  Thou  shalt  purge  me  with  hyssop,  and  I
shall  be  clean :  thou  shalt  Wash  me,  and  1  shall  be
whiter  ^han  snow.

8.  Thou  shalt  make  me  hear  of  joy  and  glad-
ness-: that  the  bones  which  thou  hast  broken  may
rejoice.

9.  Torn  thy  face  from  my  sins;  and  pat  out  all
my  misdeeds.

10.  Make  me  a  clean  heart,  O  God :  and  renew
a>  right  spirit  within  me.

11.  Cast  me  not  away  from  thy  presence:  and
take  not  thy  Holy  spirit  from  me:

13.  O.  give  me  the  comfort  of  thy  help  again ;
and  establish  me  with  thy  free  Spirit

1^.  Then  shall  I  teach  thy  ways  unto  the
wicked:  and  sinners  shall 'be  converted  unto
thee.  .  <  1

Hbar  my  prayer,  O  Lord,  and  consider  my
desire :  hearken  unto  me  for  thy  truth  and  right-
eousness'sake. — Psahncxliij.  1.

2.  And  enter  not  into  judgment  wifh  thy, ser-
vant'; for  in  thy  Bight  shall  no  man  living  he  jus-
lined.— Psalm  czlni.  2.

•  3.»  The  sacrifice  of  God  is  a  troubled  spirit :  a
broken  .and  contrite  heart,  O  God,  thou  wilt  not
despise.— Psalm  li.  17.

-  4.  Lord  thou  knowest  all  my  desire :  and  my
groaning  is  not  hid  from  thee. — Psalm  xxxviii.  9.

5.  I  stretch  forth  my  hands  unto  thee:  my
soul  gaspeth  unto  thee,  as  a  thirsty  land.— Psalm
cxliiL6.>

6.  Hear  me,  O  Lord,  and  that  soon,  for  my
■pint  waxeth  faint:  hide  not  thy  face  /rom  me,
laatl  be  like  unto  them  that  go  down  into  the  pit.
—Psalm  cxliuV  7.

7.  fiaete  thee  to  help  me,  O  Lord  God  of  my
salvation.— Paalmxxxviii.  22.

8.  For  thou  ait  a  place  to  hide  me  In :  thou
shalt  preserve  me  from  trouble :  thou  shalt  compass
me  about  with  songs  of  deliverance.— Psalm
JUuuL  8.

9.  Into  thine  hands  I  commend  my  spirit:  for
then  hast  redeemed  me,  O  Lord  God  of  truth.
—Psalm  xxxi.  5.

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  &c.
At  it  was  in  the  beginning,  &c.


A  Declaration  of  Forgiveness,  i

[From  Biihbp  Conns.]

I  no  most  humbly  desire  all,  and  every  one
whom  I  have  offended,  that  they  would  vouchsafe
to  forgive  me :  and  I  do  freely  and  heartily  forgive  ait
the  world,  whereinsoever'  any  hath  oUended  me,
or  done- me  any  manner  of  injury  whatsoever,  even
as  I  desire  to  be  forgiven  of  God,  and  to  be  absolv-
ed from  my  sins,  Hbr  the  merits  of  my  Messed
Redeemer.


OCCASIONAL  PRAYERS  FOR  THE
SICK..

A  Prayer  for  a'  Person  in  the  Beginning  of  his
Sickness,.

[From  Bishop  Taylor.]

O  Almighty  God,  merciful  and  gracious,
who  in  thy  justice  did  send  sorrow  and-  tears,
sickness  and  death,  into  the  world,  as  a  punish-
ment for  man's  sins,  and  hast  comprehended  ell
under  sin,  and  this  sad  covenant  of  suffering!, —
not  to  destroy  us,  but  that  thou  mightest  neve
mercy  upon  all,  making  thy  justice  to-minister  to
mercy,  snort  afflictions  to  an  eternal  weight  of
glory ;  as  thou  hast  been  pleased  to  turn  the  sins
of  this  thy  servant  into  sickness,  so  turn,  we  be-
seech thee,  his  sickness  to  the  advantage  of  holi-
ness and  religion,  of  mercy  and  pardon,  of  faith
and  hope,  ot  grace  and  glory.  Thou  hast  now
called  him  to  suffer.  Lord,  relieve  hie  sorrow
and  support  his  spirit,  direct  his  thoughts  and
sanctify  his  sickness,  that  the'^punishment  of  his
sin  may  be  to  him  a  school  of  .virtue.  Make  Aim
behave  as  a  son  under  discipline,  humbly  and
obediently,  -evenly  and  patiently,  that  he  may  be
brought  by  this  .means  nearer  to  thee ; '  that  if  Ae
shall  recover  his  former  health,  he  may  return  to
the  world  with  greater  strength  of  spirit,  to  run  a
new  race  of  stricter  holiness,  and  more  severe  re-
ligion-, or  if  he  ehall  pass  hence  through  the  gates
of  death,  he  may  rejoice  in  the  hope  of,  being  admit-
ted into  that  heavenly  society,  in  whjeh  all  thy
saints  and  servants  shall  be  comprehended  to
eternal  ages.  Grant  this,  for  Jesus  Christ's  sake,
our  blessed  Lord  and  Saviour. Amen.

A  Prayer  for  Thankfulness  in  Sickness.  •

OsGod,  wonderful  bothfn  thy  mercies  and  judg-
ments, grant  that  the  sense  -of  thy  servant's  pre-
sent afflictions  may  not  cause'  him  to  forget  thy
former  mercies,  which  thou  hast  bestowed  upon
him:  O,  therefore,  let  the  remembrance  of  those
many  and  great  blessings  that  he  hath  so  long  en-
joyed at  thy  hand,  be  now  the  proper  motives  and
incentives  to, the  virtues  of  patience  and  humility,
causing  him  cheerfully  to  resign  himself  to  thy
blessed  will  under  all  the  dispensations  of  thy  pro-
vidence, though  ever  so  hard;  and  patiently  to
wait  for  the  return  of  thy  loving-kindness  in  Jesus,
which  is  better  than  life. Amen.

A  Prayer  for  a  Blessing  on  the  Means  used  for
a  sick  Persons  Reoovery.

[From  Mr.KettJewell.]
O  gracious  Lord,  by  whose  word  man  Kvtoe
and  not  by  any  human  means  alone;  direct,  we


IN  VISITING  THEJ3ICK.


«l


pray  thee,  the  counsel*  of  thoee  wijo  prescribe  to
this  thy  servant,  and  prosper  the  medicines  which
lie  used  fee  procure  him  ease  and  strength,  but  let
not  his  confidence  in  them  lessen  any  thing  of  hia
dependence  on  thee,  but  make,  him  sensible  that
every  good  gift  is  from  thee,  and  that  it  is  thou
that  givest  us  help  in  time  of  need.  To  whom,
therefore,  but  to  thee,  should  we  flee  in  the  day  of
our  visitation  1  since  it  is  thy  blessing  only  that
maketh  the  means  we  use  effectual ;  and,  however
Vain  the  use  of  them  is  without  thee,  if  thou  bid-
dest  them,  tile  things  or  accidents  which  we  do
not  think  of,  or  regard,  shall  recover  us.  O,  there-
fore! as  their  part,  who  administer  to  him,  is  the
care,  so  let  thine,  O  God,  be  the  blessing;  and  hi*
the  comfort :  and  as  he  regards  Lhem  as  thy  instru-
ments, soviet  hitrt  own  thee  for  the  Author  of  his
mercies,  and  to  thee  give  thanks,  and  pay  Aw
vows- and  services ;  through  our  Lord  and  Saviour
Jesus  Christ Amen.

A  Prayer  for  a  sick  Person,  when  there  appears
some  Hope  of  ttecopery.
[From  Bishop  Patrick]  ^

We  thank  theej-O  Father  ,_Lord  of  heaven  and
earth,  that  thou  hast  heard  our  prayers  for  thine
afflicted  servant,' and  given  him  some  respite  and
hopes  of  recovery  from  this  great  illness.  Blessed
be  thy  goodness,  that  he  hath  not  made  his  bed  in
the  dust,  but  is  likely  to  continue  stOlAmongst  us,
.  in  the  land  of  the  living.  Blessed  be  thy  goodness  *
for  so  great  (and  lately  unexpected)  mercy  to  him.

And,  O  thou  Preserver  of  man !  who  hast  begun
to  revive  and  quicken  him  again  j  go  on  to  perfect
his  cute,  and  forsake  not  the  work  of  thy  own
hands.  Repair  all  the  decays  in  his  outward  man,
that  his  mind  may  also  recover  its  former  strength,
to  praise  and  bless  thy  goodness  to  him.

And  visit  him,  in  the  meantime,  with  thy  hea-
venly consolation  from  above.  Fill  him  with  com-'
fortabte  thoughts  of  thy  love,  and  of  the  tender
compassionate  care  which  our  Lord  Jesus  takes  of
all  bis  afflicted  servants.*  Endue  him  still  with
more  patient  submission  to  thy  will,  and  enable
him  both  quietly  to  wait  upon  thee,  till  thou  hast
finished  his  recovery,  and  also  to  continue  stead-
fastly resolved  to  serve  thee  more  faithfully  with
kis  restored  strength,  through  Jesus  Christ  our
"I  Saviour  and  Redeemer. Amen.


Another,  in  Behalf  of  the  sick  Personr  when  he
finds  any  Abatement  of  his  Distemper,

AtccEPT,  O  Lord,  of  the  unfeigned  thanks  of  thy
servant  for  abating  the  fury  of  his  present  distem-
per, and  giving  him  some  hopes  of  raising  him  up
again  to  praise  thee  in  the  great  congregation.

It  is  a  great  mercy,  O  Lord,  and  owing'  to  thy
goodness  only,  that  his  senses  are  preserved  en-
tire, and  that  he  hath  some  respite,  after  so  much
and  pain,  through  the  violence  of  his


O  perfect,  if  it  be  thy  blessed  will,  what  thou
hast  begun  in  him,  and  say  to  the  distemper,  "It
iraotuW'

Teach  him  hence,  to  look  up  to  thee  continually,
a*  the  rock  of  6irsalvation,  whence  only  he  in  to
expect  comfort  and  support:  and  give  him  grace
always  to  make  such  a  right  use  of  thy  favours,
that  ke  may  daily  find  himself  surrounded  by  the
fight  of  thy  countenance,  and  enjoy  the  blessings
of  thy  Jfeavenry  benediction, in  all  his  ways,  whe-
ther in  adversity  or  prosperity,  in  sickness  or  in


health.  Even  so,  Messed  Lord,  continue  to  assist
strengthen,  comfort,  and  bless  him,  both  now  and
for  evermore,  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.

A  Prayer  for  one  tpho  is  dangerously  ill.
O  Almighty  God,  "gracious,  and-  merciful,
and  long-suffering,  whose  compassions  fell  not ;"
look  down,  we  beseech  thee,  upon  the  low  and  dis-
tressed stale  of  thy  servant,  now  lying  in  the  ex-
tremity of  sickness.  The  harder  A&  illness  presses
upon  him,  the  louder  does  it  call  upon  thee  for
help.  O  be  merciful  therefore  unto  himx  accord-
ing to  the  necessity  of  his  case,  and  according  tit
the  multitude  of  thy  tender  mercies  in  Jesus  Christ.
Rebuke  the  distemper,  Chat  it  prevail  not  aver  him
to  death ;  but  turn  its  malevolent  aspect  into  a  joy-
ous expectation  of  life. In  as  great  danger  as  he


is,  yet  if  thou  wilt,  O  Lord,  we  know  thou  canst,
make  him  whole :  if  thou  speakest  the  word,  it  shall
be  done.  In  submission,  therefore,  to  thy  most
wise  and  good  disposal  of  all  things,  we  beg  this
mercy  at  thy  hands,  that  thou  wouldest  let  "this"
bitter  "cup  pass  away"  from  Ahy  servant,  and
cause  "  a  way  for"-  him  "  to  escape",  out  of  this
dangerous  condition,  O  spare  him  a  little,  and .
his" soul  shall  live."  Amen.  r

A  Prayer  for  a  sick  Person  token  Sickness  con-
tinues long  upon  him.

[From  Bishop  Patrick.]

Look  down,  O  Lord,  we  humbly  beseech  thee,
with  an  eye  of  compassion  on  thy  poor  distressed
servant,  who  hath  lain  so  long  under  this  severe
affliction;  and  by  how  much  the  outward  man  hi
decayed  and  brought  low  by  the  tedioosness  of  the
distemper's  continuing  on  him,  by  so  much  the
more  do  thou  be  pleased  to  support  Aim  in  the  in-
ner man  by  the  gracious  assistance  of  thy  Holy
Spirit.  Give  him  unfeigned  repentance  for  all  the
errors  of  his  past  life,  and  steadfast  faith  in  thy
Son  Jesus  Christ ;  a  comfortable  assurance  of  the
truth  of  all  his  precious  promises,  a  lively  hope,  of
that  immortal  bliss  in  which  he  reigns  for  ever-
more, and  a  strong  sense  of  thy  fiuX  ^v  love  to
Mm,  and  care  over  him,  which  may  make  him
heartily  love  thee,  and  entirely  confide  in  thee,  and
absolutely  resign  both  soul  and  body  to  thy  wise
disposal.  **  •*

We  know  there  is  nothing  too  hard  for  thee  ;
but  that  if  thou  wilt,  thou  canst  bring  him  uneven
from  the  gates'  of  death,  and -grant  him  a  longer
continuance  among  us.  May  it  be  thy  good  plea-
sure, O  most  gracitfus  God,  still  to  continue  him
here :  spare  Mm>,  O  Lord,  and  deliver  him  also
speedily  from  this  misery,  under  which  he  hath  so
long  groaned.  Bless  all  the  .means  that  are  used
for  his  recovery,  and  for  the  support  of  his  spirit*,
and  give  him  refreshment  during  this  tedious  sick-
ness. Release  him  from  his  pain,  or  grant  him
some  ease,  or  else  increase  and  strengthen  his  pa-
tience. Help  him,  in  remembrance  of  thy  past
loving-kindness,  to  trust  in  thy  goodness  and  sub-
mit to  thy  wisdom,  and  bear  with  an  equal  mind
what  thou  thinkest  fit  to  lay  upon  him ;  so  that
approving  himself  to  thee  in  these  and  all  other
virtues,  while  thou  triest  him  by  so  tore  an  afflic-
tion, he  may  say  at  the  last,  with  the  holy  Psalm-
ist, "  It  was  good  for  me  that  I  was  in  trouble."

Unto  thy  infinite  mercies  we  recommend  Atm,'
and  to  the  compassionate  kindness  of  our  Lord  Je-
sus Christ,  who  we  hope  will  hear  all  the  prayers  .
of  his  friends  for  him,  every  where!  and  send  his


*i


.THE  CLERGYMAN'S  COMPANION


/Holy  Spirit  tot*  At*  comforter,  and  his  good  an-
gel* to  be  At*  guardians,  and  direct  those  who  arc
to  advise  and  prescribe  the  means  of  his  restora-
tion, and  bring  Aim  -to  pftise  thee  again  in  the
assemblies,  of  thy  saints  Upon  earth;  or  (if  thou
hast  otherwise  disposed-  in"  thy  wise  counsels)  to
praise  thee  in  the  great  assembly  of  saints  and
angels  in  heaven ;  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord
and  only  Saviour,  to  whom  with  thee,  and  .the
Holt  Spirit,  be  all  praise,  love  and  obedience,
world  without  end.  ~Amen.

Prayer  for  the  Grace  of  Patience,  and  a  suitable
Behaviour  in  a  tick  Pewson  to  Friends  and
Attendants.

Help  thy  .servant,  O  thou  merciful  Redeemer
and  lover  of  souls,  to  undcrgb  this  load  of  afflic-
tion, which  thou  hast  laid  upon  Aim,  with  pa-
tience. "  Lead  Aim"  gently  by  the  hand  to  "  the
waters  of  comfort,"  and  let  "*thy  rod"  and  "  thy
staff  support"  him  now  that  fie  is  obliged  to  "  walk
in  the  valley  and  shadow  of  death."

Let  him  consider  thee,  O  blessed  Jesus,  in  all
thy  weary  pilgrimage  and  sufferings  here  upon
earth,  before  thou  enteredst  into  glory,  "  that  he
be  not  weary  and  faint  in  his  mind."

if  relief  does  not  come  from  thec  so  soon  as  he
expects  or  desires,  enable  Aim  still  to  hold  out  with
lonff-suffering,  and  to  wait  with  patience  for  it.
Ana  whatsoever  thou  doestwith  Mm,  O  Lord,  lot
him  be  "  dumb,  and  not  open  Ai*  mouth"  to  mur-
mur or  repine,  because  it  is  "  thy  doin^."  Make
him  acquiesce'  and  rest  satisfied,  even  in  the  bit-
terest dispensations  of  thy  providence^  and  let  no
pains  or  sufferings  ever  drive  him  from  thee,  con-
sidering that  no  u  temptation  hath  befallen  him"
but  "  what  is  common  to  men."  "  >

x  ^  And,  together  with  this  patience  towards  thee,
give  him  patience,  O  merciful  Lord,  towards  all
those  who  kindly  and  charitably  minister  umjto  Aim,
and  attend  about  Aim.

Keep  Aim  from  being  humoursome,  and  show-
ing crossness  to  their  good  counsels,  or  from  being
causelessljslLngry,  and  exceptious  against  their
kmd  endeavours.  If  any  evil  accidents  or  indis*
cretions  happen,  let  Aim  not  presently  be  outrage-
otts-to  aggravate  them,  or  break  out  into  any  re-
proachful or  unseemly  behaviour  against  them;
out  let  Aim  be  pleased  with  the  least  expression  of
their  kindness,  and  interpret  every  thing  favour-
ably; and  on  all  occasions  let  Aim  make  it  Aw
study  to  oblige  these  who  are  obliging  to  Aim  in
thfe  time  of  necessity,  ifeeeiving  with  thankfulness
their  good  offices,  and  praying  God  to  reward  them,
.  Ibr  his  Son  Jesus  Christ  s  sake. Amen.

A  Prayer  for  spiritual  Improvement  by  Sickness.

[From  Dr.  Inet.]

O  merciful  Father,  whosconrgest  those  whom
thou  lovest,  and"  chastisest  those  whom  thou  wilt
receive ;  let  thy  loving  correction  purify  thy  ser-
vant, and  make  Aim  great  in  thy  favour  by  his
present  humiliation.  O  let  him  learn  "  thy  sta-
tutes" in  this  school  of  affliction :"  let  %im~il seek
thee  early"  in  itr;  and  when  At*  "  heart  is  over-
whelmed, lead  Aim  to  the  rock  of  salvation."

Let  thy  "  rod"  awaken  Aim  from  Tils  former
security  in  stn,  and  let  Aim  sensibly  find  "that  thou
"  chastisest  Aim  for  his  profit,  that  Ae  may  be  par-
taker of  thv  hoiineas." •

Teach  Aim, Try  this  proof  of  thy  fatherly  cor-
»ctooii,tobemoreMutiMfor  thetime  to  come;


to  repent  ot  his  former  offences,  and  to  "  redeem
the  time  past,"  by  a  double  diligence  for  the  future,
if -thou  shalt  in  mercy  raise  Aim  up  again.  Let
the  remainder  of  At*  life  be  thine,  and  ret  nothing
separate  Aim  from  thy  love  and  service,  but  let  it
be  his  whole  care-and  study  to  provide  oil  for  Ait
lamp,  and  prepare  for  eternity  j^that  so ''all  the
days  of  his  appointed  time  he  may  wait  till  At*
change  come,"  and  be  ready  whensoever  At*  Lord
shall  call  Aim. Amen.

For  a  sick  Person  who  is  about  to  make  hie
Will.

O  Lord,  who  putteat  into  our  hearts  good
desires,  ana  hast  inclined  thy  servant  to  "  set  Ai*
house  in  order,"  as  well  in  relation  to  Ai*  tempo-
ral, as  Ai*  spiritual,  concerns,  grant  that  he  may-
do  it  with  exact  justice,  according  to  the  rules  01
our  own  religion,  and  the  dictates  of  right  reason.
He  un  feigned ly  thanks  thec  for  thy  great  mersies,
in  having  so  liberally  provided  for  Aim,  that  he
may  be  rather  helpful  than  chargeable  to  any,  and
die  a  benefactor  and  not  in  debt.

We  charitably  hope,  that  what  he  is  now
about  to  dispose  of,  was  all  procured  by  fair  and
righteous  dealings,  that  Ae  may  comfortably  ieej,
that  "it  is  more  blessed  to  give  than  to  re-
ceive."

Let  Aim  be  ready,  with  good  Zaccheua,  to  make
restitution  in  the  best  manner  he  is  .able,  and  to
say  with  Samuel :

"  Behold  here  1  am :  witness-against  me  .before
the  Lord ;  whose  ox  httve  I  taken-,  or  whose  ess
have  I  taken,  or  whom  have  I  defrauded  1  whom
have  I  oppressed,  or  of  whose  hand  have  I  re-
ceived any  bribe  to  blind  mine  eyes  therewith  1
and  I  will  restore  it."

Lord,  give  Aim  strength  to  order  ail  things  in
as  due  and  regular  a  manner  as  if  Ae,  were  well.
Let  his  memory  be  perfect,  and  Ai*  judgment
sound,  and  his  heart  so  rightly  disposed,  that  he
may  do  nothing  amiss,  or  through  partiality,  but
that  justice  and  integrity  may  do  seen  through
the  whole  conduct  of  his  will.

[If  rich,  add  this.]

Let  the  light  of  Ai*  charity  likewise  shine  glo-
riously before  men,  that  out  of  the  abundance
thou  past  been  pleased  to  bless  Aim  with,  Ae  may
plentifully  give  to.  the  poor  and  distressed,  though
no  otherwise  related  to  Aim  but  as  they  are  mem-
bers of  ^eses  Christ,  and  brethren  and  sisters  of
the  eamejpmmunion.

Let  hirh  O  let  Aim,  ntiw  O  Lord,  and  at  all '
times,  if  tliou  shouldest  graciously  continue  Aim
here  any  longer,  make  to  "  himself  such  friends
of  the  unrighteous  mammon,  that  when  these  mil,
they  may  receive  him  into  everlasting  habita-
tions." AmeM.

A  Prayer  for  a  sick  Penitent.

[From  Mr.  KettleweU.]

RifciTTEOus  art  thod,  O  God,  in  all  the  pains
and  sorrows  winch  punish  our  sins  and  try  our
patience,  and  We  have  none  to  accuse  and  com-
plain of  for  the  same  but  ourselves.  This  is  the
acknowledgment  which  thy  servant  makes,  whom
thou  hast  now  afflicted,  fit  receives  H  as  tile
chastisement  of  a  sinner,  and  is  willing  to  bear
chastisement  for  his  sins,  that  he  may  thereby  be
reclaimed  from  them.  Correct  Aim,  O  Lord,  that
thou  mayest  not  condemn  him^  and  Jet  Aim  be


Itt  VISITING  THE  SIC&.


553


Judged  by  thee  for  his  sins,  and  judge  himself  for
them  here,  that  he  may  have  nothing  but  mercy
without  judgment  to  receive  at  thine  hands  here-
after.

Bat  judge  Aim,  O  God,  with  mercy,  and  not  in
thine  anger.  Judge  Aim  not  according  as  his  tank
have  deserved,  hut  according  as  his  weakness  can
bear,  and  according  as  thy  compassions  are  wont
to  mitigate  thy  judgments:  and  let  his  afflictions
work  in  him  a  true  repentance,  "  not  to  be  repent-
ed of;"  and  prove  a  happy  means,  in  the  hand  of
thy  mercy,  to  reclaim  Attn  perfectly  from  all  the
errors  into  which  he  hath  fallen;  and  to  confer
that  rest  and  Peace  upon  Aw  soul,  which  is  denied
to  hie  body;  lor  our  dear  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus
Christ's  sake.

Thou  smiteet  him,  O  gracious  God,  that  thou


mayest  cure  him  ;  and puntshest  hi*  sin,  that  thou
vest  thereby  amend  and  reclaim  the  sinner ;
I  A* is  weary  of  Ai»  sins,  which  have  brought

.lA..llil.^  — J L' i. i


mayest
andAri


upon  him  all  these  sorrows,  and  which,  as  he  seems
new  deeply  sensible,  will  bring  infinitely  worse,
unleash*  prevent  the  same  by  hie  timely  and  sin-
cere jepentance.

Help  him,  therefore,  to  search  them  out ;  and


i  them,  let  Aim  not  stop  at  any  one,
but  steadfastly  resolve  to  renounce  and  amend  all :
Let  thy  love  make  him  hate  every  evil  way>  and
lender  hie  purposes  against  them  strong  and  lrco-
lote,  and  his  care  in  fulfilling  the  same,  vigilant
and  patient ;  and  grant  that  the  remainder  of  his
days  may  be  one  continual  amendment  of  his  for-
mer emors,  and  dedication  of  himself  to  thy  service.
Be  dosires  life,  only  that  A« may  serve  thee;  Lord,
continue  and  confirm  him  in  this  purpose.

Lord  cure  his  folly  by  his  misery ;  and  teach
Aim  by  the  loss  of  Asa  ease,  to  purchase  the  Mes-
sing^  of  true  repentance,  and  the  comfortable  hopes
-etf  thy  merciful  acceptance  thereof;  through -our
Lord  mod  Saviour  Jesus  Christ. Amen.

A  Prayer  Jbr  a  sick  Person  tsAo  intends  to  re~
-  ceive  the  blessed  Sacrament.

O  raou  infinite  and  eternal  Spirit,  from  whom
every  good  motion  of  our  hearts'  proceedeth !  who
both  aukkenest  the  dead,  .and  after .  thou  hast
given  fife,  givest  the  increase :  increase,,  we  beseech
thee,  the  wood  seeds  of  thy  grace,  which  thou  hast
■own  in  the  heart  of  thy  servant,  by  Inclining  him
to  receive  the  sacrament  of  the  body  and.blood  of
our-' Lord,  in  which  thou  art  more  immediately
present.  to  illuminate  the  feithful,  and  to  comfort
and  refresh  all  that  are  "weary  and  heavy-laden
with  their  sins."

O,  cause  thy  face  thus  comfortably  to  shine
upon  thy-  distressed  servant,  who  now.  intends  to
draw  near  to  thee  in  this  sacrament,  as  thou  hast
commanded  him.

Help  him,  in  the  mean  time,  O  Lord,  to  fit  and
prepare  himself  for  this  holy  communion :  fill  his
soul  wkh  reverence  and  godly  fear ;  with  earnest
desireseJDd%>bgtnffs  after  divine  life ;  with  serious
repentance  for  all  his  past  offences,  and  hearty  re-
solutions of  living  for  ever  after  unto  Jesus,  who
died  for  him.  O^let  him  meditate  upon  his
Maying  Saviour  with  a  "broken  and  a  contrite
heart,"  which  thou  hast  promised  "  not  to  despise :"
sbigiee  him  all  that,  is  past,  and  give  him  grace
for  the  rVtare,  to  "  live  more  soberly,  righteously,
and  piously,  in  this  present  world,"  if  it  shall  be
thy  good  pleasure  to  continue  him  in  it


A  Prayer  fdr  a  sick  Person  that  wants  SUep.
-  [From  Bishop  Patrick.].

Adored  he  thy  love,  thy  wonderful  love,  O
most  gracious  God,  who  hast  so  many  ways  ex-
pressed thy  bounty  towards  us.  •  Thy  mercies  in .
Christ  Jesus  surpass  all  our  thoughts ;  we  are  not-
able to  number  all  the  other  blessings  theu  hast
bestowed  upon  us.  How  much  do  we  owe  thee
for  the' quiet  sleep  of  but  one  night!  We  see,
in-  this  thy  poor  afflicted  servant  how  much  we
ought  to  thank*  thee  for  this  single  blessing,  that
our  eyes,  when  we  would  close  them,  are  not  held
waking.  ^

Pardon,  good  Lord,  our  ingratitude  for  this  and
all  the  rest  of  thy  undeserved  mercies:  and  be
pleased  graciously  also  to  visit  him,  who  soil  lan-
guishes on  his  sick-bed,  looking  up  to  thee  from
whom  cometh  our  help.  Renew  his  wasted  spirits
with  comfortable  sleep ;  compose  him  to  a  sweet
and  undisturbed  rest;  refresh  Aim  thereby  so  sen-
sibly, that  he  may  be  restored  to  such  a  degree  of .
strength,  as  may  make  Aim  able,  in  some  measure,
affectionately  to  acknowledge  thy  goodness,  when
thou  hast  dealt  so  bountifully  with  Aim;  or  if  thou
delayest  to  bestow  that  blessing  on  Aim,  in  the
multitude  of  his  thoughts  within  Aim,  let  thy
comforts  delight  his  soul.  If  he  still  continues
without  any  rest;  grant  that  his  mind  may  rest
and  repose  itself  in  the  bosom  of  thy  dearest  love,
and  may  feel  the  most  sensible  consolations  from
heaven,  not  only  quieting,  but  greatly- rejoicing
his  heart/  Preserve  the  use  of  his  understanding,
and  let  the  enemy  have  no  advantage  of  Aim;  but
make  Aim  able  to  say,  "  I  will  wait  patiently  for
the  Lord,  till  he  incline  his  ear  unto  me,  and  hear
my  cry. — O,  hear  Aw  prayer,  O  Lord,  and  give
ear  unto  his  cry :  O,  spare  Aim,  that  he  may  re-
cover-strength  before.  Ae  go  hence;"*  for  Jesus
Christ's  sake. Amen.

A  Prayer  to  he  said  wlien  the  sick  Person,  grows
light-headed.

[From  Bishop  Patrick.]

O  Lord,  look  down  from  heaven,  in-  pity  and
compassion,  upon  this  thine  afflicted  servant,  who
is  not  able  now  to  look  up  to  thee :  the  more  sorrow-
ful his  condition  grows,  the  fitter  object  he  is  Of  thine
infinite  mercies;  who  ateceptest,  we  humbly  hope,
of  the  submission  he  made  of  himself,  in  the  be-
ginning of  his  sickness,  to  thine  almighty  wisdom
and  goodness.  And  therefore,  since  it -is  thy
pleasure  to  suffer  Aw  distemper  to  proceed  to  this
dangerous  extremity,  do  thou  n6  less  graciously
love  Aim,  and  delight  in  Aim,  than  if  Ac  could  sou
give  up  himself  to  thy  blessed  wiM.

Ana  hear,  O  most  merciful  Father,  our  prayers
in  Aw  behalf,  when  he  can  no  longer  commend
himself  to  thy  mercies.  Pardon,  good  Lord,  par-
don all  At*  sins;  impute  not  to  Aim  any  of  his
former  follies ;  lay  not  to  Aw  charge  his  not  im-
proving, or  misusing,  his  reason  and  understand-
ing, which  we  earnestly,  but  humbly,  entreat  thee
to  restore  to  Aim,  together  with  such  a  measure  of
thy  divine  gracel  as  may  quicken-  and  assist  Aim
to  employ  Ai*  thoughts  to  the  best  purposes,
especially  in  meditating  on  thy  mercies,  m  study-
ing thy  praise,  and  in  exhorting  all  othenrto  lev*
thee,  to  trust  in  thee,  and  sincerely  obey  thee.


•  Psalm  xl.  1.  and  xxxix.  12, 11


854


THE  CLERGYMAN'S  COMPANION


.  And  while  he  remain*  thus  deprived  of  Aw
reason,  be  pleased  to  quiet  and  compose  Aw  spirit*,
or  to  prevent  all  furious  motions  there,  or  quickly
so  abate  such  violent  passions,  if  any  arise:  for
which  end,  be  pleased  to  remove  all  frightful  ima-
ginations far  from  Wm,  and  suffer  not  the  evil  one
to  approach  Atmr  preserve  Aim  from  doing  any
ftarm,  either  to  himself  or  to  any  others.  "  For-
sake'Aim  not,  O  Lord  our  God,  be  not  far  from
him.  Make  haste  to  "help  him,  O  Lord  our  sal-
vation.'*

"So  will  we  give  thanks  unto  thee  for  ever."

"  We  will  be  still  praising  thee,  and  showing
forth  thy  loving  kindness  tothose  who  succeed  us.

"  That  they  may  set  their  hope  in  thee  our  God,
and  not  forget  thy  works,  but  keep  thycommand-


A  Prayer  for  a  Person,  when  Danger  is  appre-
hended by  excessive  Sleep.

[FroHTMr.  Kettlewell.]

O  ftttRCiFUL  God,  let  not  this  deep  sleep,  which
la  fallen  on  thy  servant,  prove  the  steep  of  death;
make  it  the  sleep  of  a  recovering  person,  to  relieve
and  revive  him;  and  awake  him  out  of  it  in  thy
due  time,  to  offer  thee  praise,  and  to  labour  still
among  us  in  doing  thee  honour  and  service.

But  i£  thou  art  pleased  to  take  him  to  thyself,.
Lord,  remember  and  accept  of  all  his  former
prayers  and  repentance,  faitn  and  patience.

Look  not  upon  his  sins,  but  to  pardon  them;'
nor  on  hi*  weaknesses,  but  to  pity  them:  and
when  he  awakes  jn  the  next  world,  let  him  find
himself  surrounded  with  light  and  bliss,  instead
of  gloominess  and  sorrow,  and  awake  to  eternal
life.

Lord,  near  us  for  this  thy  weak  servant  in  dis-
tress. Hear  our  prayers  for  him,  who  seems  not
able  now-  to  offer  up  any  prayers  to  thee  for  him-
self. And  accept  ooth -Aim  and  us  to  the  blessed
enjoyment  of  thy  love  through  Jesus  Christ  our
Lord. Amen.

A  Prayer  for  a  Person  lying  insensible  on  a
Sick-bed.

O  thou  Preserver  of  men,,  who  knowest  the
frailty  of  our  constitutions ;  how  soon  our  senses
.may  fail  us,  and  our  understanding,  depart  from
us;  4o  what  r.^cidents,  distempers,  and  decays,
our  weak  nature  is  subject;  even  such  as.  may
make  the  most  acute  apd  judicious  quickly  be-
come as  fools;  and  the  ablest  and  strongest^ weak
and  insensible :'  O  look  down,  we  beseecji  thee,
upon  .thy  servant,  who  now  lies  in  such  a  weak
and  insensible  condition.

The  leas  abje  he  is  to  assist  himself  \  the  more
Head  hath  he  of  our  prayers,  and  of  thy  tender
mercy  to  him,  O  thou  great  Creator  of  the  world,
whobroughtest  light  out  of  darkness,  and  modest
ail  things  out  of  nothing,  and  canst  restore  our
dead  bodies  again  after  they  are  mouldered  into
dust,  be  pleased  to  repel  the  clouds  of  darkness
which  now  have  taken  away  the  light  of  our  bro-
ther's understanding,  and  rendered  him  a  com-
panion for  the  dead.

Quicken  Aim  again.  O  Lord,  and  restore  Aim
to  JUt  former  senses,  that  his  aoul  may  bless  and
praise  thy  holy  name.

'Hear  our  petitions,  O  Lord,  and  receive  our


•Fsalm  uxvtti.  *!,«.


prayers  for  our  brother,  that  this  image  of  death
may  not  be  converted  into  death  itself;  but  that  he
may  live  to  proclaim  thy  power  and  to  celebrate
thy  praises  longer  upon  earth.

JBut  if  it  be  thy  will  to  remove  Aim  hence  in  this
insensible  condition,  O  pardon,  we  beseech  thee,
all  At*  offences,  and  accept  of  the  preparation  and
repentance  that  he  was  able  to  make  before  the
distemper  prevailed  upon  Aim  in  so  deadly  a  man-
ner. Receive  Aim,  O  Lord,  into  the. arms  of  thy
mercy,  and  accept  Aim,  for  thy  well-beloved  Son  a
sake;  that  so  this  short  night  may  quickly  ha
turned  into  everlasting  day ;  and.  after  these  dark
shadows  are  removed,  Ae  may  find  himsstf  in  a
heaven  of  happiness,  where,  "  in  thy  light  he  may
see  light"  for  ever. Amen.

A  Prayer  for  One  who  hath  been  a  notoriously
wicked  Liver.

O  Lord  God,  of  infinite  goodness  and  compas-
sion, whose  mercies  are  over  all  thy  works;  who
makest  the  sun  to  shine,  and  the  rain  to  descend,
upon  the  "  unjust"  as  well  as  the  "  iust,"  and  ait
kind  even  to  the  most  unthankful;  we  humbly
beseech  thee,  to  look  down  in  mercy  upon  this  thy
unworthy  servant  who  hath  so  long  '.'  trampled
upon  the  riches  of  thy  goodness,  not  knowing  that
it  should  lead  to  repentance." ^

Let  thy  rod,  therefore,  awaken  him  now  to  a
sense  of  At*  condition^  whom  thy  goodness  hath
hot  reclaimed,  and  let  Aim  still  find  mercy  at  thy
hands,  notwithstanding  his  continual  abuse  of  it

Thou  hast  promised,  O  Lord;  that,  "when  the
wicked  man  tumeth  away  from  his  wickedness
which  he  hath  committed,  and  doeth  that  which
is  lawful  and  right,  he  shall  save  his  soul  alive."
O  make  good  this  thy  promise  to  thy  servant  here,
who  stands  in  so  much  need  of  it

"  Hide  thy  face  from  his  sins,  and  blot  out  all
his  iniquities:"  though  they  be  u  red  as*  scarlet,*
yet  do  thou  make  them  "  white  as  snow,"  by  re-
pentance, which  we  beg  of  thee  to  give  Aim,  'and
to  accept,  though  late,  through  thine  infinite  mer-
cies. X

Simon  Magus,  though  in  the  "  gall  of  bitterness,
and  the  bond  of  iniquity,"  was  exhorted  to  reuent,
and  to  pray  for  pardon :-  and  therefore  we  n^pe
the  gate  of  life  is  still  open  for  ora\Aro*Aer,  though
Ae  hath  so  long  shut  himself  out  of  it,  by  going
on  in  a  course  that  leadeth  to  the  "chambers,  of
death."

Blessed  Lord,  let  thy  terrors  at  length  awaken
Aim  out  of  this  lethargical  condition,  before  Ae  m
overtaken  by  thy  judgments.  Afflict  Aim  here,
that  thou  may  est  spare.  Aim  hereafter.  Soften  Ait
heart,  that  he  may  bewail  his  ill-spent  life,  like
Mary  Magdalen,  with  tears  of  contrition.

O  quicken  Aim  to  a  sense  of  his  duty,  and  of
his  danger,  before  it  be  too  late :  arid  when  thou
hast  brought  Aim  to  his  right  mind,  receive  Aim.
we  beseech  thee,  as  the  compassionate  father  did
his  prodigal  son,  or  the  shepherd  his  lost  sheep.

Thou,  O  Lord,  who  didst  pardon  the  thief  upon
the  cross,  hear  our  prayers  for  our  brother,  in  these
his  great,  and,  for  any  tiling  we  know,  Aw  bat
agonies.

And  as  the  fonvrneYitioned  instances  are  fivery
significations  of  thine  unbounded  goodness,  and
were  written  for  our  comfort  and  instruction,  that
none  should  despair  of  pardon;  so  with  the*  great-
est confidence  we  now  recommend  this  our  dis-
tressed brother  to  thy  divine  protection,  beseeching


IN  VISITING  THE  SICft


thee  to  forgive  all  that  is  past,  and  to  receive  Arm
at  last  into  thine  "everlasting habitation."  Amen.

A  Prayer  Jbr  One  vtho  is  hardened  and '
-impenitent.  '  "  ,

Lord  God  Almighty,  who  art  the  "  Father  of
our  spirits,"  and  who  "  turnest  the  hearts  of  men
as  thou  pleasest;  who  hast  mercy  on  whom  thou
wilt  have  mercy,  and  whom  thou  wilt  thou  hard-
enest ;  let  thy  merciful  ears  be  open,  we  pray  thee,
to  the  supplications  which  we  now  offer  to  thy
Divine  Majesty,  in  the  behalf  of  this  thy  servant
who  appears  insensible,  of  his  sin«and  folly,  .and
on\Whom  all  means  to  lead  him  to  repentance
have  hitherto  seemed  vain  and  ineffectual.  Take
from  him,  we  humbly  entreat  thee,  all  ignorance
and  hardness  of  heart;  remove  from  Mm  all  pre-
judice against,  and  contempt  of,  thy  sacred  word
and  ministry :  let  him  no  longer  "  make  a  mock
of  sin,"  but  be  sensible  that  the  wisdom  he  has
hitherto  cloned  in,  is  the  greatest  and  most  dan-
gerous folly.  Open  thou  his  eyes,  that  he  may
"see  the  wonderful  things  of  thy  law."  Show
thy  mercy  upon  him,  and  grant  hintthy  salvation.
Convince  him  of  the  -vanity  and  madness,  as  well
a*  danger,  of  his  past  ways.

His  understanding,  we  fear,  is  now  darkened,
and  his  heart  hardened  through  the  deceitfulneas
of  sin:  O,  do  thou  enlighten  his  dark  mind,  and
iBLhim  at  last  see  the  beauties  of  holiness,  which
have  so  long  been  hidden  from  his  eyes.  Take
from  him  this  "stony  heart,  and  give  him  a  heart
o?  flesh."  Awaken  ki*  slumbering  and  inatten-
tive soul,  that  it  may  delight  in  things  agreeable
to  its  nature,  and  be  employed  in  things  that
make  for  its  everlasting  peace.  O  give  him  un-
derstanding, and  he*,  shall  yet  live.  Thou  that
canst  revive  souls  which  are  dead  in  sin  and  tres-
passes, and  make  even  such  as  lie  in  the  grave  of
corruption  to  become  glorious  saints  and  even  mar-
tyrs lor  religion,  Tiear  our  prayers  for  our  brother.
who  seems  to  be  on  the  brink  of  destruction ;  ana
pity  poor  sinners  that  have  not  pity  on  themselves.

It  is  the  iinhappiness  of  being  long  accustomed
to  sin,  that  we  are  not  soon  made  sensible  of  our
errors,  nor  easily  made  to  know  them.'  It  is  the
pride  of  out  nature  to  be  unwilling  to  acknowledge
our  faults,  and  to  confess  our  sins:  but  let  thy
mce,  O  God,  teach' us  to  deny  this  ungodly  lust.
Do  thou  humble  in  us  all  high  and  vain  imagina-
tions ;  suppress  all  proud  thoughts  and  haughty
opinions  of  ourselves.  Give  us  all  (and  particu-
terhr  thy  servant,  for  whom  we  are  now  inter-
ceding) a  sense  of  our  own  vileness ;  give  us  un-
feigned iepentance<  fin  all  the  errors  of  our  life
past;  that,  being,  cast  down,  thou  mayest  raise  us
Up,  and  become  merciful  to  us,  miserable  sinners.

Let  a*  all  find,  by  blessed  experience,  that  "  We
grow  in  grace,  and  in  the  knowledge  of  our  Lord
Jesus  Christ ;"  *nd  that  "  his  commandments*  are
not  "grievous"  to  us,  but  rather  the  delight  and
desire  of  oar  souls;*  that  so  At  last  we  may  be
presented  to  bin*  "  holy  and  unbkuneable,  and  un-
Teprovabl©  in  his  sight" Amen.

A  Prayer  for  a  sick  Woman  that  is  with  Child.

O  God,  the  help  of  all  that  put  their  trust  in
thee,  the  support  of  the  weak,  and  the  relief  of  the
needy  j  look  'with  pity  upon  this  woman  thy  ser-
vant, who  at  best  acknowledgeth  herself  but  a


weak  and  helpless  creature,  but-much  more  so
now  in  her  present  condition,  when  thou  hast
added  weakness  to  weakness,  and  made  her  to
travail  with  much  sickness,  together  with  the  bur-
den of  child-bearing.

.  O  Lord,  be  thou  graciously  pleased  to  propor-
tion thy  strength  to  her  weakness,  and  as  pains
and  sorrow  take  hold  upon  her,  inspire  her  with
fjresh  vigour  and  courage  to  rely  .upon  thee,  her
only  support  in  time  of  need,  and  the  rock  of  her
salvation.  .  * *

Let  her  not  be  disquieted  with  the  fear  of  any
evil,  since  none  can  happen  unto  her  without  thy
permission;  but  give  her  grace  patiently  to  resign
herself  to  thy  blessed  will  in  all  things,  who
knowest  what  is  best  for  her,  and  wilt  lay  no
more  upon  her,  we  trust,  than  thou  wilt  enable
her  to  bear.

Bring  strength,-  O  Lord,  out  of  Weakness,  and
health  out  of  Bickness  i  and  make  her,  in  thy  good
time,  a  joyful  mother  of  a  hopeful  child,  which
may  do  good  in  its  generation,  and  be  an  instru-
ment of  thy  glory  here,  and  a  blessed  inhabitant
of  thy  heavenly  kingdom  hereafter. Amen.

A-Prayer  fory  a  Woman  in  the  Time"qf  her
Travail:

[From  Bishop  Patrick.]

O  most  Mighty  Lord,  who  hast  given  us  innu-
merable pledges  orthy  love,  and  encouraged  US'  to^
trust  in  thee  for  ever,  and  to  expect  with  quiet  and
patient  minds  the  issue  of  thy  wise1  and  good  pro*
vidence ;  we  most  humbly  commend  thy  servant,
in  this  her  extremity,  to  thy  .care  and  blessing  j
beseeching  thee  to  give  her  a  gracious  deliverance,
and  to  ease  her  of  the  burden  wherewith  she  la-
bours. We  ourse|vQ8  are  monuments'  of  that
mercy  which  we  beg  of  thee.  Thou  didst  preserve
our  weak  and  imperfect  frame,  before  we  were
born.  •  Thou  ^ast  succoured  and  'supported  us
ever  since,  many  times  beyond  our  nopes,  and
always  beyond  our  deserving*.  We  commit  our-
selves, and  every  thing  belonging,  unto  us,  most
heartily  unto  thy  hands :  remembering  that  thou
hast  the 'same  power  and  goodness  stiff,  by  which
we  came  into  the  light  of  the  hving.  We  cannot
desire  to  be  better  provided  for,  than  as  thy  infinite
wisdom  judgeth  most  convenient  for  us ;  unto  that
we  refer  ourselves,  beseeching  thee,  if  it  be  thy
good  pleasure,  that  her  deliverance  may  be  as
speedy  as  her  cries  unto  thee;  or  her  patience  as

Sreat  and  long  as  her  pains.  Tho\i  who  ripenest
le  fruits  of  tne'earth,  and  then  givest  us  tine  ga-
thering of  them  to  our  comfort,  blast  not,  we  be-
seech thee,  the  fruit  of  the  womb ;  but  bring  it  to
maturity,  and  deliver  it  safe  into  thy  servant's
hand  as  a  new  pledge  of  thy  goodness  to  her,  to
be  an  instrument  of  thy  glory,  and  a  future  com-
fort and  blessing  to  thy  servant r  who  travails  ihso
much  pain  with  it  now.  Or  if  thou  hast  other-
wise determined,  Lord,  give  her  grace  to  submit
to  thy  holy  will,  and  to  rest  satisfied  in  thy  wise
appointments,  and  never  to  distrust  thy  goodness
and  care  over  her.  Hear  us,  O  Father  ofmercies,
and  pardon  hers  and  all  our  offences,  and  pity  our
infirmities :  make  us.  more  thankful  for  what  we
have  received,  and  more  fit  for  theiriessing  which
we  now  request;  and  prepare  us  -for  all  thy  future
mercies,  either  in  this  life,  or  in  the  next,  through
thy  infinite  love  and  compassion  declared^  us,  in
Christ  Jesus  our  Lord. Amen.


856


THE  CLERGYMAN'S  COMPANION


A  Prayer  far  a  Womap.  toho  cannot  be  delivered
without  Difficulty  and  Hazard.

O  Lord  Gpd  of  all  comfort  and  consolation,
who  ait  the  refuge  of  the  distressed,  and  the  help
of  all  that  depend  upon  thee ;  we  thy  unworthy
servants  do  now  offer  up  our  supplications  at  the
throne  of -thy  majesty,  in  the  behalf  of  this  thy
servant,  who  is  in  great  pain  and  misery.  Thou
hast  been  pleased  to  bring  the  child  to  the  birth,
but  there  is  not  strength  to  bring  forth.  On  this
account,  thy  servant  is  in  violent  agonies,  crying
out  in  her  pangs,  and  pouring  out  her  soul  to  thee
in  prayer.  O  grant  that  "it  may  be,  in  an  accepta-
ble time."

"-Thou  art  our  salvation;  thou  shalt  preserve
us  from  trouble ;  thou  shalt  eompass  us  about  with
songs  of  deliverance."  O  let  thy  servant  feel  these
blessed  effects  of  thy  goodness ;  and  as  thou  hast
brought  to  the  birth,  enable  her,  we  beseech  thee,
to  bring  forth,  that  she  may  rejoice  in  the  work-
manship of  thy  hands,  and  tell  of  all  thy  wondrous
works.

v  .Consider  the  low  estate  of  thine  handmaid;  and
deliver  her  soul  from  death,  her  eyes  from  tears,
and  her  feet  from  failing.  "  Gracious  art  thou,  O
Lord7~and  righteous ;  thou  preservest  the  simple,
and  helpest  those  that  are  in  misery."  Help  thy
servant  therefore  now.  we  humbly  entreat  thee,
who  stands  in  so  much  need  of  it.  Accept  her
tears,  and  assuage  her  pain,  as  shall  seem  most
expedient  for  her. — And  forasmuch  as  she  putteth
her  whole  trust  in  thee,  give  her  strength  and  pa-
tience proportionable  to  all  her  pains  and  agonies.
Support  her  spirits  under  them,  and,  if  thou  pleas-
eat,  carry  her  safely  through  the  same,  and  "  make
her  to  near  of  joy  and  gladness,  that  the  /hones
which  thou  hast  broken  may  rejoice."

"  Restore  unto  her,  O  Lord,  the  joy  of  thy  sal-
vation, and  uphold  her  with  thy  free  Spirit ;  then
shall  sne.  teach  transgressors  thy  way,  and  sinners
shall  be  converted  unto  thee.  Deliver  her"  from
this  great  affliction,  "  O  God,  thou  God  of  her
salvation,  and  her  tongue  shall  sing  aloud  of  thy
righteousness."

•Thy  mercies  and  power  are  still  the  same,
and  will  be  the  same  for  ever.  O  let  them  now  be
shown  irt-this  thy  servant's  delivery,  as  they  have
been  formerly  on  the  like  occasion ;  that  so,  by
having  fresh  instances  of  thy- loving  kindness,  she
may  sail  praise  thee  more  and  more.
•  0  perfect  her  repentance,  and  pardon  her  sins.
'Give  her  patience  whilst  she  lives,  and  peace  when
she  dies,  and  after  death,  the  happiness  of  a  blessed
■  eternity,  which  thou  hast  promised  and  prepared
lor  all  that  love  and  fear  thee,-  through  Jesus
Christ  our  Lord.  *  Amen,

A  Prayer  for  Grace  and  Assistance  for  a  Wo-
man after  Delivery ,  but  still  in  Danger.

[From  Mr.  Kettle  well.  J

O  Father  of  mercies,  what  thanks,  can  we
worthily  give  unto  thee  for  thine  onspeakablc
goodness  to  this  thy  servant  and  her  helpless  in-
fant, and  for  the. wondrous  things  which  thou
hast  done  for  her!  The  pangs  of  death  com-
passed her,  and  she  found  trouble  and  sorrow.
The  mouth  of  the  pit  was  .opened,  and  ready  to


•  This  is  to  to  omitted,  if  it  be  the  first  child.


shut  itself  upon  her:  -but  thou  hast  graciously
assuaged  hei  pains,  and  turned  her  sorrows  into

Lord,  we  will  ever  adore  and  magnify  thy
merry,  which  has  dealt  so  lovingly  with  her,  and
praise  thy  truth  and  faithfulness,  which  have  not
suffered  her  hopes  to  fail.  We  will  never  forget
how  mindful  thou.  Hast  been  of  the  low  estate  ci
thy  handmaid ;  for  she  has  been  supported  by  thy

gjwer,  O  blessed  God,  in  her  greatest  weakness,
he  has  tasted  thy  goodness  in  the  midst  of  all
her  pangs  and  sorrows.  .x

Perfect,  O  Lord,  that  deliverance  to  her  which
thou  hast  mast  graciously  begun,  and  let -her  not
be  lost,  after  the  wonders  which  thou  hast  already
done  for  her.

Continue  her  patience,  and  her  humble  de-
pendence ojr  thee,  under  the  pains  and  accidents
to  which  she  is  still  exposed.  Support' her  spirits,
and  raise  her  up  again  in  thy- due  time.  Thy
mercy  and  power  are  still  the  same,  and  will  ba-
the same  for  ever.  O  let  them  still  be  shown  for
her  recovery,  as  they  have  been  already  for  net
delivery;  let  them  be  shown  upon  her,  that  she
may  praise  thee  more  and  more.

But  if,  in  thy  paternal  providence,  whereunto
we  pray  she  may  willingly  commit  herself,  thou
hast  determined  otherwise  concerning  her,  thy
blessed  will  -be  done.  Dispose  her  either  to  hie  or
death,
and

thee,  . ^

pentance,  and  give  her  patience  whilst  she  lrvee,
and  peace  when  she  dies,  and  after  that,  the  hap-
piness of  a  blessed  eternity,  which  thou  hast  pre-
pared for  all  that  truly  fear  thee ;  through  Jesus
Christ  our  Lord. Amen.

if  the  ChiFd  be  living,  this  any  to  added:

Preserve  likewise  her  tender  infant,. O  Father
of  mercies,  and  let  its  own  weakness,  and  our
cries,  commend  it  to  thy  care.

Keep  it  also  afterwards  in  health  and  safety,
and  as  it  increases  in  years  and  stature,  let  it  in-
crease in  wisdom,  and  in  thy  fear.  We  beg  not
for  it  wealth  or  greatness,  but  wisdom  to  know
and  to  serve  thee.  For,  O  Lord,  we  do  not  desire
life,  cither  for  ourselves  or  it,  but  that  we  may
live  to  thee,  and  grow  daily  in  love  and  thankful-
ness for  all  thy  mercies,  and  in  firth  and  patience,'
and  all  holy  obedience,  which  may  fit  us  for  the
happiness  which  thou  bast  promised:  through
Jesus  Christ  our  only  Saviour  and  Redeemer.
Amen.  ,

Prayer*  for  a  Sick  C3UUL
[Visitation  Office.]

O  Almighty,  God  and  merciful, Father,  to
whom  'alone  belong  the  issues  of  Ufa  and  death;
look  down  from  heaven,  we  humbly  beseech  thee,
with  the  eyes  of  mercy  upon  thjs  child;  now  lying  '
upon  the  bed  of  sickness:  visit  him,  O  Lord,  with
thy  salvation ;  deliver  Aim  in  thy  good  appointed
time  from  his  bodily  pain,  and  save'  his  soul  for
thy  mercy's  sake ;  that  if  it  shalj  be  thy  good  plea-
sure to.  prolong  his  days  ^  here  on  eartn,  he  may
live  to  thee,  ana  be  an  instrument  of  thy  glory,  by
serving  thee  faithfully,  and  doing  good  in  his
generation;  or  else  receive  him  into  those  hea-
venly-habiutions,  where  the  souls  of  them  that
sleep  in  the  Lord  Jesus  enjoy  perpetual  tost  and


IN  VISITING  THE  SICK.


867


felicity.  Grant  Hut,  for  thy  mercy's  soke;  through
Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.'  Amen.  t

[FromMr.KetUewelL]

Lord,  pity  the  troubles  and  weakness  of  this
>  infant,  and ptfy  our  Borrows,  who  are  afflicted  with
it,  ana  lor  it  Eaee  it  of  its  pains,  end  strengthen
it  when  it  lies  straggling  tor  lira.  Raise  it  up
again,  if  it  shall  please  thee,  to  grow  in  years  and
stature,  in  wisdom  and  virtue;  and  thereby  to
comfort  us.  and  glorify  thee.

We  believe,  O  Almighty  Father,  that  thou
knowejt  best  what  is  fit,  both  for  it  and  us,  and
wilt  do  what  is  fit  for  both,  and  therefore  we  leave
it  to  thee,  to  dispose  of  H  as  thou  pleasest.  But
whether  it  be  to  life  or  death,  let  it  be  thine  in
both,  and  either  preserve  it  to  be  thy  true  and
frhhful  servant  here  on  earth,  or  take  it  to  the
hlasweirncas  of  thy  children  in  the  kingdom  of
heaven;  through  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus
Christ Amen,

A  Prayer  for  a  Person  tehoy  from  a  state  of
Health,  is  suddenly  mixed  with,  the  Symptoms
of  Death.

O  most  gracious  Father,  Lord  of  heaven  and
earth,  Judge  of  the  living  and  of  the  dead,  behold
thy  servants  turning  to  thee  for  pity  and  mercy,
in  behalf  of  ourselves  and  this  thy  servant.  It
was  but  lately  that  we  beheld  him  in  as  promising
a  state  of  health  and  life,  as  any  one  of  us  seems  to
be  in  at  present,  and  therefore  our  concern  is  so
much  the  greater  to  behold  so  sudden  a  change,
and  so  mnooked  for  an  instance  of  our  mortality.

We  know,  O  Lord,  thou  canst  bring  back  from
the  brink  ef  the  grave,  and  as  suddenly  raise  thy
servant  again  aa  thou  hast  oast  him  down,  and
therefore  we  think  it  not  too  late  to  implore  thy
mercy  open  him  for  his  recovery;  at  least  we  beg
of  thee  to  spare  him  a  little,  that  he  may  recover
At*  strength,  and  have  time  to  make  his  peace
with  thee,  "  before  he  go  hence,  and  be  nd  more
seen."  But  if  it  be  thy  will  to  remove  him  at  this
tune  into  another  world,  Q  let,  the  miracles  of  thy
compassion,  and  thy  wonderful  mercy,  supply  to
him  the  want  of  the  usual  measures  of  time,  that
he  may  fit  himself  for  eternity.  And  let  the  great-
ness of  his  calamity  be  a  means  to  procure  his
pardon  for  those  defects  and  degrees  of  unreadi-
ness which  this  sudden  stroke  hath  caused.  *  And
teach  us  all,  we  beseech  thee,  from  this  unexpected
.fete  of  our  brother,  to  be  continually  upon  our
guard,  and  to  watch  and  pray,  since  we  know  not
the  hoar  when  the  "  Master  or  the  house  cometh,"
whether  "  in  the  evening,  or  at  midnight,  or  in
the  morning."

Lord,  thou  hast  now  called  thy  servant  before
he  wae  aware  of  it ;  0;  give  him  such  a  great  and
effectual  repentance  m  this  exigence,  that  in  a
short  time  it  may  be  sufficient  to  do  -the  work  of
many  day*.  Thou  regardest,  O  Lord,  the  sin-
cerity of  our  hearts  more  than  the  measures  of
time,  in  our  conversion ;  accept  therefore,  we  be-
seech thee,  the  few  minutes  of  thy  servant's  un-
feigned tears  and  humiliation  for  his  sins,  as  if
they  were  hours  and  days  of  a  longer  preparation ;
ana  let  it  be  thy  pleasure  to  rescue  him  from  all
the  evils  he  deserves,  and  all  the  evils  he  fears,
that  in  the  songs  of  eternity  which  angels  and
saints  abail  sing  to  the  glory  of  thy  name,  this  also
may  be  reckoned  amongst  thine  invaluable  mer-


cies, that  thou  hast  redeemed  his  soul  from  death,
and  made  him  partaker  of  eternal  life ;  through
Jesus  Christ  our  Lord. Amen.

A  Prayer  for  a  sick  Person,  when  there  appeareth
small  hope  of  Recovery.

[Visitation  Office.]  '  v

O  Father  of 'mercies  and  Qod  of  all  comfort,
our  only  help  in  time  of  need;  we,  fly  unto  thee
for  succour  in  behalf  of  this  thy  servant,  here  Wing
under  thy  hand  in  great  weakness  of  body.  Look
graciously  upon  him,  O  Lord,  and,  the  more  the
outward  man.  decayeth,  strengthen  him,  we  be-  .
seech  thee,  so  much  the  more  continually  with
thv  grace  and  Holy  Spirit  hi  the  inner  man.
Give  him  unfeigned  repentance  for  all  the  errors
of  his  life  past,  and  steadfast  faith  in  thv  Son  Je-
sus, that  his  sins  may  be  forgiven,  and  his  pardon
sealed 'in  heaven,  before  he  go  hence,  and  be  no
more  seen.  We  know,  O  Lord,  that  there  is  no
work  impossible  with  thee,  and  that,  if  thou  wilt,
thou  canst  even  yet  raise  him  up,  and  grant  him  a
longer  continuance  among  us.  Yet  forasmuch  as
in  all  appearance  the  time  of  his  dissolution  draw-
eth  near,  so  fit  and  prepare  hirry,  wc  beseech  thee,
against  the  hour  of  death,  that  after  his  departure
hence  in  peace,  and  in  thy  favour,  his  soul  may
be  received  into  thine  everlasting  kingdom;
through  the  mediation  of  Jesus  Christ  thy  Son,
our  Saviour. Amen.

A  general  Prayer  for  Preparation  and  Readi-
ness to  die.

Lord,  ".what  is  our  life,  but  a,  vapour  which
appeareth  for  a  little  time,  and  then  vanisheth
away?"  Even  at  the  longest,  how  short  and
transitory  I  and  when  we  think  ourselves  most
secure,  yet  we  know  not  what  a  day  may  bring
forth ;  nor  how  soon  thou  mayeat  come,  before  we
are  aware,  to  call  us  to  our  last  account.

Quickly  shall  we  be  as  water  spilt  on  the
ground,  which  cannot  be  gathered  up  again.
Quickly  shall  we  be  snatched  away  hence,  and
our  place  here  shall  know  us  no  more.

Our  bodies  shall  soon  lie  down  in  the  grave,
and  our  souls  be  summoned  to  appear  before  the
tribunal  of  Christ,  to  receive  our  everlasting  doom ;
and  yet,  O  Lord,  how  do  the  generality  of  man-
kind live  in  this  world,  as  if  they  were  never  to
leave  it !  How  unmindful  are  we  all  of  our  depar-
ture! how  improvident  of  our  time !  how  careless
of  our  souls,  and  negligent  in  our  preparations  for
eternity !  so  that  thou,  mightest  justly  cut  us  off
in  the  midst  of  our  sina,  and  our  unpreparednesa
to  appear  before  thee.  But,  O  God  of  all  comfort
and  mercy,  remember  not  our  sins  against  thee,
but  remember  thy  own  love  to  us  in  Jesus  Christ
and  thy  tender  mercies  which  have  been  ever  or
old.  O,  remember  how  short  our  time  is,  and
"  so  teach  us  to  number  our  days,  that  we  may
apply  our  hearts  unto  wisdom."

In  the  days  of  our  health  and  prosperity,  let  us,
from  the  example  of  our  brother's  weakness,  re-
member our  own  approaching  fate ;  and  let  himt
from  the  sudden  change  of  health  to  sickness,  con-
sider how  few  and  evil  all  his  days  have  been,  and
that  there  is  no  satisfaction  in  any  thing,  but  in
knowing  thee,  O  God.  Lord,  what  have  we  to
do  in  this  world,  but  to  devote  ourselves  wholly  to
thy  service,  and  to  make  ready  for  the  world  to

7  22*


966


THE  CLERGYMAN'S  COMPANION


»1  O,  that  we  may  all  of  u*  be  mindful  of
Uui  "one  thing  necessary,'*'  that  we  may  finish
our  "  work/'  before  we  finish  our  course. .

Quicken  thy  servant,  O  Lord,  into  a  powerful
and  serious  consideration  of  these  things,  now  thou
hast  brought  him  into  more  intimate  acquaintance
with  them.  Instruct  and  assist  him  in  this  great
work  of  preparation  to  die.  Show  him  how  to  do
it,  and  help  him  with  good  success  to  perform  it ;
that  when  the  time  of  his  dissolution  draweth
near,,  he  may  have  nothing  else  to  do,  but  to  re-
sign himself  willingly  and  cheerfully  into  thy
hands,  as  into  the  hands  of  a  merciful  Creator,
there  to  remain  with  thee  for  ever  in  that  blessed
place  where  sin  and  sickness  and  death  shall  be
no  more. Amen.

A  commendatory  Prayer  for  a  sick  Person  at  the
point  of  Departure.

[Visitation  Office.  J

O  Almighty  (Sod,  with  whom  do  live  the  spi-
rits of  just  men  made  perfect ;  we  humbly  com-


)  soul  of  this  thy  servant  our  dear  brother
into  thy  hands,  as  into  the  hands  of  a  faithful
Creator,  and  most  merciful  Saviour-,  humbly  be-
seeching thee,  that  it  may  be  acceptable  in  thy
aht  And  teach  us,  who  survive,  by  this  and
ler  daily  instances  of  mortality,  to  see  how  frail
and  uncertain  our  own  condition  is,  and  so  to
number  out  days,  that  we  may  seriously  apply
our  hearts  to  that  holy  and  heavenly  wisdom,
which  may  bring  us  to  life  everlasting;  through
Jesus  Christ  thy  Son,  our  Lord. Amen.

A  Litany  /or  a  rick  Person  at  the  time  of
Departure.

[From  Bishop  Andrews.]

O  God,  the  Father  of  heaven,
Have  mercy  upon  him :
Keep  and  defend  him.
O  God  the  Son,  Redeemer  of  the  world,
Have  mercy  upon  him :
Save  and  deliver  him.
O  God  the  Holy  Ghost,  proceeding  from  the
Father  and  the  Sonr

Have  mercy  upon  Aim  :
Strengthen  and  comfort  hxm.
O,  holy,  blessed,  and  glorious  Trinity,

Have  mercy  upon  him.
Remember  not,  Lord,  his  offences;  call  not  to
mind  the  offences  of  his  forefathers ;  but  spare
him,  good  Lord,  spare  thy  servant,  whom  thou
hast  redeemed  with  thy  precious  blood,  and  be
not  angry  with  him  for  ever.

From  thy  wrath  and  indignation ;  from  the  fear
of  death;  from  the  guilt  and  burden  of  his  sins,
and  from  the  dreadful  sentence  of  the  last  judg-


Good  lyord  deliver  him.
From  the  sting.of  conscience :  from  impatience,
distrust,  or  despair;  and  from  the  extremity  of
sickness  or  agony,  which  may  any  ways  withdraw
his  mind  from  thee ;

Good  Lord  deliver  him.
(  From  the  powers  of  darkness ;  from  the  illu-
sions and  assaults  of  our  ghostly  enemy ;  and  from
the  bitter  pangs  erf  eternal  death;
(3ood  Lord  deliver  him.
From  all  danger  and  distress;  from  all  tenon


and  torments;  from  all  pains  and  ;
both  of  the  body  and  of  the  soul ;
Good  Lord  deliver  him.
By  thy  manifold  and  great  mercies ;  by  the  ma-
nifold and  great  mercies  of  Jesus  Christ  thy  Son ;
by  his  agony  and  bloody  sweat;  by  his  strong
crying  and  tears;  by  his  bitter  cross  and  passion ;
by  his  resurrection  and  ascension;  by  his  inter-
cession and  mediation:  and  by  the  graces  and
comforts  of  the  Holy  Ghost ;
Good  Lord  deliver  him.
In  this  time  of  extremity;  in  his  last  and  great-
est need ;  in  the  hour  of  death,  and  in  the  day  of
judgment;

Good  Lord  deliver  him.
We  Burners  do  beseech  thee  to  hear  01,0  Lord
God :  that  it  may  please  thee  to  be  nis  defender
and  keeper;  to  remember  him  with  the  fevour
thou  bearest  unto  thy  people,  and  to  visit  him
with  thy  salvation :

We  beseech  thee  to  hear  us,  Good  Lord.
That  it  may  please  thee  to  save  and  deliver  his
soul  from  the  oower  of  the  enemy,  to  receive  it  to
thy  mercy,  and  to  give  him  a  quiet  and  joyful  de-
parture:

We  beseech  thee  to  hear  us,  Good  Lord.
That  it  may  please  thee  to  be  merciful,  and  to
forgive  all  the  sins  and  offences,  which  at  any
time  of  his  life  he  hath  committed  against  thee :
We  beseech  thee  to  hear  us.  Good  Lord.
That  it  may  please  thee  not  to  lay  to  his  charge,
what  in  the  lust  of  the  flesh,  or  in  the.  lust  of  the
eye{  or  in  the  pride  of  life,  he  hath  committed
against  thee  :

We  beseech  thee  to  hear  us,  Good  Lord.
That  it  may  please  thee  not  to  lay  to  his
charge,  what,  in  the  fierceness  of  his  wrath,  or  in
vain  and  idle  words,  he  hath  committed  against
thee:

We  beseech  thee  to  hear  us,  Good'Lord.
That  it  may  please  thee  to  make  him  paTtahnr
of  all  thy  mercies,  and  promises,  in  Christ  Jesus.
We  beseech  thee  to  hear  us,  Good  Lord.
That  it  may  please  thee  to  grant  his  body  rest
and  peace,  and  a  part  in  the  blessed  resurrection
of  life  and  glory:

We  beseech  thee  to  hear  us,  Good  Lord.
That  it  may  please  thee  to  vouchsafe  his  soul
the  enjoyment  of  everlasting  happiness,  with  all
the  blessed  saints  in  thy  heavenly  kingdom : *
We  beseech  thee  to  hear  us,  Good  Lord.
Son  of  God,  we  beseech  thee  to  hear  us.
O  Lamb  of  God,  that  takest  away  the  sins  of
the  world;

Grant  him  thy  peace.
O  Lamb  of  God,  that  takest  away  the  sins  of
the  world ;

Have  mercy  upon  him.

Form  qf  recommending  the  Soul  to  God,  in  her
Departure  from  the  Body.

[From  Bishop  Oosins,]
Into  thy  merciful  hands,  O  Lord,  we  commend
the  soul  of  this  thy  servant,  now  departing  from
the  body.  Receiv&Afrp,  we  humbly  beseech  thee,
into  the  arms  of  thy  mercy,  into  the  glorious  so-
ciety of  thy  saints  in  heaven. Amen.

God  the  Father,  who  hath  created  thee;  God
the  Son,  who  hath  redeemed  thee;  God  the  Ho*/


IN  VISITING  THE  SICK.


859


Ghost,  who  hath  infused  bis  grace  into  thee;  be
now  and  eiennore  thy  defence,  assist  thee  in  this
thy  last  trial,  and  bung  thee  to  everlasting  life.
Amen*

[From  Bishop  Taylor.]

1-

O  Holt  and  most  gracious  Jesus,  we  humbly
recommend  the  soul  ofthy  servant  into  thy  hands,
thy  most  merciful  hands :  let  thy  blessed  angels
stand  in  ministry  about  thy  servant,  and  protect
him  in  hie  departure.  Amen,
II.

Lord,  receive  the  soul  of  this  thy  servant :  enter
not  into  judgment  with  him;  spare  him  whom
thou  hast  redeemed  with  thy  most  precious  blood,
and  deliver  Aim  from  all  evil  and  mischief,  from
the  crafts  and  assaults  of  the  devil,  from  the  fear  of
death,  and  from  everlasting  condemnation.  Amen.

m.

Lord,  impute  not  unto  Mm.  the  fellies  of  his
youth,  nor  any'  of  the  errors  of  hi*  life;  but
strengthen  him  in  his  agony,  and  carry  him  safely
through  the  last  distress.  Let  not  his  faith  waver,
nor  hu  hope  fail,  nor  his  charity  be  diminished ;
let  him  die  in  peace,  and  rest  in  nope,  and  rise  in
glory. Amen.

O  Saviour  of  the  world,  who  by  thy  cross  and
precious  blood  hast  redeemed  us :  save  and  help
this  thy  departing  servant,  we  humbly  beseech
thee,  O  Lord. Amen.

Unto  thy  gracious  mercy  and  protection  we
commit  him.  O  Lord,  bless  him,  and  keep  him.
Make  thy  face  to  shine  upon  himt  and  be  gracious
unto  him.  Lift  up  thy  countenance  upon  him,
and  give  him  peace,  both  now  and  evermore.
Amen.

A  consolatory  Form  of  Devotion  that  may  be
used  with  the  Friends  or  Relations  of  the
Deceased.

"Borrow  not  brethren,  for  them  which  are
asleep,  even  as  others,  who  have  no  hope. *■

"For  if  we  believe  that  Jesus  died,  and  rose
again:  even  so  them  also  which  sleep  in  Jesus,
will  God  bring  with  him."— >1  Thess.  iv.  13, 14.

M  It  is  the  Lord,  let  him  do  what  seemeth  good
unto  him."— -1  Sam.  iii.  18.

"  The  righteous  is  taken  away  from  the  evil  to
come  "—Isaiah  lvii.  1.

"  Though  the  righteous  be  prevented  with
death,  yet  shall  he  be  in  rest

"  The  honourable  age  is  not  that  which  stand-
eth  in  length  of  days,  nor  that  which  is  measured
by  number  of  years.

"  But  wisdom  is  the  gray  hair  unto  men,  and
an  unspotted  life  is  old  age,6— Wisd.  iv.  7, 8,  9.

"  Precious  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord,  is  the  death
of  his  saints."— Psalm  cxvi.  15.

"  Yea,  blessed  are  the  dead,  which  die  in  the
Lord :  even  so  saith  the  Spirit;  for  they  rest  from
their  labours."— Rev.  xiv.  13.

Let  as  pray.

Lord,  have  mercy  upon  us.
Christ  have  mercy  upon, us.
Lord,  have  mercy  upon  us.
Our  Father  which  art  in  heaven :  hallowed  be
thy  bum. Thy  kingdom  come. Thy  will  be


dene  in  earth  as  it  is  in  heaven.  Give  us  this  day
our  daily  bread,  And  forgive  us  our  trespasses
as  we  forgive  them  that  trespass  against  us.  And
lead  us  not  into  temptation;  but  deliver  us  from
evfl. Amen.

"  Lord,  thou  hast  been  our  refuge  from  one
generation  to  another.

Before  the  mountains  were  brought  forth,  or
ever  the  earth  and  the  world  were  made,  tnou
art  God  from  everlasting,  and  world  without  end.

Thou  turnest  man  to  destruction ;  again  thou
sayest,  Come  again,  ye  children  of  men.

For  a  thousand  years  in  thy  sight  are  but  as
yesterday,  seeing  that  is  past  as  a  watch  in  the
night

As  soon  as  thou  -acatterest  them,  they  are'
even  as  a  sleep,  and  -  fade  away  suddenly  lice  the
grass.

In  the  morning  it  is  green,  and  groweth  up;
but  in  the  evening  it  is  cut  down,  (fried  up,  and
withered.

For  we  consume  away  in  thy  displeasure,  and
are  afraid  ofthy  wrathful  indignation.

Thou  hast  set  our  misdeeds  before  thee,  and
our  secret  sins  in  the  light  of  thy  countenance.

For  when  thou  art  angry,  all  our  days  are
gone :  we  bring  our  years  to  an  end,  as  it  were  a
talc  that  is  told.

So  teach  us  to  number  our  days,  that  we  may
apply  our  hearts  unto  wisdom.

Turn  thee  again  at  last,  and  be  gracious  to
thy  servants.

Comfort  them  again,  now  after  the  time  that
thou  hast  afflicted  them,  and  for  the  present  oc-
casion, wherein  they  suffer  adversity.

O  satisfy  them  with  thy  mercy,  and  that  soon :
so  shall  they  rejoice,  and  be  glad  all  the  days  or
their  life."


mit  with  all  humility  and  patience  to  this  dispen-
sation of  thy  divine  providence.  Be  pleased  so  to
sanctify  it  to  this  family,  that  thy  grace  and  mercy
may  more  abundantly  flow  upon  thy  servants.
Thy  property  it  is  to  bring  good  out  of  evil ;  O
turn  that  evil,  which  is  now  befallen  this  house,  to
the  benefit  of  every  one  of  us,  that  so  we  may  be
able  to  say,  from  happy  experience,  that  "the
house  of  mourning  is  better  than  the  house  of
feasting,"  while  the  death  of  our  brother,  through
thy  blessing,  shall  conduce  and  minister  to  our
spiritual  advantage.

Let  the  sight  of  Aw?  change  make  us  the  more
mindful  of  our  own,  and  the  sense  of  our  loss
make- us  cleave  more  steadfastly  to  thee,  O  God.
Let  the  remembrance  of  his  virtues  make  us  fol-
low his  example,  and  the  hope  we  have  of  his
being  blessed,  cause  us  to  "  press,"  with  the  more
earnestness,  "  towards  the  mark,  for  the  prize  of
our  high  calling  in  Christ  Jesus."

Thou  knowest,  O  Lord,  the  weakness  and
frailty  of  our  nature,  and  therefore  we  beseech
thee  to  give  thy  servants,  who  are  more  nearly
concerned  in  this  visitation,  a  constant  supply  of
thy  good  Spirit,  to  enable  them  to  bear  it  with
humility,  patience,  resignation,  and  submission
to  thy  divine  will,  as  becometh  the  Gospel  of  Je-
sus Christ.  O  that  no  repining  thoughts  may
arise  in  their  hearts  to  discompose  their  duty  to-
wards thee,  or  towards  their  neighbour:  but  help


mo


THE  CLERGYMAN'S  COMPANION.


Chan  rather  to  think  wherein  they  have  offended
thee,  And  carefully  to  amend  it:  to  place  their
affections  more  steadfastly  on  those  immoveable
things  which  are  above,  and  freely  resign  all  their
thoughts  and  desires  unto  thee ;  saying,  with  holy
Job,  "  The  Lord  gave,  and  the  Lord  hath  taken
away,  blessed  be  die  name  of  the  Lord."  And
let  the  death  of  thy  servant  strike  us  all  with
such  a  lively  sense  of  our  mortality,  as  may  cause
us  so  thoroughly  to  die  to  sin,  and  live  to  grace,
that  when  we  die,  we  may  rest  in  him,  as  our
hope  is  this  our  "brother  doth.

We  evidently  see  "that  death  is  the  end  of  all
men;"  grant  us  therefore  grace  to  lay  it  to  heart,
to  despise  the  world,  "  to  abhor  that  which  is  evil,
and  cleave  to  that  which  is  good ;  to  delight  in  thy
word,  to  study  thy  will,  to  observe  thy  law,  and  to
take  all  possible  care  to  promote  thy  honour,  and
our  own  salvation ;  that  when  "  we  go  the  way
of  all  earth,  we  may  be  comforted  by  thy  pre-
sence," and  admitted  into  thy  heavenly  king
Amen.


r  kingdom.


us  mercifully,  O  Lord,  in  these  our
supplication*  and  prayers,  and  dispose  the  way
of  toy  servants  towards  tne  attainment  of  ever-
lasting  salvation;  that,  among  all  the  changes
and  chances  of  this  mortal  life,  they  may  ever  be
defended  by  thy  most  gracious  and  ready  help;
through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord. Amen.

The  Lord  hless  us  and  keep  us,  the  Lord  lift
up  the  light  of  his  countenance  upori  us,  and
give  us  peace,  now  and  for  evermore. Amen. '


OCCASIONAL  PRATERS  AND  DEVOTIONS  FOR  THE
SICK  AND  UNFORTUNATE  IN  EXTRAORDINARY
CASES.

A  Prayer  far  a  Person  whose  Illness  is  chiefly
brought  on  him  by  some  calamitous  Disaster  or
toes,  as  of  Estate,  Relations,  or  Friends,  fyc.

[From  Bishop  Patrick.]

O  most  gracious  and  glorious  God,  supreme
Judge,  and  Governor  of  the  world,  "  in  whom  we
live,  and  move,  and  have  our  vbeing,"  and  from
whom' all  the  blessings  we  enjoy,  and  "every
flood  and  perfect  gift  cometh,"  grant  us,  we  hum-
bly beseech  thee,  such  a  measure  of  thy  grace,
that  whenever  thou  art  pleased  to  remove  any  of
thy  blessings  from  us,  we  may  bear  it  with  a  per-
fect resignation  to  thy  divine  will ;  and  with  all
patience,  humility,  an<J  contentcdness  of  spirit,
consider  how  unworthy  we  are  of  the  least  of  thy
mercies.

More  particularly,  O  Lord,  we  beseech  thee  to
give  Una  peaceablenesB,  and  contentedness  of
mind,  to  this  thy  servant,  whom  thou  hast  so  sen-
sibly afflicted,  by  taking  so  near  and  dear  a  bless-
ing from.  Aim.  O  give  him  such  a  portion  of  thy
blessed  Spirit  and  such  a  lively  sense  of  his  dutv,
that  he  may  have  power  to  surmount  all  the  dif-
ficulties he  labours  under,  and  freely  to  resign  all
hie  thoughts  and  desires  unto  thee,  submitting
himself  entirely  to  thy  good  providence,  and  re-
solving, by  thy  gracious  assistance,  to  rest  con-
tented with  whatsoever  thou  in  thy  wisdom  ap-
pojnteet  for  him.  Thou  knowest,  O  Lord,  the
"  i  and  frailty  of  our  nature,  and  therefore


be  pleased  to-comfcrt  Aim  in  this  bed  of  a
establish  him  with  the  light  of  thy  count
and  grant  that  no  repining  thoughts  may  increase
his  illness,  or  discompose  Aw  duty  towards  thee,  or
Aw  neighbour:  but  enable  him  to  think  wherein
A? -hath  offended  thee,  and  carefully  to  amend  Ait
errors ;  to  set  At*  affection*  on  things  above,  and
not  on  things  below,  and  to  lay  up  for  himself
treasure?  in  heaven,  even  the  treasures  of  a  good
life,  which  no  disasters  or  calamities  shall  ever  be
able  to  take  from  Aim.  Grant  this,  O  heavenly
Father,  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord. Amen.

A  Prayer  for  a  Person  who  by  any  calamitous
Disaster  hath  broken  any  of,  his  Bones,  or  is
very  much  bruised  and  hurt  in  his  Body.

[From  Mr.  Jens*.]

O  Lord,  the  only  disposer  of  all  events,  thou
hast  taught  us  that  "affliction  cometh  not  forth
of  the  dust,  neither  doth  trouble  spring  out  of  the
ground :"  but  that  the  disasters  which  befall  us
are  by  thy  appointment.  Thou  art  just  in  all
thou  bringest  upon  us :  and  though  tny  "  judg-
ments are  far  above  out  of  our  sight,"  vet  we
know  "  that  they  are  right,  and  that  it  is  m  very
faithfulness  thou  causest  us  to  be  afflicted."  "  Why
then  should  a  living  man  complain,  a  man  for  the
punishment  of  his  sins  ?"  Let  these  considerations
prevail  with  thy  servant  to  submit  to  thy  dispen-
sations.. Make  Aim  resolve  to  bear  the  effects  of
thy  displeasure,  and  to  consider  it  as  the  just  de-
sert of  Aw  sins.  O  Lord,  give  Aim  patience  and
strength,  and  grace,  proportionable  to  "this  great
trial ;  and  enable  Aim  so  to  conduct  himself  under
it,  that,  after  the  affliction  is  removed,  he  may  find
cause  to  say,  "  it  was  good  for  Aim  to-be  afflicted."
Thou  that  hast  torn  and  smitten,  thou  art  able  ^9
heal  and.  to  comfort.  Be  pleased  to  remember  Aim
in  this  his  low  estate.  Cause  him  to  "search and
try  his  ways,  and  turn  to  thee,  and  hr^ng  forth
fruits  meet  for  repentance."

We  know,  O  Lord,  thou  canst  taise .  Aim  up
from  the  deepest  affliction :  O,  let  it  be  thy  gra-
cious will  to  glorify  thy  power  and  mercy  in  Ait
recovery ;  or,  nowever  thou  shalt  think  fit  to  dis-
pose of  this  "vile  body,"  grant  Aim,  O  God,  a
mind  entirely  resigned  to  thy  will,  and  satisfied
with  thy  dispensations.  O,  make  this  calamity
the  messenger  of  thy  love  to  his  soul,  and  the
happy  means  of  Aw  conversion ;  through  Jesus
Christ. Amen.

A  Prayer  for  a  Person  that  is  afflicted  with
grievous  Pains  of  his  Body.

[From  Mr.  Jenki.]

O  Lord,  thou  art  a  merciful  God,  and  dost  not
willingly  afflict  the  children  of  men ;  but  when
necessity  requires,  thou  chastisest  us  for  our  profit,
that  we*  may  be  partakers  of  thy  holiness.  Re-
move, we  beseech  thee,  this  affliction  from  thy
servant,  or  enable  Aim  to  bear  what  thou  art
p]eased~to  lay  upon  Aim.  Lord,  all  Ait  desire  is
before  thee,  and  Ait  groaning  is  not  hid  from
thee.  Regard  Ait  affliction,  when  thou  nearest
his  cry.  Enter  not  into  judgment  with  Aim,  nor
deal  with  Aim  according  to  Aw  sins,  but  according
to  thy  mercy  in  Josus  Christ.  O  gracious  Father,
sanctify  to  Aim  what  thou  hast  laid  upon  Aim,
that  his  present  affliction  may  work  out  for  kim
an  eternal  weight  of  glory. Support  him  under


IN  VISITING  THE  SICK. .


961


his  puns,  till  it  shall  please  thee  to  grant  Aim
ease  and  comfort.  Ana,  however  thou  shalt  deal
with  him,  let  him  not  repine  at  thy  correction,
nor  sin  in  charging  thee  foolishly.  Make  him
sensible,  that  thou  doest  nothing  but  what  is  wise
and  just;  nothing  but  what  thy  servant  shall  one
day  have  cause  to  bless  and  praise  thee  for  dome.
And  let  this  consideration  teach  him  to  glorify
thee  in  the  time  of  hi*  visitation,  by  an  humble
submission  to  thy  will,  and  a  sincere  reformation
under  thy  providential  dispensations;  that  thou
mayest  visit  him  in  mercy  and  love,  show  him  the
joy  of  thy  salvation;  through 'Jesus  Christ  our
Lord. Amen.

A  Prayer  Jbr  One  who  is  troubled  with  acute
Pains  of  the  Qout,  Stone,  Colic,  or  any  other
bodily  Distemper.

[From  Mr.  Spinkes.]

O  blessed  God,  just  and  holy,  who  dost  not
willingly  afflict  the  children  of  men ;  withhold  not,
we  beseech  tbee,  thy  assistance  from  this  thy  ser-
vant in  the  extremity  of-  his  pain.  His  sorrows
are  increased,  and  his  soul  is  roll  of  trouble.  Be
has  none  to  nee  unto,  for  the  ease  and  mitigation
of  his  agonies,  but  to  thee,  O  Lord.  He  freely
owns  that  his  sufferings  are  infinitely  less  than  he
has  deserved ;  yet  since  they  pierce  deep,  and  are
become  almost  too  heavy  for  him  to  bear,  we  pre-
sume to  call  upon  thee  for  aid;  and  to  entreat  thee,
not  to  punish  Mm  according  to  his  deserts.  For
if  thou  shouldest  be  extreme  to  mark  what  is  done
amiss,  O  Lord,  who  may  abide  it  1"  Spare  him
therefore  for  toy  mercy's  sake;  and  correct  him
"not  m  thine  anger,  lest  thou  bring  Aim  to  nothing."
Endue  him  with  that  patience  which  may  enable
him  cheerfully  to  submit  to  thy  chastisement;
and  grant  him  an  unfeigned  repentance  for  all
his  sins.  Comfort  his^oul,  which  melteth  away
for  very  heaviness,  and  let  thy  loving  mercy  come
unto  him.  Sanctify  this  thy  fatherly  correction
to  Asm,  that  it  may  be  for  thy  glory,  and  At*  ad-
vantage. And  when  thy  gracious  ends  in  afflict-
ing hsm,  shall  be  accomplished,  which  we  know
are  not  for  "  thy  pleasure,"  but  for, /us  profit,  give
him.  we  beseech  thee,  a  fresh  occasion  to  rejoice
in  thy  saving  health ;  through  Jesus  Christ  our
Lord. Amen.

A  Prayer  for  a  Person  in  the  Small- Pox,  or
any  suchrUke  raging  infectious  Disease.

O  gracious  and  merciful  Father,  the  only
giver  of  health,  look  down,  we  beseech  thee,  with
an  eye  of  compassion,  upon  thy  miserable  and
disconsolate  servant,  from  whom  thou  hast  taken
this  great  and  valuable  "blessing ;  and  instead  of  it,
has  filled  every  part  of  his  body  with  a  sore


Teach  him,  O  Lord,  and  teach  us  all  from  hence,
to  consider  how  soon  the  beauty  of  life  is  blasted
like  a  flower,  and  our  "  strength  dried  up  like  a
potsherd,"  that  we  may  not  put  our  trust  in  any
of  these  transitory  things,  but  hi  thee  only,  the
living  God,  who  art  able  to  save  and  to  destroy,  to
kill  and  to  make  alive.

Our  brother,  whom  we  now  beheld. a  spectacle
of  misery,  was  lately,,  like  one  of  us,  in  perfect
health.  But  now  *rthou  makest  his  beauty  to
us  away,  as  H-were  a  moth  fretting  a  gar-
Thine  arrows  stick  fast  in  him,  and  thy


hand  presseth  him  sore ;  so  that  there  is  no  sound-
ness in  his  flesh,  because  of  thine  anger ;  neither
is  there  any  rest  in  his  bones  by  reason  of  his
sin.

"  O  reject  him  not  utterly,  but  take  thy  plague
away  from  him.  Return,  O  Lord,  ana  that
speedily;  for  his  spirit  faileth.  O  leave  him  not
in  his  distress ;  for  though  the  world  may  forsake
him,  his  sure  trust  is  in  thee.  To  thee,  O  Lord,
does  he  cry;-  te  thee  doth  he  stretch  forth  his
hands ;  his  soul  thirsteth  after  thee  as  a  barren  and
dry  land.  Lord,  all  At*  desire  is  before  thee,  and
his  groaning  is  not  hid  from  thee.  Comfort  him
therefore  again  now  after  the  time  that  thou  hast
afflicted  him,  and.  for  the  days  wherein  Ae  hath
suffered  adversity.'1

Put  a  stop,  O  Lord,  we  beseech  thee,  to  this
raging  infection,  and  say  to  the  destroying.  angeL
"  It  is  enough."  Protect  us  under  the  shadow  of  l
thy  winm.  that  we  may  not  "  be  afraid  of  any  ter-
ror by  night ;  nor  for  the  arrow  that  .flieth  by  day ;
nor  for  the  pestilence  that  walketh  in  darkness ;
nor  for  the  sickness  that  destroyeth  in  the  noon-
day ;"  but  that,  with  ease  in  our  minds,  and  health
in  our  bodies,  we  may  serve  thee  cheerfully  all  the
days  of  our  life  j,  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.
Amen.

A  Prayer  for  a  Person  in  a  Consumption,  or
sany  lingering  Disease.

[From  Mr.  Jenks.]

O  merciful  God,  thou  haat  long  kept  thy  ser-
vant under  thy  chastening  hand;  thou  hast»made-
him  acquainted  with  gnef ;  and  his  sickness  is
even  become  his  familiar  companion :  yet,  O  bless-
ed Lord,  grant  that  he  may  not  be  impatient  un-
der thy  chastisement,  who  art  pleased  to  wait  so
long  for  the  return  of  a  sinner :  but  let  Aim  re-
member that  thou  hast  kind  intentions,'  even  in
thy  bitterest  dispensations ;  that  thou  "  chastenest
Aim  whom  thou-  lovest,  and  scourgest  every  son
whom  thou  receivest"  Teach  Aim,  O  gracious
Father,  to  see  love  in  thy  rod,  and  justice  in  all
thy  dealings ;  that  he  may  humble  himself  under
thy  mighty  hand ;  that  he  'may  think  it  good  for
Aim  to  nave  been  afflicted,  and  patiently  wait  for
thy  loving  kindness.

Yet,  that  his  faith  may  not  fail,  nor  his  patience
be  overcome,  give  Aim  ease  and  relaxation  from
At*  pain,  and  a  happy  conclusion  of  this  long  vi-
sitation. In  the'  mean  time,  grant  that  he  may
neither  despise  thy  chastening,  nor  feint  under
thy  rebukes;  but  employ  the  time  which  thou
lendest,  and  improve  the  affliction  which  thou
continuest,  as  a  gracious  opportunity  for  Aw  spi-  .
ritual  advantage;  that  under  the  decays  of  the
body,  the  inner  man  may  be  renewed  day  by  day;
and  that  whatever  appertains  to  Ats  everlasting
salvation  may  be  promoted  and  perfected  through
the  riches  of  thy  grace,  and  the  multitude  of  thy
mercies  in  Jesus  Christ Amen.^

A  Prayer  for  a  Person  who  is  lame  in  his  Sick-
ness.

[From  Mr.  Lewis.]

O  almighty  God,  who  "  art  eyes  to  the  blind
and  feet  to  the  lame,"  have  pity,  we  entreat  thee,
on  thy  servant :  help  Aim  in  his  distress,  and  bless,
we  pray  thee,  the  means  made  use  of  for  his  cure.  '
Make  Aim  sensible  of  thyjdesign  in  visiting  Aim
with  this  affliction;  cause  Asm  to  remember,  how


THE  CLERGYMAN'S  COMPANION


in  hi*  strength  and  health,  he  followed  hit  own
devices,  and  the  desire  of  Ait  own  heart;  and  let
turn  eee,  that  thou  haat  lifted  up  thy  hand  against
him,  for  this  very  purpose,  that  he  may  learn  to
walk  more  humbly  with  thee,  and  turn  his  feet  to
•thy  testimonies.  Deliver  him  from  the  painful
confinement  under  which  he  labours,  and  grant
him  again  the  happiness  of  enjoying  the  comforts
of  life,  and  of  worshiping  thee  in  thy  sanctuary,
with  the  "voice  of  joy  and  praise."  But,  O  Lord,
hot  our  willj  but  thine  be  done.  Thou  Jmowest
better  what  is  good  for  us,  than  weourselves ;  and
it  is  in  wisdom  that  thou  afflictest  us.  Give  thy
servant  patience,  that  he  may  bear  his  pains  with-
out murmuring,  and  wait  at  the  time  of  his  deli-
verance from  them  without  uneasiness ;  satisfy  him
of  thy  care  over  Aim,  and  thy  tender  regard  to
Aim;  and  in  thy  good  time  restore  Aim  to  his  for-
mer strength  andvigour,  that  he  may  give  thanks
to  thee  in  the  great  congregation ;  through  Jesus
Christ  out  Saviour. Amen.

A  Prayer  for  One  thai  is  Bedridden.

[From  Mr.  Lewis.]

O  Lord  our  God,  the  Father  of  mercies,  and
the  God  of  all  comfort,  have  compassion,  we  en-
treat thee,  on  the  helpless  condition  of  thy  servant  t
support  his  spirits  wnich  are  ready  to  droop  under
affliction:  refresh  his  mind  which  is  apt  to  be  un-
easy and  melancholy  at  the  thought  of  perpetual
confinement.  Give  sleep  to  his  eyes,  and  rest  to
lib  weary  thoughts.  Cause  Aim  to  meditate  on
thee  in  tne  night  watches ;  to  u  commune  with  his
own  heart ;"  and,  in  his  solitude, "  to  search  and  try
hit  ways,"  that  Aemay  see  wherein  he  hath  erred,
and  may  turn  unto  thee  with  all  his  soul  and  with
all  Ait  strength.  Let  this  affliction  be  the  means
of  preparing  Aim  for  the  enjoyment  of  thy  pre-
sence, in  which  is  fulness  of  joy;  and  let  Aim  be
the  more  patient  under  it  for  that  reason.  Make
Aim  thankful  that  thou  hast  by  this  expedient
preserved  Aim  from  the  company  of  those  whose
evil  communication  might  navo  corrected  his
heart,  and  hast  taken  Aim  out  of  a  world,  by  the
snares  and -temptations  of  which  Ac  might  have
been  prevailed  upon  to  forsake  thee,  and  turn  from
the  way  of  thv^ommandmenU.  Grant  O  Lord,
that  A«  may  not  render  himself  unworthy  of  thy
favour,  by  murmuring  and  repining;  but  that  he
may  use  the  leisure  and  opportunity  now  given
Aim,  to  make  his  peace  with  tnee,  ana  be  fitted  for
the  enjoyment  of  an  inheritance  among  the  saints
in  light;  through  thy  mercy  in- Jesus  Christ,  our
Saviour  and  Redeemer. Amen.

A  Prayer  for  a  Person  troubled  in  Mind,  or  in
Conscience.

[Visitation  Office.]
O  blessed  Lord,  the  Father  of  Mercies,  and
the  God  of  all  comforts,  we  beseech  thcc,  look
down  in  pity  and  compassion  upon  this  thine
afflicted  servant  Thou  writest  bitter  things
against  Aim,  and  makest  Aim  to  possess  his  for-
mer iniquities :  thy  wrath  lieth  bard  upon  Aim,
and  his  soul  is  full  of  trouble.  But,  O  merciful
God,  who  hast  given  us  thy  holy  word  for  our
learning,  that  we  through  patience,  and  comfort
of  the  Scriptures,  might  have  hope ;  give  Aim  a
tight  understanding  of  himself,  and  of  thy  threat-


enings  and  promises ;  that  he  may  neither  cast
away  his  confidence  in  thee,  nor  place  it  any
where  but  in  thee.  Give  Aim  strength  against
all  temptations,  and  heal  all  Aw  infirmities.  Break
not  the  bruised  reed,  nor  quench  the  smoking  flax.
Shut  not  up  thy  tender  mercies  in  displeasure,
but  make  Asm  hear  of  joy  and  gladness,  that  the
bones  which  thou  hast  broken  may  rejoice.  De-
liver Aim  from  the  fear  of  the  enemy;  lift  up  the
light  of  thy  countenance  upon  Aim,  ana  give  Aim
peace,  through  the  mediation  of  Jesus  Christ  our
Lord. Amen.

Another  for  the  same,  or  for  One  under  deep  Me-
lancholy and  Dejection  of  Spirit.

[From  Mr.  JenksJ

6  most  gracious  Lord,  thou  knowest  our  frame,
and  art  fulfof  compassion  to  thy  servants  under
their  trouble  and  oppression ;  look  down  upon  us,
we  humbly  beseech  thee,  with  thy  wonted  pity,
and  remember  the  work  of  thy  hands,  our  discon-
solate brother.  Thy  wrath  Bee  hard  upon  Aim;
and  all  thy  waves  are  gone  over  Aim  ,*  thy  terrors
oppress  Aw  mind,  and  disturb  Ait  reason.  O  thou
that  speakest  the  winds  and  waves  into  obedience
and  calmness,  settle  and  quiet  his  discomposed
thoughts;  speak  peace  and  satisfaction  to  his
troubled  mind,  and  give  Aim  comfort  and  sure,
confidence  in  the  sense  of  thy  pardon  and  love.
Lord,  help  his  unbelief,  and  increase  At*  faith.
Though  he  walk  in  the  valley  and  shadow  of
death,  let  "thy  rod  and  thy  staff  support  and  pro-
tect Aim."  In  the  multitude  of  the  thoughts  and
sorrows  that  As  hath  in  his  heart,  let  thy  comfort
refresh  Ait  soul  Let  in  a  beam  of  thy  heavenly
light,  to  dispel  the  clouds  and  darkness  in  which
Ait  mind  is  involved.  O  direct  to  the  means
most  proper  for  Ait  help,  and  so  Mess  and  prosper
them,  that  they  may  effectually  promote  Ait  re-
covery out  of  this  deplorable  state.  Incline-  Ait
ears  to  wholesome  counsels,  and  dispose  Ait  heart
to  receive  due  impressions.  O  gracious  Father,
pity  Ait  frailty,  forgive  Ait  sin,  and  rebuke  Ait
distemper,  that  Ait  disquieted  soul  may  return  to
its  rest  O.  raise  Aim  up,  and  show  thy  mercy
upon  Aim;  tor  the  sake  or  Jesus  Christ,  our  bless-
ed Saviour  and  Redeemer. Amen.

For  the  same.

[From  Bishop  Patrick.]

Preserye  this  thy  servant,  O  gracious  Father,
from  dishonouring  thee  and  Ait  religion,  by  dis-
trusting thy  power,  or  thy  goodness.

Remove  all  troublesome  imaginations  from  Aim.
and  give  Aim  a  clear  understanding  of  thee,  ana
of  himself  that  no  causeless  fears  and  jealousies
may  overwhelm  Aim,  nor  Ait  heart  sink  within
Aim  from  any  sadness  and  dejection  of  spirit
Compose,  we  beseech  thee,  Ait  disturbed  thoughts ;
quiet  his  disordered  mind,  and  appease  all  the  tu-
mults of  Ait  soul,  by  a.  sweet  sense  of  thy  tender
mercies,  and  of  the  love  of  thy  Son  Jesus  Christ
to  mankind.  Keep  Aim  from  forming  any  rash
conclusions  concerning  thy  providence ;  and  give
Aim  so  much  light  and  judgment  amid  all  the
darkness  and  confusion  of  Ait  thoughts,  that  he
may  not  think  himself  forsaken  by  thee ;  but  may
firmly  believe,  that  if  Ae  does  the  best  he  can,  thou
requirest  no  more.  And  enable  Aim,  O  Lord,  to
look  forwards  to  that  region  of  light  and  glory,


IN  VISITING  THE  SICK.


963


whither  our  Saviour  is  gone  before,  to  prepare  a
place  for  all  thy  faithful  servants.

Strengthen  his  weak  and  feeble  endeavours.
Support  his  fainting  spirit,  and  cause  it  humbly
to  nope  in  thee.  Confirm  and  establish  every
good  thought,  desire,  and  purpose,  which  thou
East  wrought  in  him.  Make  him  to  grow  in
wisdom,  faith,  love,  and  willing  obedience.  Con-
duct him  hereafter  so  easily  and  steadily,  peace-
ably and  quietly,  so  cheerfully  and  securely,  in
thy  ways,  that  he  may  glorify  thee  whilst  fie  lives,
and  when  he  leaves  tnis  troublesome  world,  may
resign  hia  soul  into  thv  merciful  hands,  with  a
pious  confidence  and  a  hope  of  a  joyful  resurrec-
tion: through  the  merits  of  thy  Son  Jesus  Christ
our  Lord. Amen.

A  Prayer  for  One  under  Fears  and  Doubts  con-
cerning his  spiritual  Condition,  or  under  per-
plexing Thoughts  and  Scruples  about  his
Duty.

{Tram  -Mr.  KettteweH.  ]
O  Lord  our  God,  we  offer  up  our  humble  sup-
plication to  thee  in  behalf  of  this  thy  servant,
whose  soul  is  disquieted  within  him  by  his  fears
and  anxiety  respecting  the  safety  of  his  condition.
Remove  from  him7  we  entreat  thee,  all  frightful
apprehensions,  all  perplexing  doubts  and  scruples
about  Ait  duty.  Make  Aim.  satisfied  and  settled
in  a  right  understanding  of  all  thy  precepts,  and
careful  in  the  observance  of  them;  and  dispel,  by
the  light  of  thy  countenance,  all  that  darkness
which  obscures  his  soul,  that  he  may  not  be  un-
necessarily dejected,  and  distrustful  of  himself,  or
dishonourably  jealous  of  thee.  Deliver,  him  from
all  those  offences  which  make  him  so  much  a
stranger  to  peace  and  comfort;  and  cause  Aim  to
place  his  cmef  satisfaction  and  delight  in  obeying
thy  commandments,  and  in  meditating  on  thy
mercy ;  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.

A  Prayer  for  One  who  is  disturbed  with  wicked

and  blasphemous  Thoughts.

[From  Mr.  Lewis.]

O  Lord  God,  the  Father  of  our  spirits,  to
whom  all  hearts  are  open,  and  all  desires  known ;
we  humbly  entreat  thee  to  succour  and  relieve  this
thv  servant,  who  labours  under  the  burden  of
wicked  thoughts.  L«t  thy  power  and  goodness
be  shown  m  healing  Ai»  disordered  mind.  Cleanse
the  thoughts  of  Aw  heart  by  the  inspiration  of  thy
Holy  Sprit  Staler  them  not  to  be  denied  by
any  profane  or  blasphemous  suggestions,  but  heal
the  soul  of  thy  servant,  by  enabling  him  to  stifle
and  suppress  all  such  thoughts  as  tend  to  rob  him
at  his  peace,  or  deprive  kim  of  the  comforts  of  re-
ligion. Enable  htm  to  be  of  an  equal  and  steady
temper,  to  be  mild  and  gentle  in  his  behaviour,
ana  to  keep  his  hopes  and  fears  within  due
bounds.  Make  him  sensible  of  the  wise  and
kind  reasons  of  these  afflictions ;  that,  if  they  are
duly  improved,  they  may  be  powerful  preserva-
tives of  his  soul  against  the  prevailing  sins  of  a
licentious  age:  may  lessen  his  inclinations  to  the
enjoyments  of  this  hfe-,  and  deaden  his  appetite  to
sensual  pleasure,  and  the  perishing  goods  of  this
world;  that  these  afflictions  may  dispose  him  to
compassionate  the  sufferings  of  others,  and  make
him  more  thoroughly  feel  his  own  infirmities,  and
the  want  of  divine  assistance.  Open  his  eyes,
that  he  may  see  and  know  the  wise  and  gracious
dispensations  of  thy  providence ;  and,  by  humbling


himself  under  them,  may  at  length  be  lifted  up
and  made  a  partaker  of  that  peace  and  joy  which
thou  bestowest  on  all  thy  faithful  servants.  Grant
this,  for  the  sake  of  Jesus  Christ,  our  only  Media-
tor and  Redeemer.

A  Prayer  for  One  who  is  afflicted  with  a  profane
Mistrust  of  Divine  Truths,  and  blasphemous
Thoughts.

[From  Mr.  KettleweU.]

O  most  gracious  God,  in  whose  hand  is  the
soul  of  every  living  creature;  protect  this  thy
servant,  we  numbly  and  earnestly  entreat  thee,
against  all  doubts  and  mistrusts  of  thy  truth,
against  all  irreligious  thoughts  and  suggestions.

Never  suffer  them,  O  Lord,  to  weaken  his
faith,  or  to  hinder  him  from  performing  his  duty.
Preserve  him  not  only  from  the  sin,  but  if  it  seem
good  to  thine  infinite  wisdom,  from  the  tempta-
tion and  the  sorrow,  which  may  attend  them.

But,  if  it  be  thy  blessed  will  to  continue  these
terrifying  thoughts  for  his  trial  and  humiliation,
Lord,  make  him  sensible  that  tjiey  will  not  be
imputed  to  him  as  sin,  if,  aa  soon  as  he  perceives
them,  he  rejects  them  with  horror  and  indigna-
tion.

During  this  trial,  let  him  learn  to  depend  upon
thee,  that,  as  often  as  these  profane  thoughts  arise
in  his  mind,  he  may  find  grace  to  overcome  them,
and  without  the  least  indulgence  or  delay  to  cast
them  out ;  and  that  he  may  learn  to  show  patience
under  them,  as  under  every  other  affliction  and
trial  of  thy  appointment,  trusting  to  thy  grace  to
assist  him,  and  to  thy  goodness  to  deliver  him;
through  Jesus  Christ  our  Saviour. Amen.

A  Prayer  for  One  under  the  dread  of  God?*
Wrath  and  everlasting  Damnation.

[From  Mr.  Lewis.]

6  almighty  God,  the  aid  of  all  that  need,  and
the  helper  of  all  that  flee  to  thee  for  succour,  ac-
cept, we  beseech  thee,  our  humble  supplications
for  this  thv  servant,  labouring  under  the  dismal
apprehensions  of  thy  wrath.

O  Lord,  enter  not  into  judgment  with  him ;
make  him  sensible  that,  though  the  wages  of  sin
are  death,  the  gift  of  God  is  eternal  life ;  that  thou
hatest  the  death  of  a  sinner,  and  art  not  willing
that  any  should  perish ;  that  thou  always  purush-
est  less  than  we  deserve,  and  in  the  midst  of  judg-
ment rememberest  mercy.  Revive  his  soul  with
a  sense  of  thy  love,  and  the  hopes  of  obtaining
thy  pardon,  and  the  joy  of  thy  salvation ;  that  he
may  be  raised  from  tins  dejection,  and  show  with
gladness  what  thou  hast  done  for  his  soul.  All
this  we  humbly  beg  for  Jesus  Christ's  sake.
Amen.

A  Prayer  for  a  Lunatic.
[FromMr.Jenks.]

O  Lord,  the  only  wise  God  from  whom  we
have  received  all  the  faculties  of  our  souk :  thou
art  holy  and  righteous  in  all  thy  dispensations,
though  the  reason  of  them  is  frequently  unknown
tons.  Dispel,  we  humbly  beseech  thee,  if  it  be
agreeable  to  thine  infinite  wisdom,  the  clouds  in
which  the  soul  of  thy  servant  is  now  involved ;
that  he  may  regain  his  understanding,  and  the


which  the  soul  of  thy  servant  is  now  involved ;
that  he  may  regain  his  understanding,  and  the
right  use  of  his  faculties.  Heal  his  disordered
rmnd :  settle  and  quiet  his  passions;  pacify  and
compose  his  imagination.


964


THE  CLERGYMAN'S  COMPANION


O  prosper  the  means  which  are  used  for  hit  re-
covery. Make  him  tractable  in  the  line  of  reme-
dies, and  willing  to  somply  with  the  advice  of  Aw
friend*.  But  if  no-means  can  effect  hit  cure,  let
him  possess  his  aoul  in  peace  and  composure,  and
in  every  interval  of  reason  address  his  prayer  to
thee :  that,  when  his  earthly  tabernacle  shall  be
dissolved,  he  may  rejoice  in  his  former  inability
to  pursue  the  pleasures  of  the  world,  and  be  pre-
sented unto  thee  pure  and  undefiled,  through  Je-
sus Christ  our  Lord. Amen,

A  Prayer  for  natural  Fools,  or  Madmen.
[From  Mr.  Kettlewell.]

O  almighty  and  most  merciful  Father,  pity,
we  entreat  thee,  this  thy  unhappy  creature,  who
knoWs  not  his  own  wants,  nor  how  to  ask  for  thy
mercies.  Compassionate,  O  Lord,  his  infirmities,
and  supply  his  necessities.  Let  thy  wisdom  pre-
vent those  evils  Which  he  cannot  fozesee,  or  wants
understanding  to  remove ;  but  especially  keeo  him
from  doing  any  thing  that  may  be  hurtful  either  to
himself  or  others.

Let  his  mind,  on  all  occasions,  be  quiet  and
peaceable ;  and  as  far  as  his  faculties  extend,  ex-
ercised in  piety  and  devout  meditations.  O  near
our  cry  when  we  call  upon  thee :  hear  us  for  him
who  is  not  able  to  pray  for  himself;  grant  him
thy  fatherly  care  at  present,  and  thy  peace  at  the
last ;  through  the  mediation  of  thy  son,  our  Sa-
viour Jesus  Christ Amen.

PROPER  PSALMS  FOR  A  SICK  PER-
SON AT  SEA. -
I.

1.  Sate  me,  O  God,  for  the  waters  are  come  in,
even  unto  my  soul.

3.  \  am  come  into  deep  waters,  so  that  the
floods  run  over  me. — Psalm  lxix.  1,  2.

3.  The  floods  are  risen,  O  Lord,  the  floods
have  lift-  up  their  voice;  the  floods  lift  up  their


4.  The  waves  of  the  sea  are  mighty,  and  rage
horribly :  but  yet  the  Lord,  who  dwelle|h  in  hea-
ven, is  mightier. — Psalm  xciit  4,  5.

5.  He  maketh  the  storm  to  cease,  so  that  the
waves  thereof  are  still.

6.  Wherefore  unto  thee,  O  Lord,  do  I  cry  in
my  trouble:  deliver  me  i  out  of  my  distress. —
Psalm  cvii.  98.

7.  Thou  shalt  show  us  wonderful  things  in  thy
righteousness,  O  God  of  our  salvation :  thou  that  art
the  hope  of  all  the  ends  of  the  earth,  and  of  them
thai  remain  in  the  broad  sea. — Psalm  Lev.  5.

8.  Through  thee  have  I  been  holden  up  ever
since  I  was  born ;  thou  art  he  that  took  me  out  of
my  mother's  womb ;  my  praise  shall  always  be  of
thee.— Psalm  lxxi.  5,  6.

9.  I  will  cry  unto  thee.  Thou  art  my  father,
my  God,  and  the  rock  of  my  salvation. — Psalm
lxxxix.  26.  .

10.  Withdraw  not  thou  thy  mercy  from  me,  O
Lord;  let  thy  loving-kindness  and  truth  always
.preserve  me.

11.  For  Innumerable  troubles  are  come  about
me :  my  sins  have  taken  such  hold  upon  me,  that
1  am  not  able  to  look  up;  yea,  they  are  more  in
number  than  the  hairs  oi  my  head,  and  my  heart
hath  failed  me.

12.-  O  Lord,  let  it  be  thy  pleasure  to  deliver  me,
make  haste,  O  Lord,  to  help  me.— Psalm  xl.  11,
12, 13.  :  ■ .


II.

1.  Out  of  the  deep  have  I  called  unto  thee,  O
Lord;  Lord,  hear  my  voice.

2.  O  let  thine  ears  consider  web\  the  voice  of  my
complaint — Psalm  exxx.  1,  2.

3.  For  I  am  helpless  and  poor,  and  my  heart  is
wounded  within  me. — Psalm  cix.  21.

4.  My  heart  is  disquieted  within  me,  and  the
fear  of  death  is  fallen  upon  me.

5.  Fcarfulness  and. trembling  are  come  upon
me,  and  an  horrible  dread  hath  overwhelmed  me.
—Psalm  lv.  4,  5.

6.  I  go  hence  like  the~*hadow  that  departeth,
and  am  driven  away  like  a  grasshopper. — Psalm
cix.  22.

7.  O  God,  thou  knowest  my  foolishness,  and
my  sins  are  not  hidden  from  thee.— Psalm  lxix.  5.

8.  Thou  hast  laid  me  in  the  lowest  pit ;  in  a
place  of  darkness,  and  in  the  deep.

9.  Thine  indignation  lieth  hard  upon  me,  and
thou  hast  vexed  me  with  aU  thy  storms. — Psalm
lxxxviil  5,  6. ;

10.  Thou  bremkest  me  with  a  tempest,  and  my
foarings  are  poured  out  like  waters.— Job  in.  94;
ix.  17.

1L  O  reject  me  not  utterly,  and  be  not  exceed-
ing Wroth  against  thy  servant. — Lament  v.  22.

12.  For  my  soul  is  full  of  trouble,  and  my  lift
draweth  nigh  unto  hell. — Psalm  lxxxviii.  2.

13.  I  am  brought  into  so  great  trouble  and  mi-
sery, that  1  go  mourning  all  the  day  long.

14.  For  my  loins  are  filled  with  a  sore  disease,
and  there  is  no  whole  part  in  my  body. — Psalm
xxxviii.  6,  7.

15.  My  wounds  stink  and  are  corrupt,  through
my  foolishness.— Psalm  xxxviii  5.

16.  Behold,  O  Lord,  1  am  in  distress;  my
bowels  are  troubled',  my  heart  is  turned  within
me,  for  I  have  grievously  transgressed.— Lament
i.20.

17.  O  remember  not  the  sins  and  offences  of
my  youth -but  according  to  thy  mercy  think  thou
upon  me,  O  Lord,  for  thy  goodness. — Fsakn  xxv.  6.

18.  Cast  me  not  away  in  the  time  of  age ;  for-
sake me  not,  when  my  strength  faileth  me. — Psalm
lxxi.  8.

19.  Take  thy  plague  away  from  me:  I  am  <
consumed  by  the  means  of  thy  heavy  hand.

20.  When  thou  with  rebukes  dost'  chasten
for  sin,  thou  makest  his  beauty  to  consume  away,
like  as  it  were  a  moth  fretting  a  garment:  every
man  therefore  is  but  vanity.

21.  Hear  my  prayer,  O  Lord,  and  with  thine
ears  consider  my  calling ;  hold  not  thy  peace  at  my
tears.

22.  For  I  am  a  stranger  with,  thee,  and  a  so-
journer, as  all  my  fathers  were.

23.  O  spare  me  a  little,  that  I  may  recover  my
strength,  liefore  I  go  hence,  and  be  no  more  seen.
—Psalm  xxxix.  11—13.

A  Prayer  for  a  sick  Seaman.

O  most  great  and  glorious  Lord,  the  "  salvation
of  all  that  dwell  on  the  earth,  and  of  them  that' re-
main in  the  broad  sea ;"  under  whose  powerful  pro-
tection we  are  alike'  secure  in  every  place,  and
without  whose  providence  over  us  we  can  no
where  be  in  safety  ;  look  down,  we  beseech  thee,
.upon  us,  thy  unworthy  servants,  who  are  called  to
"behold  thy  wonders  in  the  deep,"  and  to  peifoiui
our  several  duties  in  the  great  waters.


INVlSITtNG  THE  SICK.


""Thou  art  our  refuge  and  strength,  a  very  pre-
-  sent  help  in  trouble ;  and  therefore  we  fry  unto
thee  for  succour  in  alitor  necessities.  Extend
thy  accustomed  goodness  to  our  distressed  brothcc.
whom  thou  hasCbean  pleased  to  visit  with  the  rod
of  afliietion.  ♦ *  J  •

"  The  waves  j>i  death  encpmpass  him  about,
and  the  sorrows  of  hell  take  hojd  upon  him." ,

O  leave  him  not  to  .himself,  nor  let  hira  be  given
over  "  to  a  Sffirit  oi  slumber"  and  darkness :  tut
"open-  his  eyes,  that  fie  may  see'. the  wondrous
things  o#  tny'fapr,"  and,  the  necessity  of  a  speedy
and  sincere  repentance  ^  so  thatfrom  the  sickness
of  his  body,  he  may  derive  health  and  salivation  to'
his  soulj  which  is  the  mat  end.  of-all  thy  righte-
ous judgments,  and  ofall  Our  afflictions.

-lit  him  seriously  consider  and  reflect  within
himself  from  this  visitation.  "  what  a  dreadful
thing  it  is  to  rail  into  the  handrof  the  living  God;"
end  let  him  hence  leant,  if  it  shall  please  thee  to.
raise  him  up  again,  to  preserve  a  more  awful  sense
of  thy  divine  majesty  upon  his  spirit,  "  and  to  lire
more  soberly,  righteously,  and  piously,  in  this  pre-
sent world.*5

We  know,  O  Lord,  that  il  many  are  the  .ene-
mies of  peace,"  and  that  "  the  whole  world"  lieth
in  wickedness:"  bat  let  him  not  "  follow  a  multi-
task to  do.evti,"  nor  ^give  his  consent  to  tho  en-
ticement of  sinners ;"  but  being  perfectly  V  redeemed
from  all  vain  conversation*  and  renewed  in  the
spirit  of  his  mind,"  let  him.  "  walk  before,  thee  with"
a  {Jerfect  heart,"  and  spend  the  residue  of  his,  days'
in  thy  faith  and  fear.  ' . .

Or  if  thou  frurt  determined  otherwfse  concern;
Jngjiimv  be,  pleased  to  give  him  sufficient  grace.
,«nd  strength,  and  time,  to  "  make  his  calling- and
ejection  sure,  before  he  go  hence  and  be.  no  more
seen  f;  revive  his  drooping  spirits;  fortify  hls.hearjt,
and  as  he  decays  in  the  outer,  strengthen  frim  in
the  inner  man,  by  setting  before  him  the  .hopes  of
a,  blessed  immortality  "  as.  an  anchor  ofythe  aoitf,
both  sure  and  stead&4."r  Amen.

-  A  Prayer  Jot  6  *feAT  Sbldier  or  Seaman.
O  most  mighty  Lord,  the  fountain  of  health
and  life,  strength  and  courage,  the  aid  and  support
ofall  that  fly  unto  thee  for  succour,  with  whom  is
no  respect  of  .persons,  but  every  one  that  feareth
thee  (Whether  he  be  rich  or  poor,  learned  or  un-'
learned)  is  accepted  byjthee ;  we  beseech  thee  mer-
cifully to  look'  down  upon  our  brother,  who  is  now
fallen  under  the  red  ot  thy  displeasure: .

"We  know,  O  Lord,  that  all  thy  judgments  are
Jnincipally  intended  for  our  good  in  the  end,  "by
the'.refeitnationNofbour  lives  and  manners:  and
therefore  we  mosfhlfinbly  beseech  thec.-to  jet  thy
present  judgment  have  tnat  good  effect  upon  our
brother,  that  he  may  lead  the  rest  of  his  life  as  a
faithful  soldier  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  not  continue  to'
harden  his  heart  against  all  the  powerful  and  re-
peated instances  of  thy  mercies  and  judgments  to-
wards hhn.

Ifthou  hast  designed  this' sicknfesa  shall  termi-
nate in*  his  death,  O.be  pleased  to  fit  amTprepare
him  lor  it;  or  if  otherwise  in  mercy  thou  hast  de-
termined to  spare  -him,  O1  let  1rim  not  return  to
any  of  hisforpier  sinful  courses,  but  let  him  al-
ways" keep  in  mind  the  promise  which' he' mate  to
thee  in  baptism,  of  renouncing  the  world,  the  flesh,
and  the  devil;  said  which;  we  hope,-  he  now  again
heartily  renews,  in  this  his  day.  of  visitation .

We  know,  O  L*>rd,  that  many  temptations


will  unavoidably  Assault  him  in  the  state  of  life
wherein  fee  fir.  engaged,  and  therefore  we.  moat
humbly  beseech  thee  togive  him  such  a  portion  of
thy  blessed  Spirit,  as  may  enable  him  to  fight  with
as  much  resolution  and  courage  against  his  spiri-
tual enemies,  as  the;  nature  ofnis  post  obliges  hira
to-do,.upon  just  occasions,  against  his  temporals
ever  remembering,  that  the  greatest  of  conquests
is  that  which  is  made  upon  ourselves ;  and  that  no
victory  is*  so  truly  honourablef  as  that  winch  is
obtained  vover  our  vicious  inclinations.

Wherefore  give  him  rfracey  we  beseech  thee,  O
L«ord,  "  to  abhor,  that  which,  is  evil,  and  -to  cleave
to  that  which  is  good."  Let  him  rengionsry  avoid
allbjaspbemy  and  ^rofeneness,  all  arunfcenriesB|
riot,- and  lasciviousness ;  and  let  him  carefully  fol-
low; th«  rule  our  Saviour1  hath  set  him,  "  ofdoina
violence  to  no  man,  accusing  no  man  falsely,  and
being  content  with  his  own  wages ;"  so  that;  hav-
ing "  put  on  the  whole  armour  of  God/ he  may  be
able  to  stand  against  the  wiles  of  the  devil;  anii
whenever  thou  shalt  be  pleased  to  put  an  end  to,
his  warfare,  (either  now  or  hereafter,)  he*  may
cheerfully  resign  his  soul  into  thy  hands,  in  these,
comfortable,  words  of  the  apostle;  "I  have  fought


a  good  fight.  I  have  finished  my  course,  I  have
kept  the  faith ;  henceforth  there  is  laid  upibr  me
a  crown  of  righteousness,  which  the  Lord,  the
righteous  Judge,  shall  give  unto  all  those  that  love
and  fear  him,  and  put  their  rrosj.in-hia^n^rcy4.'*
Amen:  .'^~r:~  i  '* ~-^


rfffwv

nenbule.] ;'*  *
(,&a$  ^ndfrjmly  m<


t>4


■S* ........

test,'"  mni'  Tnakest


A  Prayer  to  be  used  I
.Distemper  <  "

[By]

tXLoRD  Gen  Almigft
and  ail  my  powers  o?  1
duced«and  areaupported  \$\
and  rnakest  alive;  thou
whole,"

•  '•  I  own  and  reverence,  thine  hand  in  my  present
affliction.  I  acknowledge  that  thou  art  righteous
in  alT that  befalls  me ;  for  I  have  sinned;  and  tbou
chastehest  me  less  than  tny  iniquities  deserve,  In
punishment  tbou  showest  mercy,  continuest  to  .me
many  comforts,*  prolengest  my  opportunities  of  re-
flection and  amendment,  and-givest  hope  oiHhat',
pardon  which  1  so  mudh  want,  and  at  this  time
earnestly  entreat/  *  ._  .

•  I  desire  in  this  poor  condition  of  my  health,  to
search  and  try  my  ways,  and  turn  unto  thee,  0
Lo*4,  by(  deep  humility  J  sincere  repentance^  and
faith  in  the  great  Redeemer:  and  may  the  fruit  at
this'and  every  affliction  be  to  take  away  sin,  and
make  my  heart  better.

0  God,  ittt  be  th£  merciful  will,  direct  me  to*
and  prosper,  some  means  Tor  the  removal  of  my
disorder/  that  r-  may  yet  bo  capable'  of  glorifying,
thee  in  my  station,  and,  by  farther1  endeavours  for
thy  service  upon  earth,  be  fitter  for  immortality.

Support  me,  gracious  Lord,  that  my  soul  may
not  be  quite  cast  doWn,  and  too-  much  disquieted
within  me.  Assist  rac  to  cherish  penitent?,  believ-
ing, serious  thoughts  and  affections.  Grant  me
such  resignation  to  thy  will,  sucti  patience  and
meekness  towards  men,  as  my  Divine  Master  re-
quireth,  and  as  he  himself  manifested  while  he
was  a  sufferer  on  earth.  Forgive  all  the  harsh-
ness and  sinfulness ,  of  my  temper,  "and  keep  h
from  increasing  upon  me.  May  1  leatn  from  whjit
I  now  feel  to  pity  «dlwho  are'  sick,  in  pain,  ox


*6S


THE  CLERGYMAN'S  COMPANION,  &c


utheiwise  afflicted,  and  do  all  in  my  power  to  as-
sist mad  relieve  them.

If  by  this  affliction  thou  intendest  to  bring  me
uown  to  the  grave,  prepare  me,  by  thy  grace,  for
toy  removal  hence,  ana  entrance  on  the  unseen
eternal  atate:  and  may  all  the  suffering*  of  the
present  life  work  out  for  me  a  for  more  exceeding
and  eternal  weight  of  gkwry.

I  am  thankful  for  any  degree  of  eaae  and  con*
fort  which  I  have  this  day  enjoyed.  Grant  me,
this  nighty  each  refreshing  rest  that  I  may  be
better  able  to  discharge  the  dates  and  shear  the
burden  of  another  day,  if  thou  art  pleased  to  in-
dulge me  with  it.  If  my  eyes  are  kept  waking,
may  my  meditation!  be  comfortable  and  useful  to
me.  -  -

Pity  my  weakness,  merciful  and  heavenly  Fa-
ther, and  nsar-nry  imperfect  petitions,  through
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who  was  once  a  man  of
sovrow,  and  is  still  touched  with  the  feeling  of  our
infirmities;  to  whom,  as  our  merciful  High  Priest
and  powerful  Intercessor,  be  glory  for  evermore.
Amen.

A  Proper  to  be  wed  an  the  Death  of  a  Friend.
CByMr.Merrfck,']
0  Almighty  God,  who  dost  not  .willingly
grieve  the  children  of  ment  hut  in  thy  .visitations
lemembereet  mercy,  teach  me  by  thy  grace  to  bear
the  loss  of  that  deaf  person  whom  thou  hast  taken
from  me  with  patience  and  resignation,  and  to
make  a  right  use  of  the  affliction  which  thy  fa-
therly hand  hath  laid  upon  me.  '  Thou.hast  given,
and  thou  hast  taken  away :  blessed  be  thy  hojy
name.  Make  me  thankful,  O  Lord,  for  the  com-
fon>  and  blessings  which  i-stiH  enjoy ;  and  sancti-
ty to  my  soul  all  the  sufferings,  which  in  the
course  of  this  mortal  tife  thou  «halt  appoint  for
me.  Let  the  -death  of  friends  and  relations  help,
to  keep  me  always  .mindful  of  ray  own  mortality.
And  grants  that  by  thy  grace  I  may  -here  apply
my  heart  to' wisdom,  ana  may  hereafter  by.  thy
merey  be  received  into  that  everlasting  kingdom,
where  all  tears  shall  be  wiped  from  afi  feces,  and
morrow  andisghmg  shall  flee' away.  Hear  me,
a  merciful  Father,  for  the  sake  of  thy  Son  Jesus
Chnat. Amen*  _

A  Prafier  to  be  need  by  a  Perton  troubled  in

Almighty  God,  who' beholdest  with  compas-
eaonand  mercy  the  weaknesses  and  frailties  of  us
thy  sinful  creatures ;  look^down  on  me,  I  beseech
thee,  and  deliver  me,  if  it  be  thy  blessed  will,  from
the  distress  of  mind  under  which  I  labour;
.  @tsen£theji  my  judgment,  and  inform  my  under-
standing, that  I  may  rightly  know  my  duty ;  and
grant  that  \  may  act  on  all  occasions,  and  in  every
circumstance  of  life,  in  the  manner  most  acceptable
to  thee.  Pardon  my  secret  sins  and  mfirmitaes,
and  preserve  me  from  all  wilful  neglects  and  of-
fences. If  thou  seest  it  consistent  with  thy  glory,
and  with  the  everlasting  'welfare  of  my  soul,  nil
me  with  that  fervency  ot  affection  towards  thee,
and  with  that  measure  of  spiritual  comfort  and
assurance,  whidfr  may  preserve  my-mind  m  a  frame
of  cheerfulness  and  composure.  But  of  trouble
and  bitterness  of  mind  be  more  expedient  for  me,
continue  to  me  both  this- and  all  -other  affliction*
which  thou  seest  moat  conducive  to  my  future
happtoeas,  and  grant  (hat  I  may  bear  them  with


patience  and  resignation.  Let  thine  Holy  Spirit '
direct  and  support  me  under  every  trial,,  ana  en-
able me  so  to  walk  in  dry  firith  and  fear,  that  I
may  at  last  be  received  into  thy  heavenly  king-
dom, through  the  merits  and  mediation  of  thy  Son
Jesus  Christ,  our  blessed  Lord  and  Saviour.
Amen.  '

A  Prayer  to  be  used  by  an  Old  Pereon.

O  gracious  Lord,-mY  maker  and  my  preatmw,
I  give  thee  thanks  for  the  long  continuance  which
thou  hast  granted  me  in  this  world,  in  order  that
I  may  be  the  better  ptepaied  for  another.  Enable
me  by  thy  grace  to  make  a  right  use  of -the  tune
afforded  me,  and  gist  me  a  true  and  deep  repent-
ance of  the  sins  which  I  have  committed.  Bup-
Kt  me  by  thy  help  under  the  infirmities  of  age.
p  me  from  covetousiiess>  and  Artfulness,  and
from  all  unreasonable  fears;  and  cares.  Give  me
that  degree  of  ease  eOkd  health  which  thou  seest
most  convenient  for  me ;  wean  my  affections  and
desires  from  the  things  of  this  Jife,  and  keep  ma
continually  prepared  for  death;  through  Jesus
Christ. Amen.

A  Prayer  for  a  Penon  condemned  to  die.  .
[From  Dr.  Inet]

O  most  just  and  holy  Lord  God,  who  hrjngeat
to  light  the  hidden  things  of  darkness,  and  by  thy
just  and  wise  providence  dost  bring  sin  to  sham*
and  punishment ;  disappointing  the  hopes  of  wick-
ed men ;  visiting  their  -sins  upon  them  in  this*  pre-
sent life,  that  thou  mayest  deter  others  from  the
evil  of  their  ways,  and  save  their  souls  in  the  day
of  judgment ;  O  Lord,  in  mercy  look  down  upon
tins  thy  servant,  who  now  is  before  thee  to  confess
thy  justice  in  making  Attn  a-sad  example-  to  others.
He  with  sorrow  and  shame  confesseth  it  would  be
just  with  thee,  should  death  eternal  be  the  wages
of  his  sins,  and  everlasting-sorrow  the  recompense
of  hi*  iniquity.  He  -has,  we  confess,  O  LordL
despised  thy  mercy,  and  abused  thy  goodness,  aha
has  therefore  no  reason  to  expect  any-other  than
to  be  made  an  everlasting  sacrifice  to  thy  justice.
When  thou  hastt  by  the  ministry  of  thy  word,
and  the  interposition  of  thy  providence^  called
him  to  repentance,  he  has  slighted  thine  admoni-
tions. O,  how  just  therefore  would  it  be  now  in
thee  to  ^disregard  his  cry,  in  this  day  of  trouble,
when  distress  and  anguish  are  come  Upon  Aim/
He  confesseth  that  he  hath  hardened  his  heart,
notwithstanding  all  thy  importunities  'to  him  to
repent  and  five-,  that  he  has,  still  gone  on  from
one  wickedness  to  another,  eagerly  repeating  Che
works  of  darkness,  and  even  hating  to  be  re-
formed ;  that  he  has  notoriously  broken  his  bap-
tismal vows,  and  given  encouragement  to  others  to
blaspheme  our  holy  fidth,and  that  on  these  accounts
he  has  nothing  to  expect  but  that  thou  uhoujdst
deal  with  him  according  to  fcts-sjus,  and  reward
him  according  W  tbe  multitude  of  hi*  offences.
But  thoUr-O  God,  hast  -been  pleased  to  declare,
that  with  thee  is  mercy  and  plenteous  redemption ;
that  thou  desirest  not  the  death  of  a  sinner,  but
rather  that  he  should  repent  and  live.  Thou  hast
so  loved  the  world,  that  thou  gavest  thy  only-
begotten  Son,  that  .whosoever  believeth  in  him
should  not  perish,  but  have  everlasting  life.  O,
let  not  him  whom  we  are  now  commending  to  thy
mercy,  for  ever  perish  and  be  lost  Have  corn-
passion  upon  a  miserable  sinner,  who  owns  he  de-
serves eternally  to  die]  and  let  frith  find  mercy  in


MINISTRATION  OP  PUBLIC  BAPTISM  GF  INFANTS.


987


Ait  dlitHMWL  Pardon,  we'  earnestly  entreat  thee.
hi*  wilful  and  hie  heedless  forties,  Ai*  errors,  and
hi»  erring  and  notorious  sins;  particularly  that
for  which  he  is  now  to  die.  O  Lord,  thou  God
of  mercy,  who  art  abundant  in  goodness,  nave
pity  on  the  work  of  thjne  own  hands.  Bury  At*
sips  in  his  grave,  and,  however  they  may  rise  up
in  this  world  to  disgrace  Attn,  let  them  never  rise
up  in  the  next  to  condemn  him:  and  whatever  he
suffers  here,  let  him  hereafter  he  in  the  number  of
those  whose  unrighteousness  is  forgiven,  and
whose  sin  is  covered.  However  men,  in  the  exe-
cution of  justice,  and  to  deter  others  from  being,
guilty of  the- like  wickedness,  may  kill  his  body;
let  neither,  his  body  nor  his  soul  Be  destroyed  In
hell,-  bat  be  delivered  from  eternal  condemnation,
for  t^e  sake  of  Jesus  Christ,  who  died  to  save  sin*
nets. Amen.

A  Prayer  ef  Preparation  for  Death*

O  Almighty  God,  Maker  and  Judge  of  ail
mercy  upon  me,  thy  weak  and  sinful
ind  if  by  thy  most  wise  and


creature-;  and m .
appointment  theliour  of  death  be  tf]


wards  me.  ^nable-me  to  meet  it  with  ft  mind  fully
prepared  tor  it,  and  to  paw  through  this  great  and
awful  trial  in  the  manner  most  profitable  for  me.
O  let  me  not  leave  any  thing  undone  which  may
help  to  make  my  departure  safe- and  happy,  or  to
qualify  me  for  the  highest  degree  of  thy  favour
that  i  am  capable  of  attaining.  Pardon  the  sins  -
which  I  have  committed  against  thee  bv  thought,
word,  and  deed,  and  all  my  neglects  of  duty.  Far-;
don  the  sins  which  I  have  committed  against  my
neighbour ;  and  if  others  have  wronged  or  on$nded
me,  incline  my  heart  freely  and  fully  to  forgive
them.  Cleanse  my  soul  from  all  its  corruptions,
and  transform  it  into 'the  likeness  of  thy  Son  Je-
sus Christ;  that  I  may  behold  thy  free  in  glory,  -
and  be  made  partaker  of  thy  heavenly  kingdom.
And,  O  merciroJ  Father,  give  me  that  supply  of
spiritual  comfort,  which  tb/m  seest  needful  for  me  ;
in  my  present  condition :  and  grant  that,  when
my  change  comes,  I  may  die  with  a  quiet  eon-
science,  with  a  well-grounded  assurance  of  thy
favour,  and  a  joyful  nope  of  a  blessed  iesurreev
tion ;  through  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ
Amen.


THE  MINISTRATION


OF  PUBLIC  BAPTISM  OF  INFANTS.


TO  BE  USED  IN  CHURCHES.


Tas  people  ate  to  be  admonished,  that  it  is  most  con-
venient that  baptism  should  not  be  administeted  but
unoa&rndays  and  ethef  holy-days,  when  the  most  num-
ber of  persons  come  together ;  si  weH  for  that  the  con-
gregation there  present,  may  testify  the  receiving  of
them  that  be  newly  baptised  into  the  number  of  Christ's
' as  also  -became,  in  the  baptism  «f  infants.


every  man  present -be  put  in  remembrancer  his  own
'  profession  made  to  God  in  ni»  baptism.  For  which
cause  also  1t  is  expedient  that  baptism  be  mintetered
in  the  vulgar  tongue.  Nevertheless  (if  necessity  so  re-
quire) children  may  be  baptised  on  any  other  day. •

And  note,  That  there  shall  be  for  every  male  child  lo
he  baptised,  two  godfathers  and  one  godmother;  and
for  every  Amale,  one  godfather  and  two  godmothers.

When  there  are  children  to  be  baptised,-  the  parent
shall  give,  knowledge  thereof- over  night,  or  In  the
awning,  before  the  beginning  of  morning  prayer,  to  the
Carats.  And  then  the  godfathers  and  godmothers,  and
the  people  with  the  children,  must  be  ready  at  the  font,
either  immediately  after  the  last  lesson  at  morning;
prayer,  or  else  immediately  after  the  last  lesson  at even -
urg  prayer,  as  the  Qnrate  by  his  discretion  shall  appoint.
Aadtbe  Priest  coming  to  the  font  (which  is  then  to  be
•fled  with  purs  watery  and  standing  there,  shall  say, ■

Q.  Hath  this. child  been. already  baptized,
otaa?  \  •

If  they  answer  AV>,  then  shall  the  Priest  proceed -as

^  follows:

DfiafcLY  bejared,  forasmuch  as  all  men  are  con-


ceived and  bom  in-  sin,  and  that  our  Saviour
Christ  saitti,  none  can  enter  irito.the  kingdom  of
God,,  except  babe  regenerated  and  born  anew  of
water  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost-;  I  beseech  yon  to
call  upon  God  the  Father,  through  ovt  Lord  Je-
sus Christ,  that  of  his  tounteoua  mercy  he  wffl
grant  this  child  that  thing  whkh  by  nature  he.
.cannot  hive/thatA«  may  m  baptised  with  water
and  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  received  into  Christ's
holy  church, 'andfte  made  a  lively  member  of  the


Then  shall  the  Priest  say,
Let  us  pray.

Almighty  and  everlasting  God,  who  of  thy
great  mercy  didst  save  Noah  and  his  family  in  the
ark  from  perishing  by  water,  and  also  didst  safely
lead  the  children  of  Israel  thy  people  through  the
Reef  Sea,  figuring  thereby  thy  holy  baptism :  and
by  the  baptism  of  thv  well-beloved  Son  Jesus
Christ  in  the  river  Jordan,  didst  sanctify  Water  to
the  mystical  washing  away  of  sin;  we  beseech
thee  for  thine  infinite  mercies,  that  thou  wilt  mer-
cifully look  upon  this  child ;  wash  him  and  sane-
tiff  him  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  that  he,  being  de-
livered from  thy  wrath,  may  be  received  into  the


MINiaTRATIOK  OP  PUBLIC  BAPTISM  OP  INFANTS.


ark  of -Christ's  church ;  and  being  steadfast  far
frith,  joyful  through  hope,  and  rooted  in  charity,
may  ao  pass  the  waves  of  this  troublesome  world,
that  finally  he  may  come  to  the  land  of  everlasting
hfe,  there  to  reign  with  thee"  World  without  end,
through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord. Amen,  v

'  Almighty  and  immortal  God,  the  aid  of  pR
that  need,  the  helper  of  all  that  flee  to  thee  for  ,
succour,  the  life  of  them  that  believe,  and  the  re-
surrection of  the  dead ;  we  call  upon  thee  for  this
'  infant,  that  he,  coming  to  thy  holy  baptism,  may
receive  remission  of  his  sins  by  spiritual  regenera-
tion. Receive  him,  O  Lord,  as  thou  hast  promised
by  thy  wetl-beloved  Son,  Baying,  Ask,  and  ye
anall  have ;  seek,  and  ye  shall  find ;  knock  and'  it
shall  be  opened  Unto  you.  So  give  now  unlo  us
thai  ask;  let  us  that  seek, -find ;  open  the  gate
unto  us  that  knock ;  that  this  infant  may  enjoy
the  everlasting  benediction  of  thy  heavenly  wash-
ing, and  may  come  to  the  eternal  kingdom  which
thou  hast  promised  by  Christ  our  Lord.  J^men.

' Theo  thall  the  Priest  stand  up,  aad  shall  say,

Bear  the  words  of  the  Gospel  written  by  St.  Mark,
in  the  tenth  chapter,  at  the  thirteenth  verse :

""  They  brought  young  children  to  Christ,  that
he  should  touch  them ; .  and  his  disciples  rebuked
those  that  brought  them.  But  when  Jesus  saw  it,
he  was  much  displeased,  and  said  unto  them,  Suf-
fer the  little  children  to  come  unto  me,  .and  forbid,
them  not;  for  of  such  is  the  kingdom  of  God.'
Verily  I  say  unto  you,  Whosoever  shall  not  re-
ceive the  kingdom  of  God  as  a  Kttle  child,  he  shall
not  enter  therein.  And  he  -took  them  up  in  his
arms,  put  his  hands  Upon  than,  and  blessed  them."

After  thsGosptr  is  read,  the  Minister  shall  make  this
brief  exhortation  upon  the  words  of  the  Gospel.

Beloved,  ye  hear  in  this  Gospel  the  v^ords  of
our  Saviour  Christ,  that  he  commanded  the  chil-
dren to  be  brought  unto  him  \  how  he  blamed
those  that  would  nave  kept  them  from  him ;  how
he  exhorted  all  men  to  follow  their  innocency.  Ye
perceive  how  by -his  outward  gesture,  and  deed  he
declared  his  good  will  towards  them;  for  he  em-  •
braced  them  in  his  arms,  he  hid  his  hands  upon
them,  and  blessed  them.  Doubt  ye  not,  therefore,
put  earnestly  believe,  that  he  will  likewise  favour- ,
ably  receive  this  present  infant ;  that  he  will  em- '
brace  him  with  the  arms  of  his  mercy ;  that  he
will  give  unto  htm  the  blessing  of  eternal  life,  and
make  him.  partaker  of  bis  everlasting  kingdom.
Where/ore  we  being  thus- persuaded,  of  the.  good
will  of  our  heavenly  Father  towards  this  infant,
declared  by  his  Son  Jesus  Christ,  and  nothing
doubting  hut  that  he  favourably  alloweth  this  cha-
ritable work  of  ours,  in  oringing  this  infant  to  his
holy  baptism,  let  us  faithfully  and  devoutly  give
thanks  unto  him,  and  say, —

,  Almighty  and  everlasting  God,  heavenlyFa-
ther,  we  give  thee  humble  thanks  that  thou  hast
vouchsafed  to  callus  tp  the  knowledge  of  thy  grace
and  faith  in  thee :  increase  this  knowledge,  and
confirm  this  faith  in  us  evermore.  Give  thy  Holy
Spirit  to  this  infant,  that  he  may  be  born  again,
and  be  made  an  heir  of  everlasting' salvation;
through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who  ftveth  and
Beigneth  with  thee  and  the  Holy  Spirit,  now  and
forever. Amen.


Than  shan  the  Priest  ssaakunto  the  goasVhars  east

godntothers  in  thiswise:  •

Dearly  beloved,  ye  have  brought  this  chUd  .
here  to  be  baptized ;  ye  have  prayed  that  our  Lord
Jesus  Christ  woujd  vouchsafe  to*  receive  Aim,  to
release  him  of  his  sins,  to  sanctify*  Am  with  the
Holy  Ghost,  to  give  hint  the  kingdom  of  heaven,
and  everlasting  life.. ♦  You  have  heard  also,  that
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ'  hath  promised  also  in  his
Gospel,  to  grant  all 'these  things  that  ye- have
prayed  fof ;  which  promise  he  1st  his  part  will
iriost  surely  ke*p  and-  perform.  Wherefore  after
this  promise  made  by  Christ,  this  infant  must  also
faithfully,  for  his  pa{t,-  promise  by  you  that  are
his  sureties,  (until  <ke  come  of  -age  to  take  it  Upon
himself)  that  he  will  renounce  the  devil  and  all
his  works,  and  constantly  believe  God's  holy  word,
and  obediently  keep  hp  commandments. , '

I  demand  therefore,  •

Dost  thou,  in  the  name  of  this  child,  renounce
the  devil  and  «U  his  works,  the  vain  pomp  and
glory  ef  the  .world,  with  all  covetous  desires  of  the
same,  and  the  carnal  dseirea  of  the  flesh,  so  thaj
thou  wilt  not  follow  nor  be  led  by  them  1

Anew.  I  renounce  them  all

Minister.

Dost  thou  behove  in  God,  the  Father  Almighty,
Maker  of  heaven  and  earth  1

And  in  Jesus  Christ  his  only-begotten  Son,  our
Lord  1  And  that  he  was  conceived  by  the  Holy
Ghost :  born  of  the  Virgin  Mary ;  that  he  suffer-
ed under  Pontius  Pilate,  was  crucified,  dead,  and
buried ;  that  he  went  down  into  hell,  and  also  did
rise  again  the  third  day;  that  he  ascended  into
heaven,  and  sitteth  at  trie  righrhand  of  Go4  the
Father  Almighty;  and  from  thence  shall  come
again,  at  the  end  of  the  World,  to  judge  the  quick
and  the  dead! ,  .

And  dostnhou  believe  in  the  Holy  Ghost  ^  the
holy  Catholic  church ;  the  communion -of  saints;
the  remission  of  sins ;  the  resurrection  of  the  flesh;
and  everlasting  life  after  death  1

Ansy>. All  this  I  steadfastjy  behove.  ,

Minister.

Wilt  thou  then  he  baptized  m  this  faith  T
Ansm.  This  is  my  desire.  ' v  -t

,  t  Mialster.,

Wilt  thou  then  obediently  keep  God's  holy
will  and  commandments,  and  walk  in. the  same
alLthe<iaysofthylifel ■ . •  T
Answ. I  will.

Ittea  the  Priest  shall  say,  (

0  MEirciFUL  (jpd,  grant  that  the  old  Adam  in
this  Quid  may  be  ao  buried,  that  the  new  men
may  be  raised  up  in  him.  Amen.
'  Grant  that  ajl  carnal  affections  may  die  in  him±
and  .that  ulf  things  belonging  to- the,  Spirit  may-
Eve  and  grow  in  kynr  Amen.  '■  .

Grant  that  he  may  have  power  and  strength  to
have,  victory,  and  to  triumph  tgaiiist  the  devil,  the
world,  and  the  flesh. \Ameni

Grant  'that  whosoever  is  here  dedicated  to  thee
by  our  office  .and  ministry,  may  alsd  be  endued
with  heavenly  virtues,  and  everlastingly  rewarded,
through  thy  mercy,  O  blessedLordtTod, who  dost
live  and  govern  all  things,  world  without  end.
Amen,  «. ,


MlOTSTRATlON  OF  PfllVATE  BAPTISM  OP  CHILDREN,,


969


AiAnovr?  and  everlasting,  God,  'whose  inoet
dearly  before*  Sod  J««b  Christ,  for  the  forgive-
otw  of  cm*  sins,  jftl  shed!  out  of  bis  most  precious
aide  both  water  and  blood,  and  gave  conyfcarut
inent  to  his  disciples,  that  they  should  go  and
teach  all  nations,  and  baptise  them  iirtho  name  of
the  Father,  and  of  the  Soft,  and  of  the,  Holy
Ghost;  regard,  we  beseech  thee,  tlie  supplications
of  thy  congregation  5  sanctify  this  water  to  (he
mystical  washing  away  0f  sin ;  and  grant  that  this
child  now  Jo  be  baptized  therein,  mhj  receive  the
fulness  of  thy  grace,  and  ever  remain  in"  the.  num-
ber of  thy'  faithful  and  elect  .children ;  through  Je-
au&  Christ  our  LonK Amen.

Then  the  Priest  shall  taks  the  Child  into  his  hands,  and
;  shall  say  to  the  godfathers  and  godmothers,

Name  this  child. "

And  then  naming  it  after 'them  (if  they  shall  certify
him  that- the  child  may  well  endure  it,)  be  shall  dip
It  in  the  water  discreetly  and  warily,  saying,

N.,  I  baptize  thee  in  the  name'  of  the  Father,
and  of  the  Son,  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost Amen.

Bdt  If  they  certify  that  the  Child  is  weak,  it  shall  suf-
fice to  poor  water  upon  it,  saying  the  aforesaid  words,  >

W.;  I  baptize  thee  in  the-  name  of  the  Father,
and  ofthe  Son,  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost Amen.

Then  shall  the  Priest  say,  '
,  We  recetvq  this  child  into  the  congregation  of
Christ's  flock*  and  do  sign  Ainrwith  the  sign  of
the  cross,  fat  token  that  hereafter  he  fchall  not  be
ashamed  to'  confess  the  faith  of  Chrjst  crucified,
and  manfully  to  fight  under  his  banneir,  against
sjn,  the  world,  and  the  devil,  and  to  continue
Christ's  faithful  soldier  and  servantunto  his  life's
end. Amen.

Then  shall  the  Priest  say, .

Srewo  now,  dearly  beloved  brethren,  that  this
child  if  regenerate  and  grafted  into  the  body  of
Christ's  church,  let  us  give  thanks  unto  Almighty
God  for  these  benefits,  and  with  one  accord  flake
our  prayers  onto  him,  that  Jni*  child  may  lead  the
net  of  his  life  according  to  this  beginning.


church,  he  may  be  on  inheritbT  of  thine  evertast-
ing  kingdom,  through  Christ  our  LortL  >  Amen.

Tketh  al  standing  up,  the  Priest  shall  say  to  'the  god-
fa,  there  and  godmothers  this  exhortation  following:

Forasmuch  as  this  child  hath  promised  by
you  his  sureties  to  renounce  the  devil  and  afl  his,
Works,,  to  believe  tin  God,  and  to  serve  him ;  ye
must  remember. that  it  is  your  parte  and  duties  to
see  that  this  infant  be  taught,  so  soon  as  he  shall
be  able  to  learn,  what  a  solemn  vows,  promise/and
profession,  he  hath  here  made- by  you.  '•  And  that
he  may  know  these  things  the  better,  ye  shall  call
upon  Aim  to  hear  sermons  5  and  chiefly  yo  shall
provide  that  he  may  learn  the  Creed,  tie  Lord's
Prayer,  and  the  Ten  Commandments;  in  the^ul-
gar  tongue,  and  all  other  things  which  a  Christian
ought  to  know  and  believe  to  hk>  soul's  health;
and  that  this  child  m&j  be  virtuously  brought  up
to  lead  a  godly  and  Christian  life;  renumbering
always,  that  baptism  doth  represent  unto  us  our
profession ;  which-  is,  to  follow  the.  {sample  of
our  Saviour  Christ  and  to  be  made  like  unto  him:
that  as  he  died,,  and  rose  again,  for  us;  so  should
we,  who  are  baptised,  die  from  sin,  arid  rise  again
unto  righteousness,  continually  mortifying  all  our
evil  and  corrupt  affections,  and  daily  proceeding
in  afl  virtue  and  godliness  of  living.
Then  shall  "he  add,  and  say,

Ye  are  to  take  care  that  thi*  child  be  brought
to  the  bishop,  to  be  confirmed  by  him,  so  soon  as
he  can.  say  the  Creed,  the  Lord's  Prayer,  and  the
Ten  Commandments  In  the  vulgar  tongue,  and
be  further  instructed  in  the  Church  Catechism  set
forth  for  that  purpose.

It  is  certain,  by  God's-Word,  that  children  which  are
baptised,  dying  before  they  commit  actual  sin,  are  on.
doubtedly  saved.

To  take  away,  all  scrapie  concerning  the  ass  of  the
sign  of  the  cross  in  baptism ;  the  true  explication  there-
of; and  the  just  reasons  for  the  retaining  of  it,  may  be
seen  in  tfce  XXXth  Canon,  first  published  in  the  year
MDCTV.

N  •


Then  shall  be  said,
Our  Father  which  art  in  heaven ;  Hallowed  be
thy  name.  Thy  kingdom  comer.  Thy  will  be
done  in  earth,  as  it  is  in  ^heaven  Give  us  this
day  oar  da%  bread.  Andibrgive.ua  our  tres-
passes, aa  we  forgive  them  that  trespass  against
us.  And  lead  us  not  into  temptation ;  buttteliver'
ne  from  eviL Amen. .

H»n  shall  the  Priest  say,
We  yield  thee  hearty  thanks,  moat  merciful
Father,  that  it  hath  pleased  thee  to  regenerate
this  infant  with  thy  Holy  Spirit,  to  recevVe  him
fat  thine  own  child  by  adoption,  and  to  incorpo-
rate him  into  thy  holy  church.  And  we  humbly
beseech  thee  to  grant,  that  he,  being  dead  unto
sin,  and  living  unto  righteousness,  ana  heing  bu-
ried with  Christ  in  his  death,  may  errjeify  the  old
man,  and  utterly  abolish  the  whole  body  of  sin :
and  that  as  he  is  made  partaker  of  the  death  of
thy  $on,  he  may  also  be  partaker  of  his  resurrec-
tion ;  00  that  finally,  with  the  residue  of  thy  holy


*  Bete  the  Priest  shall  make  a  cross  upon  the  Child's


TEE  SffNISrrKATTQN

OF

PRIVATE  BAPTISM  OF  CHILDBEN


IN  HOUSES.

Tax  Curate  of  the  parish  shall  often  admonish  the  peo-
ple, that  they  defer  not  the  baptism  of  then*  children
longer  than  the  first  or  second  Sunday  next  after  their
birth,  or  other  holy -day  falling  between,  unless  upon  a
great  and  reasonable  cause,  to  be  approved  b/  the  Cu-
rat*-*

And  also  they  shall  warn  them,  that,  without  like
great  cause  and  necessity,  they  procure  not  their  chil-
dren to  be  baptised  at  home  in  their  bouses.  But  whan
need  shall  compel  them  so  to  de,  then  baptism  shall  be
administered  on  this  fashion  :

First ;  let  the  Minister  of  the  parish  (or,  in  has  ab-
any  other  lawful  Minister  that  ©


^,,  __, can  be- procured,)

with  them  that  are  present,  call  upon  God,  and  say  the
Lord's  Prayer,  and  so  many  of  the  collects  appointed  to
be  said  before  in  the  form  of  Public  Baptism,  as  the
time  and  present  exigence  will  suffer.  And  then,  the
Child  being  named. -by  some  one  that  is  present,  the
"  shall  pour  water  upon  it,  saying  these  words;
23*


VIO  MINISTRATION  OF  PRIVATE  BAPTISM  OF  CHHJDUH.


NnM>anti»ptheem  the  name  of  the  Father,
■lUhoCtheBoi^axadof^heHolyGhapt.;  jlmes!


. ■Hejmthenke
ftGod,aayint;

:  yield  thee  hearty  thonki,  most  merciful
r,4heft  k  hath  isensed  thee  ttrngenelate  **«*
se^mf  with  thy  Holy  Spirit,  to  receive  Am  far
Dune  own  dufi  by  adoption,  and  to  incorporate
bamtnte  thy  holy  church.  And  we  humbly  be-
eaecbtlfcee  to  mint  that  H^k  now  mads  par*
' r  of  the  death  of  thy  Son,  so  a*  may  be  abo


ofbiaw«aiTectkm;-ai^that£i^?wimtheieai.
doe  of  thy  sainta.Jte  may  inherit  thine*


kingdom,  through  the  tame,  thy  Son,  Jens  Ghost
ourlUffd. Amom.

And  let  them  not  tout*  bet  that  tbt  Child,  ao  hea-
tieed,  i»  lawnilly  and  sufleieatly  beptieed,  ejtd.oiight.aat
to  be  baptized  again.  Yet,  nevertbeleei,  if  the  Child,
which  m  after  this  sort'  baptised,  do  afterward*  live,  it  to
expedient  that  it  be  brought  inte  the  choreb,  to*  the  la-
tent thai,  if  the  MiDistert>ribe  same  pariah  did  hjmaelf
baptise  that  Child,  the  eoagregatioa  may  be  oaninad  of
the  tme  form  of  baptiam  by  bun  prirately  before  ueed.


*>  '.


A  VIEW


OF  THE


EVIDENCES  OF  CHRISTIANITY.


IN  THREE  RAETS.


TO  THE  HONOURABLE  AN©  EIGHT  REVEREND  JAMJS8  YORE;  JDlD.
~ •  LORD  BISHOP  OF  EL*. v  .^

Mr  Loan*-* WkesitJive  years  ago,  unimportant  station  in  the  University  of  Cambridge  awaited
four  Lsrdshife  diepeeal,  yaw  were  fieaeed  so  of  er  it  to  me.  The  circumstance*  under  which  tina
efer  woo  made,  demand  m  pubHc  acknowledgment.  I  bad  never  ween  your  Lordship;  Ipessetsed
no  connexion  which  could  possiUyreeornmend  me to  your  favour;  I  waslcnown  to  you,  only  by  my
endeavours,  in  common  with  many  other*,  to  discharge  my  duty  asu  tutor  in  the  University;  end
by  come  very  imperfect,  but  certainly  welLihtended,and,  do  you  thought*  useful  publications  since*
it  an  age  by  no  means  wanting  in  examples  of  honourukie^renage,  although  thie  deserves  not
ts  be  menljoneaUn  respect  of  theobfect  of  your  LordsMfs  choice,  ft  te  inferior  to  none  in- Vte  purity
and  disinterestedness  of  the  motives  which  suggested  iU

How  the  following  work  may  be  received,  I  pretend  not  teforeteU.  My  first  prayer  concerning
UiOythat  it  may  eh  good  to  any:  nty  second  hope,that  it  mayaeeiet,whatU  hath  alwayo  been  my  earn-
est trie*  to  promott,  the  religious  part  of  en  academical  education. .  Jf  in  this  latter  view  it  might
oeem,  in  any  degree,  to  excuse  your  Lordship's  judgment  of  its  author,  IshaU  be  frraqfied  by  the
rejlecti&n,  that,  to  a  hindneeo  flowing  from  public  principles,  Thave  made  the  beet  public  return  in
my  power.  ,  v

J»  tike  mean  tuna,  and  in  every  event,  I  rejoice  in  the^opporUinitif  hare  afforded  use  -of  testify.
imgihe  sense  J  entertain  of  your  Lordshifs  conduct)  and  of  a  notice  which  I  regavd  as-  the  meat
flattering  distinction  of  my  life.  I  am,  My  Loan,  utit£  sentiments  of  gratitude  and  respect,
your  Lordship's  faithful  and  snoot  oblige*? servant,  . WILLIAM.  PALEY*


Preparatory  considerations.,


.  I DBKM  it  wmecesaary  to  prove  that  mankind
stoodm*ieed<rfarevelattoi^WausB  I  have  met
with  no  serious  penen  who  thinks  that,  even  under
the  Christian  revelation,  we  have  too  much  light,
or  anj  degree  of  asmirauta  which  k  superfluous.
I  deem,  moraore*,  that,  in  judging  ef  Christianity,
it  may  pe  remembered!  that  the.  question  lie*  be-
tween thia  religion  and  none :  for,  if  the  Christian
religion  be  not  credibte^noone,  with  whom  w*
have  to  do,  will  aupport  the  pretensions  -of  any
other. -

Suppose,  then,  the  world  we  live  m  to>have  had
a  Creator;  suppose  it  to  appeal,  from  the  predomi-
nant aim  and  tendency  ei  the  provision*  andt»n-
trivanoea  observable  in  the  universe,  that  the  Deity,
when  he  formed  it,  consulted  for' the  hannmeaa  of
auppaae  the  cbapoakion


which  dictated  this- counsel  to  continue;  anppoeea
a  part  of  the  creation  to  have  received  faculties
from  their  Jtfaker.  Vy  which  they  are  capable  ojf
rendering  a  moral  obedience  to  ma  wfll,  and  of  vo-
luntarily pursuing  any  end  for  which  ha  has  de-
signed them ;  suppose  the  Creator  to  intend  for
these,  hia  rational  and  accountable  agents,  a  second
state  of  existence,  in  which  their  situation  will  be
regulated  by  their  -behaviour  in  the  nart  state,  by
wjjch  supposition  (and  by  no,  other)  the  objection
to  the  divine  government  in  *not  putting  a  difler-
ence  between  the  good  and  the  bad,  and  the  wop*
sistency  of  thia  confusion  with  the  care  and  bene-
volence discoverable  -in  the  works  of  the  Deity,  is
done  away ;  suppose  it  to-be  of  the- utmost  import*,
anoe  to  the  subjects  ef  this  dispensation  .to  know
what  U intended  fe*  them i  that  w^aippose  the


979


EVIDENCES  OP  CHRISTIANITY.


knowledge  of  it  to  be  highly  conducive  to  U*e  hap-,
pines*  of  the  species,  a  purpose  which  so  many .
wovision*  of  nature  are  calculated  to  promote :
Suppose,  nevertheless,  .almost  the'  whole  race,
either  by  the  imperfection  of  their  faculties,  the
misfortune  of  their  situation,  or  by  the  loss  of  book
prior  revelation,  to  want  this  knowledge,  and  not.
to  be  likely,  without  the  aid  of  a  new  revelation,  to
attain  it :  Under  these  circumstances,  is-  it  impro-
bable that  a  revelation  should  be  made  1  is  it  incredi-
ble that  God  shoukj  interpose  for  .such  a  purpose!
Suppose  him,  todeaga  for  mankind  a  fUture  state ;
is  it  unlikely  that  he  should  acquaint  him  With  ifrl

Now  in  what  way  can  a  revelation  be  made,  but
by  miracles  ?  In  none  which  we  are  able  to  con-
ceive. Consequently,'  in  whatever  degree  it  is
probable,  or  not  very  improbable,  that  a  revelation
should  be  communicatea  to  mankind  at  all ;  in  the
same  degree  is  it  probable,  o-f  not*  very  impro-
bable, that  miracles  should  be  wrought.  There-
lore,  when  miracles,  are  related  to  hare  been
wrought  in,  the  promulgating  of  a  revelation  mani-
festly wanted,  and.'  if  true,  of  inestimable  value,
the  improbability  which  aTwes'from  the  miraculous
nature  of  the  things  ^related,  is  not  greater  than-
the  original  improbability  that  such  a  revelation
should.be  imparted  by  (Sod.  •

x  I  wish  it,  however,  to  be-  «orrectiy  •  understood,
in  what  manner,  and  to  what  extent,-  this  argu-
ment is  alleged.  We.  do  not  assume  the  attributes
of  the  Deitf/or  the  existence  of  a  future  state,  in'
order  to  prove  the  reality  of  miracles.  That  re-
ality always  must  be  proved  by  evidence  We
assert  only,  that  in  miraWes  adduced  ip.  support  of
revelation,  there  is  not  any  such  antecedent  im-
probability as  no  testimony  can  •  surmount.  And
for  thoTpurpose  of  maintaining  this  assertion,  we
contend,  that  the  incrembUityof  irm%des>  related
to  have  bam  wnught  in  attestation  of  s>  message
from  God,  conveying  intelligence  of  a-  futdre  state  of
rewards  and  punishments,  and  teaching  mankind
how  to  prepare  themselves  for  that  slate,  is  not  jn
itself  greater  than  the  event,  call  it.  either  probable
or  improhaMe,-of  the .  two  following  proposition*
being  true :  namely.&st,  that  a  future  state  of  ex-
istence should  be  destined  By  God  for  his  human,
creation ;  and,  secondly;  that,  being  so  destined,  he
should  acquaint  them  with  it  It  is  not  necessary
for  our  purpose,  that  these  propositions  be  capable
of  proof,  of  even  that,  by  arguments  drawn  from
the  light  of  nature,  they  can?  be  made  out  to  be
probable ;  it  is  enough  that  we  are  able  to.say  con-
cerning theni,  that  they  are  not  so  violently  im-
probable, so  contradictory  to  what  we"  already  be-
lieve of  the  divine  power  and  character,  that  either "
the  propositions  themselves,  or  facts  strictly  con-
nected with  the  propositions  (and  therefore  no
further  improbable 'than  they  are  improbable,)
ought  to*  b§  rejected  at  first  sight,  and  to  be  reject -
eslby  whatever  strength  or  complication  of -evi-
dence they  be  attested.

This  is  the  prejudication-  we  would  resist.  For
to  this'* length  aces  a  modern  objection  to  miracles
gu,  viz."  that  no  human  testimony  can  in  any  case
render  them  credible.  I  think  the  reflection  above
stasedf  that,  if  there  be  a  revelatkm,  there  rhust  be
miracles,  and  that  Under  the  circumstances  In
Which  Ihc  human  species  aire  placed,  a  revel&jtien
is  not  improbable^  or  not  improbable  in  any  great
degree^  to  bo  a  farTanswer  t§  the  whole  objection.

out  since  it  is  air-objection  which  stands  in  the
very  threshold  of  our  argument,  and  tf  admitted,


is  a  bar  to  every  proof^and  to  jail  future  i
upon  the  subject,  it  may  be  necessary,  before  we
proceed  further,  to  examine  the  principle  upon
which  it  professes  to  t>c  founded ;  which  principle
is  concisely  this,  That  it  is  contrary  to  experience1
that  a  miracle  should  be.  true,  but  not  contrary  to'
experience  that  testimony  should  be  false.
,  Now  there-  appears  a  small  ambiguity  in  the
term  "  experience,"  anil  in  the  phrases,  "  contrary
to  experience,"  or  "  contradicting  experience,
which  it  may  be  necessary,  to  remove  in  the  not
place.  Strictly  speaking,  the  narrative  of  a  fact  is
then  only  contrary  to  experience,  when  the  feci  is
related  to  have  existed  at  a  tiqje  and  place,  a*
which  time -and  place  we  being  presents-did  not
perceive  it  to  exist :  as  if  it  should  be  asserted,  that
in  a  particular  room,  and  at  a  particular  hour  of  a
certain  day,  a.  nun  was'  raised  from  the  dead,  in
which  room,  and  at  the  time  specified,  we  being
present  and  .looking  on,  perceived  no  -such  event
to  have  taken  place.  Here  the  assertion  is  con-
trary to  experience  property  so^aued:  and  this  is
a  contrariety  which  no  evidence  Tan  surmount.  U
matters' nothing,  whether  the  feet  bo  of  a  miracu-
lous nature  or  riot  But  although  this  be  the  ex-
perience, ant)  the  contrariety,  which  Archbishop
Tillotson  alleged  in  th«  quotation  with,  which.
Mr.  Hume  opens*- his  >  Essay,  it  is  certainty  .not
that  experience,  nor  that  contrariety,  which  Mr.
Hume  himself  intended  to  object  Arid^  short  of
this,  I  know  no  inU'UigiMe  signification  which  can
bo  affixed  to  the  term  u  contrary  to  experience^
but  one,  via.  that  of  not  having  ourselves  -expe*
riencesYany  thing  similar  to  the  thing  related,  at
such  things  not  being  generally-  experienced  by
.others. '  I  say  " n6t generally :  Fpr  to  state  con-
cerranjf;  the  feet  in  question,  that  no  such  tiring
was  ever  experienced,  or  that  -s^ieersatexparienoa
is  against  it,  is  to  assume  the  auibjeet  of  the*  con-
troversy.

Now  the  improbability  which  arises  from  the
want  (for  this  properly  is  a  want,  not  a  contradic-
tion) of  experience,  is  only  equal  to  the  probability
there  is,  that,  if  the  thing  were  true)  we  should
experience  things  similar  to  it,  or  that  such  things
would  be  generally  experienced.  '^Suppose  it. then
to  be  true  that  miracles  were  wrought  on  the  first
p^onmlgation  of  Christianity,  when  nothing*  but
miracles  could  decide  its  authority,  is  it  certain
that  such  miracles  would  be  repeated  so  often,  arid
in  so  many  places,  as  to  become  objects  of  general
experience  1  Is  it  a  probability  approaching  to
certainty  1  is  it  a  probability  of  any  great  .strength
or  force  1  is  it  such  as  no  evidence  can  encounter  f
And  yet  this  probability  is  the  exact  converse,  and
therefore  the  exact  measure,  of  the  improbability
which  arises  from  the  want  of  experience,  and
which  Mr.  Hume  represents  as  invincible  by  hu^
man*  testimony.  -1  ' ".'""*

It  is  not  like  alleging  a  new  law  of  nature,  or  a
new  experiment  in  natural  philosophy ;  because;
when  these  are  related,  it  is  expected 'that,  under
the*  same  circumstanefc^  the  same  effect  will  fol-
low universally ;  ano\ih  proportion  as  this  expect-
ation is  justly  entertained,  the  want  of  a"  corre-
sponding experience  negatives  the.  history.  '  But
to'expect  concerning  a'  miracle-,  that  it  should  suc-
ceed tfpon  a  repetition,  U  to  expect  that  which
would  make  it  cease  to  be*rnifncfe,  which  is  coA-
•  trary  to  its  nature  as  such,  ano!  woufd  totally  de-
stroy thfcuse  and  purpose  for  which  it  was  wrought
'  The  force  of  experience  as  an  objection  to  mi-


EVIDENCES  OP  CHRISTIANITY.


873


rades<  OB  founded  in  the  presumption,  either  that
that  tic  course  of  nature  is  invariable,  or  that,  if
it  be  ever  varied,  variations  will  be  frequent  and
general.  Has  the  necessity  of  this  alternative
Been  demonstrated  1  Permit  as  to  call  the  course
of  nature  the  agency  of  an  intelligent  Being;  and
is  there  any  good  reason  for  judging  this  state  of
the  case  to  be  probable  1  Ought  we  not  rather  to
expect  Jhat  such  a  Being,  on  occasions  of  peculiar
importance,  may  interrunt  the  order  which  he  had
appointed:  yet,  that  such  occasions  should  return
seldom;  that  these  interruptions  consequently
should  be  confined  to  the  experience  of  a  few;
that  the  want  of  it,  therefore,  in  many,  should  be
matter  neither  of  surprise  nor  objection.

But  as  a  continuation  of  the  argument  from  ex-
perience, it  is  said  that,  when  we  advance  accounts
of  miracles,  we  assign  effects  without  causes,  or
we  attribute  effects  to  causes  inadequate  to  the
purpose,  or  to  causes,  of  the  operation  of  which  we
nave  no  experience.  Of  what  causes,  we  may
ask,  and  of  what  effects  does  the  objection  speak  1
If  it  be  answered  that,  when  we  ascribe  the  cure
of  the  palsy  to  a  touch,  of  blindness  to  the  anoint-
ing of  the  eyes  with  day,  or  the  raising  of  the
dead  to  a  word,  we  lay  ourselves  open  to  this  im-
putation; we  reply,  that  we  ascribe  no  such  effects
to  such  causes.  We  peioeive  no  virtue  or  energy
in  these  things  move  than  in  other  things  of  the
same  kind.  They  are  merely  signs  to  connect
the  miracle  with  its  end.  The  effect  we  ascribe
simply  to  the  volition  of  the  Deity;  of  whose  ex-
istence and  power,  not  to  say  of  whose  presence
and  agency,  we  have  previous  and  independent
proof  We  have,  therefore,  all  we  seek  for  in  the
works  of  rational  agents, — a  sufficient  power  and
an  adequate  motive.  In  a  word,  once  believe  that
there  is  a  God,  and  miracles  are  not  incredible.

Mr.  Hume  states  the  case  of  miracles  to  be  a
contest  of  opposite  improbabilities,  that  is  to  say,  a
question  whether  it  be  more  improbable  that  the
miracle  should  be  true,  or  the  testimony  false :  and
this  1  think  a  fair  account  of  the  controversy.  But
herein  I  remark  a  want  of  argumentative  justice,
that,  in  describing  the  improbability  of  miracles,
he  suppresses  all  those  circumstances  of  extenua-
tion, wnieh  result  from  our  knowledge  of  the  exist-
ence, power,  and  disposition,  of  the  Deity ;  his
concern  in  the  creation,  the  end  answered  by  the
miracle,  the  importance  of  that  end,  and  its  sub-
serviency to  the  plan  pursued  in  the  work  of
nature.  As  Mr.  Jtiume  has  represented  the  ques-
tion, miracles  are  alike  incredible  to  him  who  is
P*btousJt  assured  of  the  constant  agency  of  a
Divine  Being,  and  to  him  who  believes  that  no
each  Being  exists  in  the  universe.  They  are
equally  incredible,  whether  related  to  have  been
wrought  upon  occasions  the  most  deserving,  and
for  purposes  the  most  beneficial,  or  for  no  assign-
able end  whatever,  or  for  an  end  confessedly  tri-
fling or  pernicious.  This  surety  cannot  be  a  cor-
rect statement  In  adjusting  also  the  other  side
of  the  balance,  the  strength  and  weight  of  testi-
mony, this  author  has  provided  ah  answer  to
every  possible  accumulation  of  historical  proof  by
telling  us,  that  we  are  not  obliged  to  explain  bow
the  story  of  the  evidence  arose.  Now  I  think  that
we  are  obliged :  not,  perhaps,  to  show  by  positive
accounts  how  it  did,  but  by  a  probable  hypothesis
how  it  might  so  happen.  The  existence  of  the
testimony  w  a  phenomenon :  the  truth  of  the  fact
solves  the  phenomenon.  If  we  reject  tins  sotu-
3M


tion,  we  ought  to  have  some  other  to  rest  in :  and
none,  even  by  our  adversaries,  can  be  admitted,
which  is  not  inconsistent  with  the  principles  that
regulate  human  affaire  and  human  conduct  at
present,  or  which  makes  men  then  to  have  been  a
different  kind  of  beings  from  what  they  are  now.

But  the  short  consideration  which,  independ-
ently of  every  other,  convinces  me  that  there  is  no
solid  foundation  in  Mr.  Hume's  conclusion,  is  the
following.  When  a  theorem  is  proposed  to  a
mathematician,  the  first  thing  he  does  with  it  is
to  try  it  upon  a  simple  case,  and  if  it  produce  a
fidse  result,  he  is  sure  that  there  must  be  some
mistake  in  the  demonstration.  Now,  to  proceed
in  this  way  with  what  may  be  called  Mr.  Hume's
theorem.  If  twelve  men,  whose  probity  and  (rood
sense  I  had  long  known,  should  seriously  and
circumstantially  relate  to  me  an  account  of  a  mi-
racle wrought  before  their  eyes,  and  in  which  it
was  impossible  that  they  should  be  deceived,*  if
the  governor  of  the  country,  hearing  a  rumour  of
this  account,  should  call  these  men  into  his  pre-
sence, and  offer  them  a  short  proposal,  either  to
confess  the  imposture,  or  submit  to  be  tied  up  to
a  gibbet;  if  they  should  refuse  with  one  voice  to
acknowledge  that  there  existed  any  falsehood  or
imposture  in  the  case ;  if  this  threat  were  commu-
nicated to  them  separately,  yet  with  no  different
effect ;  if  it  was  at  last  executed ;  if  I  myself  saw
them,  one  after  another,  consenting  to  be  racked,
burnt,  or  strangled,  rather  than  give  up  the  truth
of  their  account;  still,  if  Mr.  Hume's  rule  be  my
guide,  I  am  not  to  believe  them.  Now  I  under-
take to  say  that  there  exists  not  a  sceptic  in  the
world  who  would  not  believe  them,  or  who  would
defend  such  incredulity.

Instances  of  spurious  piracies  supported  by
strong  and  apparent  testimony,  undoubtedly  de-
mand examination  ;  Mr.  Hume  has  endeavoured
to  fortify  bis  argument  by  some  examples  of  thai
kind.  I  hope  in  a  proper  place  to  show  that  none
of  them  reach  the  strength  or  circumstances  of  the
Christian  evidence.  In  .these  however,  consists
the  weight  of  his  objection :  in  the  principle  itself,
1  am  persuaded,  there  is  none.


PARTL

OF  THE  DIRECT  HISTORICAL  EVIDENCE  OF  CHRIS-
TIANITY, AND  WHEREIN  IT  IS  DISTINGUISHED
FROM  THE  EVIDENCE  ALLEGED  FOR  OTHER  MI-
RACLES.

The  two  propositions  which  I  shall  endeavour
to  establish  are  these :

I.  That  there  is  satisfactory  evidence  that
many,  professing  to  be  original  witnesses  of  the
Christian  Miracles,  passed  their  lives  in  labours,
dangers,  and  sufferings,  voluntarily  undergone  in
attestation  of  the  accounts  which  they  delivered,
and  solely  in  consequence  of  their  belief  of  those
accounts-;  and  that  they  also  submitted,  from  the
same  motives,  to  new  rules  of  conduct

II.  That  there  is  not  satisfactory  evidence,
that  persons  professing  to  be  original  witnesses  of
other  miracles,  in  their  nature  as  certain  as  these
are,  have  ever  acted  in  the  same  manner,  in  at-
testation of  the  accounts  wbicfc  they  d^veied,  and


S74


EVIDENCES  OF  CHRISTIANITY.


properly  in  consequence  of  their  belief  of  those
account*

The  first  of  them  proposition*,  as  it  forms  the
argument*  will  stand  at  the  head  of  the  following
rune  chapters.


CHAPTER  I.

There  is  satisfactory  evidence  that  many,  pro-
Jessing  to  be  original  witnesses  of  the  Chris-
tian miracles,  passed  their  lives  in  labours,  dan-
gers, and  sufferings,  voluntarily  undergone
in  attestation  of  the  accounts  which  they  de-
livered, and  solely  in  consequence  of  their  be-
lief qf  those  accounts  $  and  that  they  also  sub-
mUtea\from  the  same  motives,  to  new  rules  of
conduct.  •

To  rapport  this  proposition,  two  points  are  ne-
cessary to  be  made  out:  first,  that  the  Founder  of
the  institution,  his  associates  and  immediate  fol-
lowers, acted  the  part  which  the  proposition  im-
putes to  them :  secondly,  that  they  did  so  in  attest  -
ation  of  the  miraculous  history  recorded  in  our
Scriptures,  and  solely  in  consequence  of  their  be-
lief of  the  truth  of  this  history.

Before  we  produce  any  particular  testimony  to
the  activity  and  sufferings  which  compose  the  sub-
ject of  our  first  assertion,  it  will  be  proper  to  con-
sider the  degree  of  probability  which  the  assertion
derives  from  the  nature  of  the  ease,  that  is,  by  in-
ference* from  those  parts  of  the  case  which,  in
point  of  net,  are  on  all  hands  acknowledged.

First,  then,  the  Christian  religion  exists,  and
therefore  by  some  means  or  other  was  established.
Now  it  either  owes  the  principle  of  its  establish-
ment, i.  e.  its  first  publication,  to  the  activity  of  the
Person  who  was  the  founder  of  the  institution,  and
of  those  who  were  joined  with  him  in  the  under-
taking, or  we  are/driven  upon  the  strange  supposi-
tion, thai,  although  they  might  lie  by,  others  would
take  it  up;  although  they  were  quiet  and  silent,
other  persons  busied  themselves  in  the  success
and  propagation  of  their  story.  This  is  perfectly
increaible.  To  me  it  appears  little  less  than  cer-
tain, that,  if  the  first  announcing  of  the  religion
by  the  Founder  had  not  been  followed  up  by  the
seal  and  industry  of  his  immediate  disciples,  the
attempt  must  have  expired  in  its  birth.  Then  as
to  the  kind  and  degree  of  exertion  which  was  em-
ployed, and  the  mode  of  life  to  which  these  persons
submitted,  we  reasonably  suppose  it  to  be  like
that  which  we  observe  in  all  others  who  volunta-
rily become  missionaries  of  a  new  faith.  Fre-
quent, earnest,  and  laborious  preaching,  constant-
ly conversing  with  religious  persons  upon  religion,
a  sequestration  from  the  common  pleasures,  en-
gagements, and  varieties  of  life,  and  an  addic-
tion to  one  serious  object,  compose  the  habits  of
such  men.  I  do  not  say  that  this  mode  of  life  is
without  enjoyment,  but  I  say  that  the  enjoyment
springs  from  sincerity.  With  a  consciousness  at
toe  bottom,  of  hoUowneas  and  falsehood,  the  fatigue
and  restraint  would  become  insupportable.  I  am
apt  to  believe  that  very  few  hypocrites  engage  in
thaw  undertakings ;  or,  however;  persist  in  them
long.  Ordinarily  speaking,  nothing  can  overcome
the  indolence  of  mankind,  the  love  which  is  natural
to  most  tempera  of  cheerful  society  and  cheerful


scenes,  or  the  desire,  which  is  common  to  all,  of
personal  ease  and  freedom,  but  conviction.

Secondly,  it  is  aho  highly  probable,  from  the
nature  of  the  case,  that  the  propagation  of  the
new  religion  was  attended  with  difficulty  and  dan-
ger. As  addressed  to  the  Jews,  it  was  a  system
advene  not  only  to  their  habitual  opinions,  but  to
those  opinions,  upon  which  their  hopes,  their  par-
tialities, their  pride,  their  consolation,  was  founded.
This  people,  with  or  without  reason,  had  worked
themselves  into  a  persuasion,  that  some  signal  and
greatly  advantageous  change  was  to  be  effected  in
the  condition  of  their  country,  by  the  agency  of  a
long-promised  messenger  from  heaven.  •  The  ru-
lers of  the  Jews,  their  leading  sect,  their  priesthood,
had  been  the  authors  of  this  persuasion  to  the
common  people.  So  that  it  was  not  merely  the
conjecture  of  theoretical  divines,  or  the  secret  ex-
pectation of  a  few  recluse  devotees',  but  it  was  be-
come the  popular  hope  and  passion;  and  like  all
popular  opinions,  undoubting,  and  impatient  of
contradiction.  They  clung  to  this  hope  under
every  misfortune  of  their  country,  and  with  more
tenacity  as  their  dangers  or  calamities  increased.
To  find,  therefore,  that  expectations  so  gratifying
were  to  be  worse  than  disappointed ;  that  they
were  to  end  in  the  diffusion  of  a  mild  unambitious
religion,  which,  instead  of  victories  and  triumphs,
instead  of  exalting  their  nation  and  institution
above  the  rest  of  the  world,  was  to  advance  those
whom  they  despised  to  an  equality  with  them-
selves, in  those  very  points  of  comparison  in  which
they  most  valued  their  own  distinction,  could  be
no  very  pleasing  discovery  to  a  Jewish  mind  ;  nor
could  the  messengers  of  such  intelligence  expect
to  be  well  received  or  easily  credited.  The  doc-
trine was  equally  harsh  and  noveL  The  extend-
ing of  the  kingdom  of  God  to  those  who  did  not
conform  to  the  law  of  Moses,  was  a  notion  that
had  never  before  entered  into  the  thoughts  of  a
Jew.

The  character  of  the  new  institution  was,  in
other  respects  also,  ungrateful  to  Jewish  habits
and  principles.  Their  own  religion  was  in  a  high
degree  technical.  Even  the  enlightened  Jew  placed
a  great  deal  of  stress  upon  the  ceremonies  of  his
law,  saw  in  them  a  great  deal  of  virtue  and  effi-
cacy ;  the  gross  and  vulgar  had  scarcely  any  thing
else ;  and  the  hypocritical  and  ostentatious  mag-
nified them  above  measure,  as  being  the  instru-
ments of  their  own  reputation  and  influence.
The  Christian  scheme,  without  formally  repeal-
ing the  Levitical  code,  lowered  its  estimation  ex-
tremely. In  -the  place  of  strictness  and  zeal  in
performing  the  observances  which  that  code  pre-
scribed, or  which  tradition  had  added  to  it,  the
new  sect  preached  up  faith,  well-regulated  affec-
tion^ inward  purity,  and  moral  rectitude  of  dis-
position, as  the  true  ground,  on  the  part  of  the
worshipper,  of  merit  and  acceptance  with  God.
This,  however  rational  it  may  appear,  or  recom-
mending to  us  at  present,  did  not  by  any  means
facilitate  the  plan  then.  On  the  contrary,  to  dis-
parage those  qualities  which  the  highest  charac-
ters in  the  country  valued  themselves  most  upon|


*  "  Percreboerat  orients  toto  vetut  et  constans  opinio,
esse  in  fatia,  uteo  tempore  Judca  profecti  Tenun  poti-
rentur."— Sueton  Vespasian,  cap.  4— 8.

"  Pluribui  persuasio  inerat,  antiquis  saoerdotom  li-
teris  continen,  eo  ipso  tempore  fore,  ut  valesceret  orient,
profectique  Jades  rerum  potirentur."— Tacit.  Histor.
fit.  v.  cap.  9— 13.


EVIDENCES  OP  CHRISTIANITY


975


was  ft  row  way  of  making  powerful  enemies.  As
if  the  frustration  of  the  national  hope  was  not
enough,  the  long-esteemed  merit  of  ritual  zeal  and
punctuality  was  to  be  decried,  and  that  by  Jews
preaching  to  Jews.

The  ruling  party  at  Jerusalem  had  just  before
crucified  the  Founder  of  the  religion.  That  is  a
nut  which  will  not  be  disputed.  They,  therefore,
who  stood  forth  to  preach  the  religion,  must  ne-
cessarily reproach  these  rulers  with  an  execution,
which  they  could  not  but  represent  as  an  unjust
and  cruel  murder.  This  would  not  render  their.
office  more  easy,  or  their  situation  more  safe.

With  regard  to  the  interference  of  the  Roman
government  which  was  then  established  in  Judea,
I  should  not  expect,  that,  despising  as  it  did  the
religion  of  the  country,  it  would,  it  left  to  itself,
animadvert,  ekher  with  much  vigilance  or  much
severity,  upon  the  schisms  and  controversies
which  arose  within  it.  Yet  there  was  that  in
Christianity  which  might  easily  afford  a  handle
of  accusation  with  a  jealous  government  The
Christians  avowed  an  unqualified  obedience  to  a
new  master.  They  avowed  .also  that  he  was  the
person  who  had  been  foretold  to  the  Jews  under
the  suspected  title  of  King.  The  spiritual  nature
of  this  kingdom,  the  consistency  of  this  obedience
with  civil  subjection,  were  distinctions  too  refined
to  be  entertained  by  a  Roman  president,  who
viewed  the  business  at -a  great  distance,  or  through
the  medium  of  very  hostile  representations.  Our
histories  accordingly  inform  us,  that  this  was  the
turn  which  the  enemies  of  Jesus  gave  to  his  cha-
racter and  pretensions  in  their  remonstrances  with
Pontius  Pilate.  And  Justin  Martyr,  about  a  hun-
dred years  afterwards,  complains  that  the  same
mistake  prevailed  in  his  time :  "  Ye,  having  heard
that  we  are  waiting  for  a  kingdom,  suppose,  with-
out distinguishing,  that  we  mean  a  human  king-
dom, when  in  truth  we  speak  of  that^  which  is
with  God."*  And  it  was  undoubtedly  a  natural
source  of  calumny  and  misconstruction.

The  preachers  of  Christianity  had,  therefore,  to
contend  with  prejudice  backed  by  power.  They
had  to  come  forward  to  a  disappointed  people,  to
a  priesthood  possessing  a  considerable  share  of
municipal  authority,  and  actuated  by  strong  mo-
tives oi  opposition  and  resentment;  and  they  had
to  do  this  under  a  foreign  government,  to  whose
favour  they  made  no  pretensions,  and  which  was
constantly  surrounded  by  their  enemies.  The
well-known,  because  the  experienced  fate  of  re-
formers, whenever  the  reformation  subverts  some
reigning  opinion,  and  does  not  proceed  upon  a
change  that  has  already  taken  place  in  the  sen-
timents of  a  country,  will  not  allow,  much  less
lead  us  to  suppose,  that  the  first  propagators  of
Christianity  at  Jerusalem  and  in  Judea,  under  the
difficulties  and  the  enemies  they  had  to  contend
with,  and  entirely  destitute  as  they  were  of  force,
authority,  or  protection,  could  execute  their  mis-
sion with  personal  ease  and  safety.

Let  us  next  inquire,  what  might  reasonably  be
expected  by  the  preachers  of  Christianity  when
they  turned  themselves  to  the  heathen  public.
Now  the  first  thing  that  strikes  us  is,  that  the  re-
ligion they  carried  with  them  was  exclusive.  It
denied  without  reserve  the  truth  of  every  article
of  heathen  mythology,  the  existence  of  every  ob-


*  Ap.  Ima.  p.  16.  Ed.  Thirl.


ject  of  their  worship.  It  accepted  no  compromise;
it  admitted  no  comprehension.  It  must  prevail,
if  it  prevailed  at  all,  by  the  overthrow  of  every
statue,  altar,  and  temple,  in  the  wor]&  It  will
not  easily  be  credited,  that  a  design,  so  bold  as
this  was,  could  in  any  age  be  attempted  to  be  car*
ried  into  execution  with  impunity.  *

For  it  ought  to  be  considered,  that  this  was  not
setting  forth,,  or  magnifying  the  character  and
worship  of  some  new  competitor  for  a  place  in
the  Pantheon,  whose  pretensions  might  be  dis-
cussed or  asserted  without  questioning  the  reality
of  any  others ;  it  was  pronouncing  all  other  gods
to  be  false,  and  all  other  worship  vain.  From  the
facility  with  which  the  polytheism  of  ancient  na-
tions admitted  new  objects  of  worship  into  the
number  of  their  acknowledged  divinities,  or  the
patience  with  which  they  might  entertain  propo-
sals of  this  kind,  we  can -argue  nothing  as  to  their
toleration  of  a  system,  or  of  the  publishers  and
active  propagators  of  a  system,  which  swept  awaj
the  very  foundation  of  the  existing  establishment,
The  one  was  nothing  more  than  what  it  would
be,  in  popish  countries,  to  add  a  saint  to  the  calen-
dar; the  other  was  to  abolish  and  tread  under
foot  the  calendar  itself.

Secondly,  it  ought  also  to  be  considered,  that
this  was  not  the  case  of  philosophers  propounding
in  their  books,  or  in  their  schools,  doubts  concern-
ing the  truth  of  the  popular  creed,  or  even  avow-
ing their  disbelief  of  it  These  philosophers  did
not  go  about  from  place  to  place  to  collect  prose-
lytes from  amongst  the  common  people;  to  form
in  the  heart  of  the  country  societies  professing
their  tenets;  to  provide  for  the  order)  instruction,
and  permanency  of  these  societies ;  nor  did  they
enjoin  their  followers  to  withdraw  themselves  from
the  public  worship  of  the  temples,  or  refuse  a  com-
pliance with  rites  instituted  by  the  laws  •  These
things  are  what  the  Christians  did,  and  what  the
philosophers  did  not ;  and  in  these  consisted  the
activity  and  danger  of  the  enterprise.

Thirdly,  it  ought  also  to  be.  considered,  that
this  danger  proceeded  not  merely  from  solemn
acts  and  public  resolutions  of  the  state,  but  from
sudden  bursts  of  violence  at  particular  places!
from  the  license  of  the  populace,  the  rashness  or
spme  magistrates,  and  negligence  of  others;  from
the  influence  and  instigation  of  interested  adver-
saries, and,  in  general,  from  the  variety  and  warmth
of  opinion  which  an  errand  so  novel  and  extraor-
dinary could  not  foil  of  exciting.  I  can  conceive
that  the  teachers  of  Christianity  might  both  fear
and  suffer  much  from  these  causes,  without  any
general  persecution  being  denounced  against  them
by  imperial  authority.  Seme  length  of  time,  I
should  suppose,  might  pass,  before  the  vast  ma-
chine of  the  Roman  empire  would  be  put  in  mo-
tion, or  its  attention  be  obtained  to  religious  con-
troversy :  but  during  that  time,  a  great  deal  of
ill  usage  might  be  endured,  by  a  set  of  friendless,
unprotected  travellers,  telling  men,  wherever  they
came,  that  the  religion  of  their  ancestors,  the  re-
ligion in  which  they  had  been  brought  up,  the  re-


*  The  best  *f  tfrc  ancient  philosophers,  Plato,  Cicero,
and  EptctetiiB,  allowed,  or  rather  enjoined,  men  to  wor-
ship the  gods  of  the  country,  and  in  the  established
form.  See  passage*  to  this  purpose,  collected  from  their
works  by  Dr.  Clarke,  Nat.  and  Rev.  Rel.  p.  180.  ed.  5.—
Except  Socrates,  they  all  thought  it  wiser  to  comply
with  the  laws  than  to  contend.


m


WIDENCE3  OF  CHRISTIANITY.


ligion  of  the  Mate,  and  *f  the  magistrate,  the  rite*
which,  thej  frequented,  the  pomp  which  they
admired,  was«t]youghout  a  system  of  fojly  and
delusion.  . .

Nor  do  I  think  that  the  teachers  of  Christianity
would  £48  protection  in  that  general  disbelief  of
the  popular  theology,  which  is  supposed  to  have
prevailed  amongst  the  intelligent  part  of  the  hea-
then public  It  is  by  no  means  true  that  unbe-
lievers are  usually  tolerant.  They '  are  not  dis-
posed (and  why  should  they  T)  to  endanger  the
present  state  of  things,  by  suffering  a  religion  of
which  they  believe  nothing,  to  be  disturbed  by
another  of  which  they  believe  aa  little.  They  are
ready  themselves  to  conform  to  any  thing;  and
an,  oftentimes,  amongst  the  foremost  to  procure
conformity  from  others,  by  any  method  which  they
':  likely  to  be  efficacious. When  was  ever  a


>  change  of  religion  patronized  by  infidels'?  How
little,  notwithstanding  the  reigning  scepticism,  and
the  magnified  liberality  of  that  age,  the  true  prin-
ciples o?  toleration  were  understood  by  the  wisest
men  amount  them,  may  be  gathered  from  two
eminent  and  uncontested  examples.  The  younger
Pliny,  polished  aa  he  was  by  all  the  literature  of
that  son  and  elegant  period,  could  gravely  pro-
nounce this  monstrous  judgment: — "  Those  who
persisted  in  declaring  themselves  Christians,  I
*  to  be  led  away  to  punishment,  (t.  e.  to
a,)  for  I  did  not  doubt,  whatever  it  was


that  they  confessed,  that  contumacy  and  inflexi-
ble obstinacy  ought  to  be  punished.  His  master,
Trajan,  a  mild  and  accomplished  prince,  went,
nevertheless,  no  further  in  nis  sentiments  of  mo-
deration and  equity,  than  what  appears  in  the
following  rescript :  "  The  Christians  are  not  to
be  sought  for;  but  if  any  are  brought  before  you.
and  convicted,  they  are  to  be  punished."  And
this  direction  he  gives,  after  it  had  been  reported
to  him  by  his  own  president,  that,  by  the  most
strict  examination  nothing  could  be  discovered  in
the  principles  of  these  persons,  but  "a  bad  and
excessive  superstition,"  accompanied,  it  seems,
with  an  oath  or  mutual  federation,  "to  allow
themselves  in  no  crime  or  immoral  conduct  what-
ever." The  truth  is,  the  ancient  heathens  con-
sidered religion  entirely  as  an  affair  of  state,  as
much  under  the  tuition  of  the  magistrate,  as  any
other  part  of  the  police.  The  religion  of  that  age
was  not  merely  allied  to  the  state ;  it  was  incor-
porated into  it  Many  of  its  offices  were  adminis-
tered by  the  magistrate.  Its  titles  of  pontifis,
augurs,  and  namens,  were  borne  by  senators,
consuls,  and  generals.  Without  discussing,  there-
fore, the  truth  of  the  theology,  thev  resented  every
affront  put  upon  the  established  worship,  as  a
direct  opposition  to  the  authority  of  government.

Add  to  which,  that  the  religious  systems  of
those  times,  however  ill  supported  by  evidence,
had  been  long  established.  The  ancient  religion
of  a  country  has  always  many  votaries,  and  some-
times not  the  fewer,  because  its  origin  is  hidden
in  remoteness  and  obscurity.  Men  have  a  natu-
ral veneration  for  antiquity,  especially  in  matters
of  religion.  What  Tacitus  »says  of  the  Jewish,
was  more  applicable  to  the  heathen  establishment:
"  Hi  ritus,  quoquo  modo  inducti,  antiquitate  de-
fenduntur."  It  was  also  a  splendid  and  sumptuous
worship.  It  had  its  priesthood,  its  endowments,
its  temples.  Statuary,  painting,  architecture,  and
music,  contributed  their  effect  to  its  ornament  and
magnificence. It  abounded  in  festival  shows  and


to  which  the
greatly  addicted,  and  which  were  of  a  nature  to  en-
gage them  much  more  than  any  thing  of  that  sort
among  us.  These  things  would  retain  great  num-
bers on  it*  side  by  the  fascination  of  spectacle  and
pomp,  as  well  as  interest  many  in  its  preservation
f>y  the  advantage  which  they  drew  from  it.  "  It
was  moreover  interwoven,"  as  Mr.  Gibbon  right*
ly  represents  it,  "  with  e^jry  circumstance  of  bu-
siness or  pleasure,  of  public  or  private  fife,  with
all  the  offices  and  amusements  of  society."  On
the  due  celebration  also  of  its  rites,  the  people  were
taught  to  believe,  and  did  believe,  that  the  pros-
perity of  their  country  in  a  great  measure  de-
pended.

I  am  willing  to  accept  the  account  of  the  matter
which  is  given  by  Mr.  Gibbon:  "The  various
modes  of  worship  which  prevailed  in  the  Roman
world,  were  all  considered  by  the  people  as  equally
true,  by  the  philosopher  as  equally  false,  and  by
the  magistrate  as  equally  useful :  and  I  would
ask  from  which  of  these  three  classes  of  men  were
the  Christian  missionaries  to  look  for  protection  or
impunity  1  Could  they  expect  it  from  the  people,
"whose  acknowledged  confidence  in  the  public
religion"  they  subverted  from  its  foundation  %
From  the  philosopher,  who.  "  considering  all  reli-
gions as  equally  false,"  would  of  course  rank  theirs
among  the  number,  with  the  addition  of  regarding
them  as  busy  and  troublesome  sealots?  <  Or  from
the  magistrate,  who,  satisfied  with  the  "utility"
of  the  subsisting  religion,  would  not  be  likely  to
countenance  a  spirit  of  proselytism  and  innova-
tion ; — a  system  which  declared  war  against  every
other,  and  which,  if  it  prevailed,  must  end  in  a
total  rupture  of  public  opinion ;  an  upstart  reli-
gion, in  a  word,  which  was  not  content  with  its
own  authority,  but  must  disgrace  all  the  settled
religions  of  the  world  1  It  was  not  to  be  imagined
that  he  would  endure  with  patience,  that  the  reli-
gion of  the  emperor  and  of  the  state  should  be  ca-
lumniated  and  borne  down  by  a  company  of
superstitious  and  despicable  Jews.

Lastly,  the  nature  of  the  case  affords  a  strong
proof,  that  the  original  teachers  of  Christianity,  in
consequence  of  their  new  profession,  entered  upon
a  new  and  singular  course  of  life.  We  may  be
allowed  to  presume,  that  the  institution  which
they  preached  to  othera,  they  conformed  to  in  their
own  persons ;  because  this  is  no  more  than  what
every  teacher  of  a  new  religion  both  does,  and
must  do,  in  order  to  obtain  either,  proselytes  or
hearers.  The  change  which  this  would  produce
was  very  considerable.  It  is  a  change  which  we
do  not  easily  estimate,  because,  ourselves  and  all
about  us  being  habituated  to  the  institutions  from
our  infancy,  it  is  what  we  neither  experience  nor
observe.  After  men  became  Christians,  much  of
their  time  was  spent  in  prayer  and  devotion,  in
religious  meetings,  in  celebrating  the  eucharist,  in
conferences,  in  exhortations,  in  preaching,  in  an
affectionate  intercourse  with  one  another,  and
correspondence  with  other  societies.  Perhaps  their
mode  of  life,  in  its  form  and  habit,  was  not  very
unlike  the  Unites  Fratrum,  or  the  modem  Metho-
dists. Think  then  what  it  was  to  become  such
at  Corinth,  at  Ephesus,  at  Antioch,  or  even  at
Jerusalem.  How  new !  how  alien  from  all  their
former  habits  and  ideas,  and  from  those  of  every
body  about  them !  What  a  revolution  there  must
have  been  of  opinions  and  prejudices  to  bring  the
matter  to  this!


EVIDENCES  OP  CHRISTIANITY.


377


We  know  what  the  precepts  of  the  religion
are ;  how  pore,  how  benevolent,  how  disinterested
a  conduct  they  enjoin ;  and  that  this  purity  and
benevolence  are  extended  to  the  very  thoughts
and  affections.  We  are  not,  perhaps,  at  liberty
to  take  for  granted  that  the  lives  of  the  preachers
of  Christianity  were  as  perfect  as  their  lessons ;
But  we  are  entitled  to  contend,  that  the  observable
part  of  their  behaviour  must  have  agreed  in  a
mat  measure  with  the  duties  which  they  taught.
There  was,  therefore,  (which  is  all  that  we  assert,)
a  course  of  life  pursued  by  them,  different  from
that  which  they  before  led.  And  this  is  of  neat
importance.  Men  are  brought  to  any  thing  almost
sooner  than  to  change  their  habit  of  life,  especial-
ly when  the  change  is  either  inconvenient,  or
made  against  the  force  of  natural  inclination,  or
with  the  loss  of  accustomed  indulgences.  "  It  is
the  most  difficult  of  all  things  to  convert  men  from
vicious  habits  to  virtuous  ones,  as  every  one  may
judge  from  what  he  feels  in  himself,  as  weH  as
from  what  he  sees  in  others."*  It  is  almost  like
making  men  over  again.

Left  then  to  myself,  and  without  any  mora  in-
formation than  a  knowledge  of  the  existence  of
the  religion,  of  the  general  story  upon  which  it  is
founded;  and  that  no  act  of  power,  force,  and  au-
thority, was  concerned  in  its  first  success;  I  should
conclude,  from  the  very  nature  and  exigency  of
the  case,  that  the  Author  of  the  religion,  during
his  life,  and  his  immediate  disciples  after  his
death,  exerted  themselves  in  spreading  and  pub-
lishing the  institution  throughout  the  country  in
which  it  began,  and  into  which  it  was  first  car-
ried ;  that,  in  the  prosecution  of  this  purpose,  they
underwent  the  labours  and  troubles  which  we  ob-
serve the  propagators  of  new  sects  to  undergo;
that  the  attempt  must  necessarily  have  also  been
in  a  high  degree  dangerous;  that,  from  the  sub-
ject of  the  mission,  compared  with  the  fixed  opi-
nions and  prejudices  of  those  to  whom  the  mis-
sionaries were  to  address  themselves,  they  could
hardly  foil  of  encountering  strong  and  frequent
opposition;  that,  by  the  hand  of  government,  as
well  as  from  the  sudden  fury  and  unbridled  license
of  the  people,  they  would  oftentimes  experience
injurious  ana  cruel  treatment;  that,  at  any  rate,
they  must  have  always  had  so  much  to  fear  for
their  personal  safety,  as  to  have  passed  their  lives
in  a  state  of  constant  peril  and  anxiety ;  and  last-
ly, that  their  mode  of  life  and  conduct,  visibly  at
least,  corresponded  with  the  institution  which
they  delivered,  and,  so  far,  was  both  new,  and  re-
quired continual  self-denial.


CHAPTER  II.

Titer*  issatisfactory  evidence  that  manyprqfess-
ing  to  be  original  witnesses  of  the  Christian
miracles  .passed  their  lives  in  labour*,  dangers,
and  sufferings,  voluntarily  undergone  in  at-
testation of  the  accounts  which  they  delivered,
and  solely  in  consequence  of  their  belief  of
those  accounts  /  and  that  they  also  submitted
from  the  same  motives,  to  new  rules  of  conduct.

Aftih  thus  considering  what  was  likely  to
happen,  we  are  next  to  inquire  how  the  transac-


►  Hartley's  Essays  on  Man,  p.  190.


tion  is  represented  in  the  several  accounts  that
have  come  down  to  us.  And  this  inquiry  is  pro-
perly preceded  by  the  other,  for  as  much  as  the
reception  of  these  accounts  may  depend  in  part  on
the  credibility  of  what  they  contain.

The  obscure  and  distant  view  of  Christianity,
which  some  of  the  heathen  writers  of  that  age
had  gained,  and  which  a  few  passages  in  their  re-
maining works  incidentally  discover  to  us,  offers
itself  to  our  notice  in  the  first  place ;  because,  so
far  as  this  evidence  goes,  it  is  the  concession  of
adversaries :  the  source  from  which  it  is  drawn  is
unsuspected.  Under  this  head,  a  quotation  from
Tacitus,  well  known  to  every  scholar,  must  be
inserted,  as  deserving  particular  attention.  The
reader  will  bear  in  mind  that  this  passage  was
written  about  seventy  years  after  Christ's  death,
and  that  it  relates  to  transactions  which  took  place
about  thirty  years  after  that  event. — Speaking  of
the  fire  which  happened  at  Rome  in  the  time  of
Nero,  and  of  the  suspicions  which  were  enter-
tained that  the  emperor  himself  was  concerned  in
causing  it,  the  historian  proceeds  in  his  narrative
and  observations  thus;

"  But  neither  these  exertions,  nor  his  largesses
to  the  people,  nor  his  offerings  to  the  gods,  did
away  toe  infamous  imputation  under  which  Plero
lay,  of  having  ordered  the  city  to  be  set  on  fire.
To  put  an  end.  therefore,  to  this  report,  he  laid
the  guilt,  and  inflicted  the  most  cruel  punishments,
upon  a  set  of  people,  who  were  boJden  in  abhor-
rence for  their  crimes,  and  called  by  the  vulgar,
Christians.  The  founder  of  that  name  was
Christ,  who  suffered  death  in  the  reign  of  Tibe-
rius, under  his  procurator  Pontius  Pilate.  This
pernicious  superstition,  thus  checked  for  a  while,
broke  out  again ;  and  spread  not  only  over  Judea,
where  the  evil  originated,  but  through  Rome  also,
whither  every  thing  bad  upon  the  earth  finds  its
way,  and  is  practised.  Some  who  confessed  their
sect,  were  first  seized,  and  afterwards,  by  their  in-
formation, a  vast  multitude  were-  apprehended,
who  were  convicted,  not  so  much  of  the  crime  of
burning  Rome,  as  of  hatred  to  mankind.  Their
sufferings  at  their  execution  were  aggravated  by
insult  and  mockery;  for,  some  were  disguised  in
the  skins  of  wild  beasts,  and  worried  to  death  by
dogs;  some  were  crucified;  and  others  were
wrapt  in  pitched  shirts,*  and  set  on.  fire  when  the
day  closed,  that  they  might  serve  as  lights  to  illu-
minate the  night.  Nero  lent  his  own  gardens  for
these  executions,  and  exhibited  at  the  same  time
a  mock  Circenaian  entertainment;  being  a  spec-
tator of  the  whole,  in  the  dress  of  a  charioteer,
sometimes  mingling  with  the  crowd  on  foot,  ana
sometimes  viewing  the  spectacle  from  his  car.
This  conduct  made  the  sufferers  pitied;  and
though  they  were  criminals,  and  deserving  the
severest  punishments,  yet  they  were  considered  as
sacrificed,  not  so  much  out  of  a  regard  to  the  pub-
lic good,  as  to  gratify  the  cruelty  of  one  man."

Our  concern  with  this  passage  at  present  is
only  so  for  as  it  affords  a  presumption  in  support
of  the  proposition  which  we  maintain,  concerning
the  activity  and  sufferings  of  the  first  teachers  of
Christianity.  Now  considered  in  this  view,  it
proves  three  things:  1st,  that  the  Founder  of  the


•  This  it  rather  a  paraphrase,  but  it  Justified  by  what
the  Scholiast  upon  Juvenal  says ;  "  Nero  malencos  ho-
mines neda  et  papyro  et  oera  ■upervestiehat,  et  tic  ad
jgnem  admoven  Jubebat.**— Lard.  Jewish  and  Heath.


Test,  vol,  i.  p.  350.


24


STB


EVIDENCES  OP  CHRISTIANITY.


institution  wu  put  to.  death;  2dly,  that  in  the
same  country  in  wfcich  he  was  put  to  death,  the-
religion,  after  a  short  check,  broke  out  again  and
spread:  3dta  (hat  it  so  spread,  as  that,  .within
thirty-four  yean  from  the  author's  death,  a  very
great  number  of  Christians  (ingeru  earum  multi-
tude) were  found  at  Rome.  From  which  fact,
the  two  following  inferences  may  be  fairly  drawn :
first,  that  if,  in  the  space  of  thirty-four  years  from
its  commencement,  the  religion  had  spread  through-
out Judea,  had  extended  itself  to  Rome,  and  there
had  numbered  a  great  multitude  of  converts,  the
original  teachers  and  misfdonaries  of  the  institu-
tion could  not  have  been  idle ;  secondly,  that  when
the  Author  of  the  undertaking  was  put  to  death
as  a  malefactor  for  his  attempt,  the  endeavours  of
his  followers  to  establish  his  religion  in  the  same
country,  amongst  the  same  people,  and  in  the
same  age,  could  not  but  be  attended  with  danger.

Suetonius,  a  writer  contemporary  with  Tacitus,
describing  the  transactions  of  the  same  reign,  uses
these  words:  "Aflecti  supphciis  Chrjstiani,  ge-
nus hominum  superstitionis  nov»  et  malefic*. ♦"
— "  The  Christians,  a  set  of  men  of  a  new  and
mischievous  (or  njagical)  superstition,  were  pu-
nished."

Since  it  is  not  mentioned  here  that  the  burning
of  the  city  was  the  pretence  of  the  punishment  of
the  Christiana,  or  that  they  were  the  Christians
of  Rome  who  alone  suffered,  it  is  probable  that
Suetonius  refers  to  some  more  general  persecution
than  the  short  and  occasional  one  which  Tacitus
describes.

Juvenal,  a  writer  of  the  same  age  with  the  two
former,  and  intending,  it  should  seem,  to  comme-
morate the  crudities  exercised  under  Nero's  go-
vernment, has  the  following  lines  :t

"  Pone  Tigellinum,  tada  lucebi*  in  ills.
Qua  stantef  ardent,  qui  flxo  qutture  fumaat,
El  latum  media  aulcum  deducitj  arena.

ic  Describe  Tigellinus  (a  creature  of  Nero,)  and
you  shall  suffer  the  same  punishment  with  those
who  stand  burning  in  their  own  flame  and  smoke,
their  head  being  held  up  by  a  stake  fixed  to  their
chin,  till  they  make  a  long  stream  of  blood  and
melted  sulphur  on  the  ground."

If  this  passage  were  considered  by  itself,  the
subject  of  allusion  might  be  doubtful ;  but  when
connected  with  the  testimony  of  Suetonius,  as  to
the  actual  punishment  of  the  Christians  hy  Nero,
and  with  the  account  given  by  Tacitus  of  the
species  of  punishment  which  they  were  made  to
undergo,  r  think  it  sufficiently  probable,  that  these
were  the  executions  to  which  the  poet  refers.

These  things,  as  has  already  been  observed,
took  place  within  thirty-one  years  after  Christ's
death,  that  is,  according  to  the  course  of  nature,
in  the  life-time,  probably s  of  some  of  the  apostles,
and  certainly  in  the  life-tune  of  those  who  were
converted  by  the  apostles^  or  who  were  convert-
ed in  their  time.  If  then  the  Founder  ,of  the
religion  was  put  to  death  in  the  execution  of
his  design ;  if  the  first  race  of  converts  to  the  re-
ligion, many  of  them,  suffered  the  greatest  ex-
tremities for  their  profession ;  it  is  hardly  credible,
that  those  who  came  between  the  two,  who  were
companions  of  the  Author  of  the  institution  dur-
ing his  life,  and  the  teachers  and  propagators  of
the  institution  after  his  death,  could  go  about  their
undertaking  with  ease  and  safety.


*  Suet.  Nero.  cap.  16.
t  Persia '•deducis."


f  Sat.  i.  ver.  135.


The  testimony  of  the  younger  Pliny  belongs  to
a  laterperiod ;  for  although  he  was  contemporary
with  Tacitus  and  Suetonius,  yet  his  account  does
not,  like  theirs,  go  back  to  the  transactions  of
Nero's  reign,  but  is  confined  to  the  aflairs  of  his
own  time.  His  celebrated  letter  to  Trajan  was
written  about  seventy  years  after  Christ's  death;
and  the  information  to  be  drawn  from  it,  so  far  as
it  is  connected  with  our  argument,  relates  princi-
pally to  two  points ;  first,  to  the  number  of  Chris-
tians in  Bithynia  and  Pontua,  whkh  was  so  con-
siderable as  to  induce  the  governor  of  these  pro-
vinces to  speak  of  them  in  the  following  terms ;
"  Multi,  omnia  ctatis,  utriusque  sexus  etiam ; —
neque  enim  civitates  tantum,  sed  vfcoa  etiam  et
agros,  superstitionis  istius  contagid  pervagata  est"
"There  are  many  of  every  age  and  of  both  sexes:
nor  has  the  contagion  of  this  superstition  seized
cities  only,  but  smaller  towns  also,  and  the  open
country."  Great  exertions  must  have  been  used
by  the  preachers  of  Christianity  to  produce  this
state  of  things  within  this  time. Secondly,  to  a

r)int  which  has  been  already  noticed,  and  which
think  of  importance  to  be  observed,  namely,  the
sufferings  to  which  Christians  were  exposed,  vntK-
out  any  public  persecution  being  denounced  against
them  by  sovereign  authority.  For,  from  Pliny's
doubt  now  he  was  to  act,  his  silence  concerning
any  subsisting  law  on  the  subject,  his  requesting
the  emperor's  rescript,  and  the  empero^  agreeably
to  his  request  propounding  a  rule  tor  his  direction,
without  reference  to  any  prior  rule,  it  may  be  in-
ferred, that  there  was,  at  mat  time,  no  public  edict
in  force  against  the  Christians.  Yet  from  this
same  epistle  of  Pliny  it  appears,  "  that  accusations,
trials,  and  examinations,  were  and  had  been,
going  on  against  them  in  the  provinces  over  which
he  presided  |  that  schedules  were  delivered  by
anonymous  informers,  containing  the  names  of
persons  who  were  suspected  of  nolding  or  of  fa-
vouring the  religion ;  that,  in  consequence  of  these
informations,  many  had  been  apprehended,  of
whom  some  boldly  avowed  their  profession,  and
died  in  the  cause ;  others  denied  that  they  were
Christians ;  others,  acknowledging  that  they  had
once  been  Christians,  declared  that  they  had:  long
ceased  to  be  such."  All  which  demonstrates,  that
the  profession  of  Christianity  was  at  that  time  (in
that  country  at  least)  attended  with  fear  and  dan-
ger: and  yet  this  took  place  without  any  edict
from  the  Roman  sovereign,  commanding  or  au-
thorising the  persecution  of  Christiana.  This
observation  is  further  confirmed  by  a  rescript  of
Adrian  to  Minucius  Fundanus,  the  proconsul
of  Asia:*  from  which  rescript  it  appears  that  the
cugtom  of  the  people  of  Asia  was  to  proceed
against  the  Christians  with  tumult  and  uproar.
This  disorderly  practice,  I  say,  is  recognised  in
the  edict,  because  the  emperor  enjoins,  that,  for
the  future,  if  the  Christians  were  guilty,  they
should  be  legally  brought  to  trial,  and  not  be  pur-
sued by  importunity  and  clamour.

Martial  wrote  a  few  years  before  the  younger
Pliny :  and,  as  his  manner  was,  made  the  suffer-
ings of  the  Christians  the  subject  of  his  ridicule.t

*  Lard.  Heath.  Test.  vol.  ii.  p.  110.
t  In  matutinft  nuper  spectatus  arena

Mucius,  impowlit  qui  sua  membra  focit.
Si  patiena  fortisque  tibi  durusque  videtur,

Abderitanie  pectora  plebit  habes;
Nam  cum  dicatur,  tunica  present e  molesta,

Ure  %  manum :  plus  est  dicere,  Non,  facia,
t  Forsan  "  tfcnre  manum."


EVIDENCES  QF  CHRISTIANITY.


979


Nothing,  however,  could  show  the  notoriety  of  the
fact  with  more  certainty  than  this  doee.  Martial's
testimony,  as  well  indeed  aa  Pliny's,  foes  also  to
another  point,  viz.  that  the  deaths  or  these  men
were  martyrdoms  in  the  strictest  sense,  that  is  to
say,  were  so  voluntary  vthat  it  was  in  their  power,
si  the  time  of  pronouncing  the  sentence,  to  have
averted  the  execution  by  consenting  to  join  in
heathen  sacrifices.

The  constancy,  and  by  consequence  the  suffer-
ings of  the  Christians  of  this  period,  is  also  refer-
red to  by  Epictetus,  who  imputes  their  intrepidity
to  madness,  or  to  a  kind  of  fashion  or  habit,  and
about  fifty  years  afterwards,  by  Marcus  Aurelius,
who  ascribes  it  to  obstinacy.  "Is  it  possible
(Epictetus  asks)  that  a  man  may  arrive  at  this
temper,  and  become  indifferent  to  those  things
from  madness. or  from  habit,  as  the  Galileans  ?**
"  Let  this  preparation  of  the  mind  (to  die)  arise
from  its  own  judgment,  and  not  from  obstinacy
like  the  Christians."*


CHAPTER  III.

There  is  satisfactory  evidence  that  many,%pro-
Jessing  to  be  original  witnesses  qf  the  Chris-
tian miracles,  passed  their  lives  in  labours,
dangers,  and  sufferings,  voluntarily  under-
gone in  attestation  qf  the  accounts  which  they
delivered,  and  solely  in  consequence  of  their
belief  qf  those  accounts  ;  and  that  they  also
submitted,  from  the  same  motives,  to  new  rules
qf  conduct.

Of  the  primitive  condition  of  Christianity,  a
distant  only  and  general  view  can  be  acquired  from
heathen  writers.  It  is  in  our  own  books  that  the
detail  and  interior  of  the  transaction  must  be
■ought  for.  And  this  is  nothing  different  from
what  might  be  expected.  Who  would  write  a
history  of  Christianity,  but  a  Christian  ?  Who
was  likely  to  record  the  travels,  sufferings,  labours,
or  successes  of  the  apostles,  but  one  of  their
own  number,' or  of  their  followers?  Now  these
books  come  up  in  their  accounts  to  the  full  extent
of  the  proposition  which  we  maintain.  We  have
tour  histories  of  Jesus  Christ.  We  have  a
history  taking  up  the  narrative  from  his  death,
and  carrying  on  an  account  of  the  propagation
of  the  religion,  and  of  some  of  the  most  eminent
persons  engaged  in  it,  for  a  space  of  nearly  thirty
years.  We  have,  what  some  may  think  still  more
original,  a  collection  of  letters,  written  by  certain
principal  agents  in  the  business,  upon  the  business,
and  in  the  midst  of  their  concern  and  connexion
with  it  And  we  have  these  writings  severally
attesting  the  point  which  we  contend  for,  viz,  the
sufferings  of  the  witnesses  of  the  history,  and
attesting  it  in  every  variety  of  form  in  which  it
can  be  conceived  to  appear :  directly  and  indirectly,
expressly  and  incidentally,  by  assertion,  recital,
and  aUusion,  by  narratives  ot  facts,  and  by  argu-
ments and  discourses  built  upon  these  facta,  either
referring  to  them,  ox  necessarily  presupposing
them.

I  remark  this  variety,  because,  in  examining
ancient  records,  or  indeed  any  species  of  testimo-
ny, it  is,  in  my  opinion,  of  the  greatest  importance
to  attend  to  the  information  or  grounds  of  argu-


•Epictl.iv.c7. tMarc.Aur.Mod.Lii.c3.


ment  which  are  casually  and  undesignedly  dis-
closed; forasmuch  as  this  species  of  proof  is,  of
all  others,  the  least  liable  to'  he  corrupted  by  fraud
or  misrepresentation.  ' -

I  nufy  be  allowed  therefore,  in  the  inquiry
which  is  now  before  us,  to  suggest  some*conclu-
sion  of  this  sort,  as  preparatory  to  more  direct
testimony.

1.  Our  books  relate,  that  Jesus  Christ,  the
founder  of  the  religion,  wasv  in  consequence  of
his  undertaking,  put  to  death,  as  a  malefactor,  at
Jerusalem.  This  point  at  least  will  be  granted,
because  it  is  no  more  than  what  Tacitus  has  re-
corded. They^hen  proceed  to  tell  us,  that  the
religion  was,  notwithstanding,  set  forth  at  this
same  city  of  Jerusalem,  propagated  thence  through-
out Judea,  and  afterwards  preached  in  other  parts
of  the  Roman  empire.  These  points  also  are
fully  confirmed  by  Tacitus,  who  informs  us,  that
the  religion,  after  a  short  check,  broke  out  again
in  the  country  Where  it  took  its  rise ;  that  it  not
only  spread  throughout  Judea,  but  had  reached
Rome,  and  that  it  had  there  great  multitudes  of
converts;  and  oil  this  within  thirty  years  after  its
commencement.  Now  these  facts  afford  a  strong
inference  in  behalf  of  the  proposition  which  we
maintain.  What  could  the  disciples  of  Christ  ex-
pect for  themselves  when  they  saw  their  Master

Sut  to  death  1  Could  they  hope  to  escape  the
angers  in  which  he  had  perished  1  If  they  have
persecuted  me,  they  Will  also  persecute  you,  was
the  warning  of  common  sense.  With  this  ex-
ample before  their  eyes,  they  could  not  be  without
a  full  sense  of  the  peril  of  their  future  enterprise;

2.  Secondly,  all  the  histories  agree  in  represent-
ing Christ  as  foretelling  the  persecution  or  his  fol-
lowers :—

"  Then  shall  they  deliver  you  up  to  be  afflicted,
and  shall  kill  you,  and  ye  shall  be  hated  of  all  na-
tions for  my  name's  sake.'*

"  When  affliction  or  persecution  ariseth  for  the

word's  sake,  immediately  they  are  offended  "1s

"  They  shall  lay  hands  on  you,  and  persecute
!......_.  ...  ^  aiMj

rulers
betrayed

both  by  parents  and  brethren,  and  kinsfolks  and
friends,  and  some  of  you  shall  they  cause  to  be  put
to  death."*

"  The  time  cometh,  that  he  that  killeth  you*,
will  think  that  he  doeth  God  service.  And  these
things  will  they  do  unto  you,  because  they  have
not  known  the  Father,  nor  me.  But  these  things
have  I  told  you,  that  when  the  time  shall  come,  ye
may  remember  that  I  told  you  of  them."S

I  am  not  entitled  to  argue  from  these , passages,
that  Christ  actually  did  foretell  these  events,  and
that  they  did  accordingly  come  to  pass ;  because
that  would  be  -at  once  to  assume  the  truth  of  the
religion :  but  1  am  entitled  to  contendt  that  one  side
or  other  of  the  following  disjunction  is  true ;  either
that  the  Evangelists  have  delivered  what  Christ
really  spoke,  and  that  the  event  corresponded  with
the  prediction :  or  that  they  put  the  prediction  into
Christ's  mouth,  because,  at  the  time  of  writing
the  history,  the  event  had  turned  out  so  to  be ;
for,  the  only  two  remaining  suppositions  appear  in
the  highest  degree  incredible;  which  are,  either

♦  Mat.  xxiv.  9.  _

iMark  iv.  17. See  also  chap.  x.  30.
Luke  uti.  IS— 10. Bee  also  chap.  xi.  49.
John  xvi.  4 Bee  also  chap.  xv.  90 ;  xvi.  33.  j


EVIDENCES  OF  CHRISTIANITY.


that  Christ  filled  the  minde  of  hie  follower*  with
fears  and  apprehensions,  without  any  reason  or
authority  for  what  he  said,  and  contrary  to  the
truth  of  the  case;  or  that,  although  Christ  had
never  foretold  any  such  thing,  and  the  event  would
have  contradicted  him  if  he  had,  yet  historians
who  lived  in  the  age  when  the  event  was  known,
falsely,  as  well  as  officiously,  ascribed  these  words
to  him.

3.  Thirdly,  these  books  abound  with  exhorta-
tions to  patience,  and  with  topics  of  comfort  under
distress.

11  Who  shall  separate  us  from  the  love  of  Christ  1
Shall  tribulation,  or  distress,  or  psssecution,  or  fa-
mine, or  nakedness,  or  peril,  or  sword  1  Nay,  in
all  these  things  we  are  more  than  conquerors
through  Him  that  loved  us."*

"  We  are  troubled  on  every  side,  vet  not  dis-
tressed ;  we  are  perplexed,  but  not  in  despair ;  per-
secuted, but  not  forsaken;  cast  down,  hot  not
destroyed:  always  bearing  about  in  the  body  the
dying  "of  the  Lord  Jesus,  that  the  life  also  of  Je-
sus might  be  made  manifest  in  our  body ; — know-
ing that  he  which  raised  up  the  Lord  Jesus  shall
raise  us  up  also  by  Jesus,  and  shall  present  us
with  vou. — For  which  cause  we  feint  not ;  hot.
though  our  outward  man  parish,  yet  the  inward
man  is  renewed  day  by  day.  For  our  light  afflic-
tion, which  is  but  far  a  moment,  worketh  for  us  a
far  more  exceeding  and  eternal  weight  of  riorv.,*t

"  Take,  my  brethren,  the  prophets,  who  have
spoken  in  the  name  of  the  Lord,  for  an  example
of  suffering  affliction,  and  of  patience.  Behold,
we  count  them  happy  which  endure.  Ye  have
heard  of  the  patience  of  Job,  and  have  seen  the
end  of  the  Lord ;  that  the  Lord  is  very  pitiful,  and
of  tender  mercy."*

"  Call  to  remembrance  the  former  days,  in
which,  after  ye  were  illuminated,  ye  endured  a
great  fight  of  afflictions,  partly  whilst  ye  were
made  a  gazing-stock  both  by  reproaches  and  afflic-
tions, and  partly  whilst  ye  became  companions  of
them  that  were  so  used ;  for  ye  had  compassion  of
me  in  my  bonds,  and  took  joyfully  the  spoiling  of
Tour  goods,  knowing  in  yourselves,  that  ye  nave
in  heaven  a  better  and  an  enduring  substance.
Cast  not  away,  therefore,  your  confidence,  which
hath  great  recompense  of  reward ;  for  ye  have
need  of  patience,  that,  after  ye  have  done  the  will
of  God,  ye  might  receive  the  promise."*

"So  that  we  ourselves  glory  in  vou  in  the
churches  of  God,  for  your  patience  and  faith  in  all
your  persecutions  and  tribulations  that  ye  endure.
Which  is  a  manifest  token  of  the  righteous  judg-
ment of  God,  that  ye  may  be  counted  worthy  of
the  kingdom  for  which  ye  also  suffer.''!!

We  rejoice  in  hope  of  the  glory  of  God ;  and
not  only  so,  but  we  glory  in  tribulations  also:
knowing  that  tribulation  worketh  patience,  and
patience  experience,  and  experience  nope. "IT

"  Beloved,  think  H  not  strange  concerning  the
fiery  trial  which  is  to  try  you,  as  though  some
strange  thing  happened  unto  you ;  but  rejoice,  in-
asmuch as  ye  are  partakers  of  Christ's  sufferings.
—Wherefore  let  tnem  that  suffer  according  to  the
will  of  God,  commit  the  keeping  of  their  souls  to
him  in  well  doing,  as  unto  a  faithfurCreator."**

What  could  afl  these  texts  mean,  if  there  was


*  Rom.  viii.  35-37.  f  2  Cor.  iv.  8-10.  M.  1*  17.

I  James  v.  10, 1L  j  Heb.  x. »-«.

[3Thess.i.4,S.  f  Rom.  v.  1,4. >
»  1  Fat  iv.  lS,l&]ft,


nothing  iirthe  circumstances  of  the  times  which
required  patience, — which  called  for  the  exercise
of  constancy  and  resolution  1  Or  will  it  be  pre-
tended that  these  exhortations  (which,  let  it  be
observed,  come  not  from  one  author,  but  from
many)  were  put  in,  merely  to  induce  a  'belief  in
after-ages,  that  the  Christians  were  exposed  to
dangers  which  they  were  not  exposed  to,  or  under-
went sufferings  which  they  did  not  undergo  1  If
these  books  belong  to  the  age  to  which  they  lay
claim,  and  in  which  age,  whether  genuine  or  spu-
rious, they  certainly  did  appear,  this  supposition
cannot  be  maintained  for  a  moment;  because  I
think  it  impossible  to  believe,  that  passages,  which
must  be  deemed  not  only  unintelligible,  but  false,
by  the  persons  into  whose  hands  the  books  upon
their  publication  were  to  come,  should  nevertheless
be  inserted,  for  the  purpose  or  producing  an  effect
upon  remote  generations.  In  forgeries  which  do
not  appear  till  many  ages  after  that  to  which  they
pretend  to  belong,  it  is  possible  that  some  con-
trivance of  that  sort  may  take  place;  but  in  no
others  can  it  be  attempted.


CHAPTER  IV.

There  is  satisfactory  evidence  thai  eumy,  pro-
-  fessing  to  be  ori^mUvnlnessesqf  the  Christian
miracle;  pasted  their  Uvea  in  labour*,  dangers^
and  sufferings,  voluntarily  undergone  in  at-
testation of  the  accounts  which  they  delivered,
and  solely  in  consequence  of  their  belief  of  those
accounts;  and  that  they  also  submitted,  from
the  same  motives,  to  new  rules  of  conduct.

The  account  of  the  treatment  of  the  religion,
and  of  the  exertions  of  its  first  preachers,  as  stated
in  our  Scriptures  (not  in  a  professed  history  of  per-
secutions, or  in  the  connected  manner  in  which  I
am  about  to  recite  it,  but  dispersedly  and  occasion-
ally, in  the  course  of  a  mixed  general  history,
which  circumstance  alone  negatives  the  supposi-
tion of  any  fraudulent  design,)  is  the  following :
11  That  the  Founder  of  Christianity,  from  the  com-
mencement of  his  ministry  to  the  time  of  his  vio-
lent death,  employed  himself  wholly  in  publishing
the  institution  in  Judea  and  Galilee ;  that,  in  order
to  assist  him  in  this  purpose,  he  made  choice  out
of  the  number  of  his  followers,  of  twelve  persons,
who  might  accompany  him  as  he  travelled  from
place  to  place ;  that,  except  a  short  absence  upon
a  journey  in  which  he  sent  them,  two  by  two,  to
announce  his  mission,  and  one  of  a  few  days,  when
they  went  before  him  to  Jerusalem,  these  persons
were  steadily  and  constantly  attending  upon  him ;
that  they  were  with  him  at  Jerusalem  when  he
was  apprehended  and  put  to  death ;  and  that  they
were  commissioned  by  him,  when  his  own  minis-
try was  concluded,  to  publish  his  Gospel,  and  col-
lect disciples  to  it  from  all  countries  of  the  world."
The  account  then  proceeds  to  state,  "that  a  few


days  after  his  departure,  these  persons,
of  his  relations,  and  some  who  nad  regularly  fre-
quented their  society,  assembled  at  Jerusalem;
mat,  consideringthe  once  of  preaching  the  religion
as  now  devolved  upon  them,  and  one  of  their  num-
ber having  deserted  the  cause,  and,  repenting  of
his  perfidy,  having  destroyed  himself,  they  proceed-
ed to  elect  another  into  his  place,  and  that  tbey


EVIDENCES  OP  CHRISTIANITY.


Were  careful  to  make  their  election  out  of  thcrram-
ber  of  those  who  had  accompanied  their  Master
Aran  the  first  to  the  last,  in  order,  as  they  alleged,
that  he  might  be  a  witness,-  together  with  them-
selves, of  the  principal  facte  which  they  were
-about. to  produce  and  relate  concerning  him  ;*  that
they  began  their  work  at  Jerusalem-  by  publicly
asserting  that  this  Jesus,  whom  the  rulers  and  in-
habitants of  that  place  had  so  lately  crucified,  was,
•in  truth,  the  person  in  whom  all  their  prophecies
and  long  expectations  "terminated;  that  ne  had
been  sent  amongst  them  by  God:  and  that  he  was
appointed  by  God  the  future  judge  of  the  .human
species :  that  all  who  were  solicitous  to  secure  to'
themselves  happiness  after  death,  ought  to  receive

.  him  as  such,  and  to  make,  profession  of  their  be-
lief, by  being  baptized  in  hi*  name."t.  The  his-
tory goes  on  to  relate,  "  that  considerable  numbers
accepted  this  proposal,  and  that  they  who  did  so,
formed  amongst  themselves  a  strict  union  and  so-
ciety ;t  that  the  attention  of  the  Jewish  govern-
ment being  soon  drawn  upon  them,  two  of  the
principal  persons  of  the  twelve,  and  who  also  had
lived  most  intimately  and  constantly  with  the
Founder  of  the  religion,  were  seized  a?  they  Were
discoursing  to  the  peoplein  the  temple;  that,  after
being  kept  all  night  in  prison,  they,  were  brought
the  next  day  before  an  assembly  composed  of  the
chief  persons  of  the  Jewish  magistracy  and  priest-
hood ;  that  this  assembly,  after  some  consultation,
found  nothing,  at  that  time,  better  to  be  done  to-
wards suppressing  the  growth  of  the  sect,  than  to
threaten  tneir  pnsonere  with  punishment  if  they
persisted :  that  these  men,  -after  expressing,  in  de-
cent but  firm  language,  the  obligation  under  which
they'  considered  themselves  to  be,  to  declare  what
they  knew,  '  to  speak  (he  things  which  they  had
seen  and  heard,'  returned  from  the  council,  and
reported  what  had  passed  to  their  companions  j
that  this  report,  whilst  it  apprized  the^n  of  the
danger  of  their  situation  and  undertaking,  had  no
other  effect  upon  their  conduct  than  to  produce  in
them  a  general  resolution  to  persevere^  and  an
earnest  prayer  to  God  to  furnish  them  with  assist-
ance, and  to  inspire  them  with  fortitude,  propor-
tioned to  the  increasing  exigency  of  the  service."!
A  very  short  time  after  this,  we  fead  "  that  all  the
twelve  apostles  were,  seized  and  cast  into  prison  ;ll

.that  being  brought  a  second  time  before  the  Jew-
ish Sanhedrim,  they  were  upbraided  with  their
disobedience  to  the  injunction  which  had  been  laid
upon  them,  and  beaten  for  their  contumacy ;  that,
being  charged  once  more  to  desist,  they  wereraf-
fered  to  depart ;  that  however  they  neither  quitted
Jerusalem,  nor  ceased  from  preaching,  both  daily
in  the  temple,  and  from  house  to  house  ;1T  and  that
the  twelve  considered  themselves  as  so  entirely
and  exclusively  devoted  to  this  office,  that  they
now  transferred  what  may  be  called  the  temporal
mttnn  of  the  society  to  other  hands."**


*  Actt  i.  21,  2*V  t  Acts  zi.  J  Acts  iv.  33.

**  AcUiv.  jf  Acts  v.  18. IT  Acts  v.  42  -'.

••  I  do  aot  know  that  it  has  ever  been  insinuated,  that
the  Christian  mission,  in  the  hands  of  the  apostles,  was
a  scheme  for  making  a  fortune,  or  for  getting  money. —
Bat  it  may  nevertheless  be  fit  to  remark  upon  thie  pas-
sage of  their  history,  how  perfectly  free  they  appear  to
have  been  from  any  pecuniary  or  interested  views  what-
ever. The  most  tempting  opportunity  which  occurred,
of  making  a  gain  of  their  converts,  was  by  the  custody
and  management  of  the  public  funds,  when  some  of  the
richer  members.  Intending  to  contribute  their  fortunes
to  the  common  support  of  the  society,  soM  their  posse*
3N


-  Hitherto  the  preachers  of  the  new  religion  s
to  have  had  the  common  people  on  their  side;
which  is  assigned  as  the  reason  why-  the  Jewish
rulers  did  not,  at  this  time,  think  it  prudent  to
proceed  to  greater  extremities.  It  was  not  long,
however,  before  the  enemies  of  the  institution
found  means  to  represent  it  to  the  people  as  tend-
ing to  subvert  their  law,  degrade  their  lawgiver,
and  dishonour  their  temple .*  And  these  insinua-
tions were  dispersed  with  so  mueh  success,  aa  to
induce  the  people  to  join  with  .their  superiors  in
the  stoning  of  a  very  active  member'  oi-  the  new
community.  -

The  death  of  this  man  was  the.  signal  of  a
general  persecution,  the  activity  of  which  may  be
judged  of  from  one  anecdote  of  the  time : — "  As
for  Saul,  he  made  havoc  of  the-  church,  entering
into  every  house,  and  haling 'men  and  women,
committed  them  to  prison."t  This  persecution
raged  at  Jerusalem  with  so  much  fury,  as  to  drive
most  of  the  new  converts  out  of  the  place,  except
the  twelve1  apostles. t  The  converts,  thus  "scat-
tered  abroad,"  preached  the  religion  wherever  they
came;  .and  their  preaching  *  was,  in  effect,  the
preaching  of  •  the  twelve;  for  it  was  sd  for  carried
on  in  concert  and  correspondence  with  them,  that
when-  they  heard  of  the  succes84»f  their  emissaries
in  .a  particular  country,  they  sent  two  of  their
number  to  the  place,  to  comnlate  and  confirm  the


An  event  now  took  place,  of  great  importance
in  the  future  history  of  the  religion.  The  perse-
cutions' which  had  begun  at  Jerusalem,  followed
the  Christians  to  other  cities,  in  which  the  autho-
rity of  the  Jewish  Sanhedrim  over,  those  of  their
own  nation  was  allowed  to  be  exercised.  A
young  man,  who  had  signalized  himself  by  his
hostility  to  the  profession,-  and  had  procured  a
commission  from  the  council  at  Jerusalem  to  seize
any  converted  Jews  whom  he  might  find  at  Da-
mascus, suddenly  became  a  prosejyte  to  the  reli-
gion which  he  .was  going  about  to  extirpate*.  The
new  convert  not  only  shared,  on  thk  extraordina-
ry change,  the  late  of  his  companions,  but  brought
upon  himself  a  double  measure  of  enmity  from
the  party  which  he  had  left.  The  Jews  at  Da-
mascus, on  his  return  to  that  city,  watched  the
Sates  night  and  day,  witii  so  much  diligence,  that
e  escaped  from  their  hands  only  by  being  .let
down  in'a  basket  by  the  wall.  Nor  did  he  find
himself  in  greater  safety  at  Jerusalem,  whither  he.
immediately  repaired. — Attempts  were  there  also,
soon  set  on  foot  to  destroy  him ;  from  the  danger


sions,  and  laid  down  the  prices  at  the*  apostle*'  feet.
Yet;  so  insensible,  or  unrlesirousf  were  they  of  the  ad-
vantage which  that  confidence  afforded,  that  we  find
they  very  soon  disposed  of  the  trust,  by  putting  it  into
the  hands,  not  of  nominees  of  their  own,  but  of  stew-
ards formally  elected  for  the  purpose  by  the  society  at
large.

We  may  add  also,  that  this  excess  of  generosity,  which
cast  private  property  into  the  public  stock,  was  so  far
from  being  required  by  the  apostles,  or  imposed  as  a  law
of  Christianity,  that  Peter  reminds  Ananias  that  he
had  been  guilty,  in  his  behaviour,  of  an  officious  and
voluntary  prevarication;  "  for  whilsi,"  says  be,  "  thy
estate  remained  unsold,  was  it  not  thine  own  ?  and  after
it  Was  sold,  was  it  not  in  thine  own  power  ?  *

*  Acts  vi.  13.  t  Acts  vui.  3.

1  Acts  viit.  1.  "  And  they  were  all  scattered  abroad  :••
but  the-  term  "  all,vis  not,  I  think,  to  be  taken  strictly
as  denoting  more  than  the  fn$ralttl ;  in  like  manner  as
in  Acts  ix  35  "  And  all  that  dwelt  at  Lycula  and  8a-
ron.saw  him,  and  turned  to  the  Lord."

JActsix.  yp


EVIDENCES  OF  CHRISTIANITY.


of  which  he  wu  preserved  by  being  sent  my  Co
Cibcia,  his  native  country.

For  eome  reason,  not  mentioned,  perhaps  not
known,  but  probably  connected  with  the  civil  his-
tory of  the  Jews,  or  with  sumetdanger*  which
engrossed  the  public  attention,  an  intermission
about  this  time  took  place,  in  the  sufierings  of  the
Christians.  This  happened,  at  the  roost,  only
•even  or  eight,  perhaps  only  three  or  four,  years
after  Chrjsts  death.— Within  which  period,  and
notwithstanding  that  the  late  persecution  occupied
part  of  it,  churches,  or  societies  of  believers,  nad
Men  formed  in  all  Judea,  Galilee,  and  Samaria;
for  we  read  that  the  churches  in  these  countries
M  had  now  ret*,  and  were  edified,  and  walking  in
the  fear  of  the  Lord,  and  in  the  comfort  of  the
Holy  Ghost,  were  multiptiedV't  The  original
preachers  of  the  religion  aid  not  remit  their  la-
bours or  activity  during.ihia  season  of  quietness  ;-
for  we  find  one,  and  he  a  very  principal  person
•moat  them,  passing  throughout  all  quarters.  We
And  also  those  who  nad  been  before  expelled  from
Jerusalem  by  the  persecution  which  raged  these,
twfeffing  as  for  as  Phamice,  Cyprus,  and  Anti-
och J*  and,  lastly,  we  find  Jerusalem  again  in  the
centre  of  the  mission,  the  place  whither  the
preachers  returned  from  their  several  excursio
when  they  reported  the  conduct  and  effects
their  ministry,  where  questions  of  public  cone
were  canvassed  and  settled,  whence  directions
Bsoupht,  and  teachers  sent  forth


The  time  of  this  tranquillity  did  not  ho1

Herod  Agrippaj  who  had  lately


1  tang,
to  the  j


i  government  of  Judea,  "stretched
forth  his  hand  to  vex  certain  of  the  church.**  He
began  his  cruelty  by  beheading  one  of  the  twelve
original  -apostles,  a  kinsman  and  constant  tom-
panion  of  the  Founder  of  the  religion.  Perceiving
that  tins  execution  gratified  the  Jews,  he  pro-
ceeded to  seize,  in  order  to  put  to  death,  another
of  the  number, — and  him,  like  the  former,  associ-
ated with  Christ  during  his  life,  and  eminently
active  in  the  service  since  his  death.  This  man
was  nowever  delivered  from  prison,  as  the  account
states^  miraculously,  and  made  his  escape  from
Jerusalem.

These  things  are  related,  not  in  the  general
terms  under  which,  in  giving  the  outlines  of  the
instory,  we  have  here  mentioned  them,  but  with
the  utmost  particularity  of  names,  persons,  places.
and  circumstances;  and,  what  is  deserving  of
notice,  without  the  smallest  discoverable  propensi-
ty in  the  historian  to  magnify  the  fortitude,  or  ex-
aggerate the  sufierings  of  his  party.  When  they
fid  for  their  lives,  he  tells  .us.  When  the
churches  had  rest,  he  remarks  it  When  the  peo-
ple took  their  part,  he  does  not  leave  it  without
notice.  When  the  apostles  were  carried  a  second
time  before  the  Sanhedrim,  he  is  careful  to  ob-
serve that  they  were  brought  without  violence.
When  milder  counsels  were  suggested,  he  gives
us  the  author  of  the  advice,  and  the  speech  whi
contained  it  When,  in  consequence  of  this  ad-
vice, (he  rulers  contented  themselves  with  threat-


♦  Dr.  Lardner(4n  which  he  is  followed  also  by  Dr.
Benson)  ascribes  this  cessation  of  the  persecution  of  the
Christians  to*  the  attempt  of  Caligula  to  set  up  his  own
statue  in  the  temple  of  Jerusalem,  and  to  the  conster-
nation thereby  excited  in  the  minds  of  the  Jewish  peo-
ple: wmch  consternation  for  a  season  suspended  every
ether  contest.  ~"

t  Acts  zi/10.

i  Acts  xii.  3-17.


t  Acts  iz.  31
)  Acts  xii.  1.


ening  the  apostles,  and
witfi  stripe


them  to  ha


beaten  with  stripes,  without  urging  at  that  time
the  persecution  further,  the  historian  candidly  and
distinctly  records  their  forbearance.  When,  there-
fore, in  other  instances,  he  states  heavier  persecu*
tions^  or  actual  martyrdoms,  it  is  reasonable  to  be-
lieve that  he  states  them  because  they- were  true,
and  not  from  any  wish  to  aggravate,  in  his  ac-
count, the  sufferings  which  Christians  sustained,
or  to  extol,  more  than  it  deserved,  their  patience
under  them.

Our  history  now  pursues  a  narrower  path.
Leaving  the  rest  of  the  apostles,,  and  the  original
associates  of  Christ,  engaged  in 'the  propagation
of  the  new  frith  (and  who  there  is  not  the  least
reason  to  believe  abated  in  their  dihgenoa  or
courage,)  the  narrative  procseda-with  the  separate
memoirs  of  that-  eminent  teacher,  whose,  extraor-
dinary and  sudden  conversion  to  the  religion,  and
corresponding  change-  of  conduct,  had  before  been
circumstantially  described:  This  ^person,  in  con-
junction with  another,  who  appeared  among,  the
earlier  members  of  the  society  at  Jerusalem,  and
amongst  the  immediate  adherents*  of  the  twelve
apostles,  set  out  from  Antioch  upon  the  exuwas
business  of  carrying  the  new  religion  through  the
various  provinces  of  the  Lesser  Asia.t  :  During  '
this  expedition,  we  find  that,  in  almost  everf  place
to  which  they  came,  their  persona  were  insulted,
and  their  lives  endangered.  AJtobe^expeUed
from.  Antioch  in  Pistdia,  they  repaired  to  Ico-
nium.* At  Iconium,  an  attempt  was  made  to
stone  them;  at  Lvatra,  whither  they  fled  from
Iconium,  one  of  them  actually  was  stoned,  and
drawn  out  of  the  city  for  dead.S  ;  These  two  men,
though  not  themselves  original  apostles,  were
acting  in  connexion  and  conjunction  with  the
original  apostles;  for  after  the  completion  of  their
journey,  being  sent  on  a 'particular  commission  to
Jerusalem,  they  there  related  to  the  apostles!)  and
elders  the  events  and  success  of  their  ministry,
and  were,  in  return,  recommended  by  them  to  the
churches,  "as  men  who  had  hazarded  their  lives
in  the  cause."  -, .

Thetreatment  which  they  had  experienced  in
the  first  progress,  did  not  deter  them  from  pre-
paring for  a  second.  Upon' a  dispute,-,  however,
arising  between  them,  but  not  connected  with  the
common  subject  of  their  labours,  they  acted  as
wise  and  sincere  men-would  act;  they  did  not  re-
tire in  disgust  from  the  service  in  which  they  were
engaged,  But,  each  devoting  his  endeavours  to  the
advancement  of  the  religion,  they  parted  from  one
another,  and  set  forwards  uppn  separate  routes.  *
The  history  goes  along  with  one  of  them ;  and
the  second  enterprise  to  him  was  attended  with
the  same  dangers  and  persecutions  as  both  had
met  with  in  the  first.  The  apostle's  travels  hi-
therto bad  been  confined  to  Asia.  -He  now  crosses,
for  the  first  time,  the  JSgean  sea,  and  carries  with
him,  amongst  others,  the  person  .whose  accounts
supply  the  information  we  are  stating.1T  The  first
place  in  Greece  at  which  he  appeals  to  have
stopped,  was  Philippi  in  Macedonia.  Here  him-
self1 and  one  of  his  companions  were  cruelly
whipped;  cast  into  prison,  and  kept  there  under
the  most  rigorous  custody,  being  thrust,  whilst
yet  smarting  with  their  wounds,  into  the  inner


♦Actaiv.36.
1  AcU-xiii.  51
fl  Acts  xv.


{Acts  ziii.  3.
Acts  xiv.  19.
Acts  zvL  11.


EVIDENCES  OP  CHRISTIANITY.


963


dungeon,  and  their  foe{  made  fast  in  the  stacks  *
Notwithstanding  this  unequivocal  specimen  of
the  usage  which  they  had  to  took  for  in  that  coun-
try, they  went'  forward  in  the  execution  of  their
errand.  After  passing  through  Amphipous  and
ApoQonia,  they  came  to  Thessalonica;  m  which
city,  the  house  in  which  they  locked  was  assailed
by  a  party  of  theh\  enemies,  in  order  to  bring  them
out  to  the  popubee.  And  when,  fortunately  for
theft  preservation,'  they  were  not  found  at  .home,
the  master  of  the  house  was  dragged  before  the
magistrate-  for  admitting  them  within  his  doore.t
Their  reception"  at  the  next  city  was  something
better :  but  neither  had  they  continued  long  before
their  turbulent  adversaries,  the  Jews,-  excited
against  them  such  commotions  amongst  the  in-
habitants, as  obliged  the  apestle  to  make  his  es-
cape by  a  private  journey- to  Athens.*  The  ex-
tremity of  the  progress  was  Corinth.  His,  abode
in  this  city,  fbi*  some  time,  seems  to  have  been
without  molestation.  At-  length,  however,  the
Jews  found  means  to  stir  up  an  insurrection
against  him,  and  to  bring  him  before  the  tribunal
of  the  Roman  president.!  It  was*  to  the  contempt
which  that  magistrate  entertained  for  the  Jews
and  their  controversies,  of  which?  be  accounted
Christianity  to  be  one,  that  our  apostle  owed  his
3ehreranoe.il

This  indefatigable  teacher,  after  leaving  Corinth,
returned  by  Ephesus.into  Syria :  and  again- visited
Jerusalem,  and  the  society  of  Christians-  in  that
city,  which,  as  hath  been  irepeatedly  observed,  still
Continued  the  centre  of  the  mwrion.1T  .  It  suited
not,  however,  with  the, activity  of  his  zeal  to  re-
main long  at  Jerusalem.'  We  find  him  going-
thence  to  Antiochj  and,  after  some  stay  there,
traversing  once  more  the  northern  provinces  of
Asia  Minor.**  This  progress  ended  at  Ephesus ;
in  which  city,  the  apostle  continued  in  the  .daily
.  exercise  of  his  ministrvtwo  years,  -and  until  his
success,  at  length,  excited  the  apprehensions  of
those  who  were  interested  in  the  support  of  the
national  worship.  Their  clamour  produced  a  tu-
mult, in  which  he  had  nearly  lost  his  life.tt  Un-
dismayed, however,  by  the  dangers  to  which  he
snw  himself  exposed,  ne  was  driven  from  Ephesus
only  to  renew  his  labours  in  Greece.  After  pass-
ing over  Macedonia,  he  thence  proceeded  to  his
former  station  at  Corinth.**  When  he  bad  formed
his  design  of  returning  by  a  direct  course  from
Corinth  into  Syria^  he  was  compelled  by  a  conspi-
racy of  ths^Jews,  who  were  prepared  to  intercept
him  on  his  way,  to  trace  back  his  steps  through
Maeedoniafo  Ptulippi,  and  thence  to  take  shipping
into  Asia.  Along  the  coast  of  Asia,  he  pursued
his  voyage  with  all  the  expedition  be  could  com-
mand, in  order  to  reach  Jerusalem  against  the
feast  of  Pentecoet.H  His  reception  at  Jerusalem
was  of  a  piece  with  the  usage  he  had  experienced
from  the  Jews  in  other  places.  He  had  oeenonly
a  few  days' in  that  city,  when  the  populace,  insti-
gated by  some  of  his  old  opponents  in  Asia,  who
attended  this  feast,  seized  him  in  the  temple,
forced  him  out  of  it  and  were  ready  immediately
to  have  destroyed  him,  had  not  the  sudden  pre-
sence of  the  Roman  guard  rescued  him  out  of  their


hands.*  The  officer,  however,  who  had  thus
seasonably  interposed,  acted  from  his  care- of  the
public  peace,  with  the  preservation  of  which  ho
was  charged,  and  not  from  any  favour  to  the  apos-
tle, or  indeed  any  disposition  to  exercise  either
justice  or  humanity  towards  him:  for  he  had  no
sooner,  secured  his  person  in  the  fortress,  than  he
was  proceeding  to  examine  him  by  torture.t

From  this  tune  to  the  conclusion  of  the  history,
the  apostle  remains  in  public  custody  of  the  Ro-
man government.  After  escaping  >  assassination
by  a  fortunate  discovery  o/thejplbt,  and  delivering
himself  from  the  influence  ofnis  enemies  by  an
appeal  to  the  audience  of  the  emperor,*  he  was)
sent,  but  not  until  he  had  suffered  two  years'  inn
prisonment,  to  Rome  J  He-Teached  Italy,  after  *
tedious  voyage,  and  after  encountering  in  lpa  pas-
sage the  penis  of  a  despenteshipwreck.U  Bat
although  still  a  prisoner,  and  his  fate  still  depend-
ing, neither  the  various  and  long  continued  suffer-
ings which  he  had  undergone,  nor  the  danger  of
his  present  situation,  deterred  nim  from  persisting
in  preaching  the  religion ;  for  the  historian  closes
the  account  by  telling  us,  mat,  for  two  years,  he
received  all  that  came  unto  him.  in  his  own  hired
house,  where  he  was  permitted  to  dwell  with  a
soldier  that  guarded  him,  "  preaching  the  kingdom
of  God,  and  teaching  those  things  which  concern
the  Lord' Jesus  Christ,  with  all  confidence."

Now  the  historian  from  whom  we  "have  drawn
this  account,  in  the  part  of  his  narrative  which  re-
lates to  Saint  Paul,  is  supported  by  the  strongest
corroborating  testimony  that  a  history  can  receive.
We  are  in  possession. of  letters  written  by  Saint
Paul  himself  upon  the  subject  of  his  ministry,  and
either  written' during  the  period  which  the  history
comprises,  or  if.  written  afterwards,  seating  and
referring  to  the  transactions  of  that  period.  These
letters,  without  borrowing  from  the  nistory,  or  the
history,  from  them,  unintentionally  confirm  the
account  which  the  nistory  delivers,  in  a  great  v*r
riety  of  particulars.  What  belongs  to  our  present
purpose  is  the  description  exhibited  of  the  apos-
tle's sufferings :  and  the  representation,  given  in
the  history,  of  the  dangers  and  distresses  which
he  underwent,  not  only  agrees,  in  general,  with
the  language  which  he  himself'  uses  whenever  he
speaks  of  his  life  or  ministry,  but  is  also,  in  many
instances,  attested  by  a  specific  correspondency  of
time,  place,  and  order  of  events.  If  the  historian
put  down  in  his  narrative,  that  at  PhUippi,  the
apostle  "  was  beaten  with  many  stripes,  cast  into
prison,  and  there  treated  with  rigour  and  indigni-
ty ;"Y  We  find  him,  in  a  letter  to  a  neighbouring
church,**  reminding  his  converts,  that,  "  after  he
had  suffered  before,  and  was  shamefully  entreated
at  Philippi,  he  was  bold,  nevertheless,  to  *peak
unto  them  (to  whose  city  he  next  came)  the  Gos-
pel of  God.*'  If  the  history  relate,tt  that,  at  Thea-
salonica, the  house  in  which  the  apostle  was
(lodged,  when  he  first  came  to  that  place,  was  as-
saulted by  the  populace,  and  the  master  of  it  drag-
ged before  the  magistrate  for  admitting  such  a
guest  within  his  doors ;  the  apostle,  in  his  letter  to
the  Christians  of  Thessalonica,  calls  to  their  re-
membrance "  how  they  had  received  the  Gospel  in
much  affliction."** If  the  history  deliver  an  ac-


•Actsxvi.83.9i3S.

JAcUxvii.li
Actsxviii.  15.
*  Acts  xviii.93.
t|  ActSXX.1,9.


tAetsxvii.l— 5.
§  Actsxviii.  19.
tf  Actaxvul.98.

\T  ACU  XlX.  1.9,10.

gActsxx.  10. „


•  Actsxxi.  27-33.  t  Acts  xxil.  94.

t  Acta  xxv.  9. 11.  i  Act*  xxj v.  97.

I  Acts  xxvii.  J  Acts  xvi.  9J,  94.

**  lThess.li,9. • • tt.AcUxvil.5.
1%  lThesm.i.6.,


S84


EVIDENCES  OP  CHRISTIANITY.


count  of  an  Insurrection  at  Ephesus,  which  had
nearly  coot  the  apostle  his  life ;  we  have  the  apos-
tle himself;  in  a  letter  written  a  short  time  after
^  his  departure  from  that  city,  describing  his  despair,
*  and  returning  thanks  for  his  deliverance.*  -  If  the
history  inform  us,  that  the  apostle  was  expelled
from  Anupehln  Hsidia^  attempted  to  Jjp.  stoned  at
Iconium,  and  actually  stoned  at  Lystra ;  there  U
preserved  a  letter  from  him  to  a  favourite  convert,
whoml  as  the  same  history  tells  us,  he  first  met
with  in  these  parts ;  in  which  letter  he  appeals  to
thai  disciple's  knowledge  "  of  the  persecutions
which  befell  him  at  Antioch,  at  Iconium,  at  Lys-
tra."t  If  the  history  make  the  apostle,  in  his
Speech  to  the  Ephesian  elders,  remind  them,  as
one  proof  of  the  disinterestedness  of  his  views,  that,
to  their  knowledge,  he  had  supplied  his  own  and
the  necessities  of  his  companions'  by  personal  la-
bour \t  we  find  the  same  apostle,  in  a  letter  writ-
ten during  his  residence  at  Ephesus,  asserting  of
himself,  "that  even  to  that  hour  he  laboured,
working  with  his  own  hands.  "I

These  coincidences,  together  with  many  rela-
tive to  other  parts  of  the  apostle's  history,  and  all
drawn  from  independent  sources,  not  only  confirm
the  truth  of  the  account,  in  the  particular  points
as*  to  which  they  are  observed,  but  add  much  to
the  credit  of  the  narrative  in  all  its  ports :  and  sup-
port the  author's  profession  of  being  a  contempo-
rary of  the  person  whose  history  he  writes,  and,
throughout  a  material  portion  of  his  narrative,  a
companion.

What  the  epistles  of  the  apostles  declare  of  the
suffering  state  of  Christianity,  the  writings  which
remain  of  their  companions  and  immediate  follow-
ers, expressly  confirm.

Clement,  who  is  honourably  mentioned  by  Saint
Paul  in  his  Epistle  to  the  Philippians,ll  hath  left
us  his  attestation  to  this  point,  in  the  following-
words  :  "  Let  us  take  (says  he)  the  examples  of
our  own  age.  Through  zeal  and  envy,  the  most,
faithful  and  righteous  pillars  of  the  church  have
been  persecuted  even  to  the  most  grievous  deaths.
Let  us  set  before  our  eyes  the  holy  apostles.  Peter,'.
by  unjust  envy,  underwent,  not  one  or  two,  but
many  suffering*;  till  at  last,  being  martyred,  he
went  to  the  place  of  glory  that  was  due  unto  him.
For  the  same  cause  did  Paul,  in  like  manner,  j€z
ceive  the  reward  of  his  patience.  Seven  times  he
was  in  bonds  j  he  was  whipt,  was  stoned ;  he.
preached  both  in  the  East  ana  in  the  West,  leav-
ing behind  him  the  glorious  report  of  his  faith ;
and  so  having  taught  the  whole  world  righteous-
ness, and  for  that  end  travelled  even  unto  the  ut-
most bounds  of  the  West,  he  at  last  suffered  mar-
tyrdom by  the  command  of  the  governors,  and  de-
parted out  of  the  world,  and  went  unto  his  holy
place,  being  become  a  most  eminent  pattern  of
patience  nnto  all  ages.  To  these  holy  apostles
were  joined  a  very  great  number  of  others,  who,
having  through  envy  undergone,  in  like  manner,
many  pains  and  torments,,  have  left  a  glorious  ex-
ample to  us.  For  this,  not  only  men,  nut  Women
have  been-  persecuted ;  and,  having  suffered  very
grievous  and  cruel  punishments,  have^finished  the
course  of  their  faith  with  firmness."ir

Hetmas,  saluted  hy  Saint  Paul  in  -his  Epistle  to

*  Acts  fix. 2  Cor.  8-10.

t  Acts  Mii.  30 ;  xiv.  5. 19. 9  Tim.  iii.  10, 11, .

lPhiHpp.iv.3. ^

1  Clem,  ad  Cor.  c  v,  vi. Abp.  Wake's  Trans,


J  the  Romans,  in  a  piece  very  little  connected  with
historical  recitals,  thus  speaks :  "  Such  aft  have  ba-
■  lieved  and  suffered  death  for  the  name  of  Christ,
and  have  endured  with  a  ready  mind,  and  liave
'  given  up  their  lives  with  all  their  hearts."*
j Poly  carp,  the  disciple  of  John  (though  all  thai
j  remains  of  bis  works  be  a  very  short  epiatie,)  has
j  not  left,  this  subject  unnoticed. "  I  exhort  (says
|  he)  all  x>f  you,  that  ye  obey  the  word  of  righteous-
ness, and  exercise  all  patience,  whioh  ye  have  seen
set  forth  before  your  eyes,  not  only  in  the.  blessed
Ignatius,  and  Lorimus,  and  Rnfns,  but  in  others
among  yourselves,  and  in  Paul  himself  and  Ike
rest  of  the  apostles ;  being  confident  in  this,  that
all  these  have  not  run  in  vain,  but  in  faith  and
righteousness ;  and  are  gone  to  the  place  that  was
due*  to  them  from  the  Lord,  with  whom  also  they
suffered. For  they  loved  not  this  present  world,
but  Him  who  died,  and  was  raised  again  by  God
forus.'>

Ignatius,  the  contemporary  of  Polycarp,  recog-
nises the  same  topic,  briefly  indeed,  but  positively
and  precisely.  "  For  this  cause,  (t.  t.  having  felt
and  handled  Christ's  body  after  his  resurrection,
and  being  convinced,  as  Ignatius  expresses  it,  both
by  his  flesh  and  spirit,  Vthey  (£.  e.  Peter,  and  those
who  were  present  with  Peter  at  Christ's  appear-
ance) despised  death,  and  were  found  to  be  above
it."t  -  ■

Wouldthe  reader  know  what  a  persecution  in
these  days  was,  I  would  refer  him  to  a  circular
letter,  written  by  the  church  of  Smyrna  soon  after
the  death  of  Polycarp,  who,  it  will  be  remembered,
had  lived  with  Saint  John ;  and  which  letter  is  en-
titled a  relation  of  that  bishop's  martyrdom. ' "  The
sufferings  (say  they)  of  all  the  other  martyrs  were
blessed  and  generous,  which  they  underwent  ac-
cording to.  the  will  of  God.  For  so  it  becomes  as,
who  are  more  religious  .than  others,  to  ascribe  the
power  and  ordering  of  all  things  unto'  him.  And
indeed  who  can  choose  but  admire  the  jgreatness
of  their  minds,  end  that  admirable  patience  and
love  of  their  Master,  which  then  appeared  in  them  1
Who.  when  they  were  so  flayed-with  whipping,
that  the  frame  and  structure,  of  their  bodies  were
laid  open  to  their  very  inward  veins  and  arteries,
nevertheless  endured  it.  .  In  like  manner,  those
who  were  condemned  to  the  beasts,  and  kept  «
long  time  in  prison,  underwent  many  cruel  tor-
ments, being  forced  to  Ho  upon  sharp  spikes  laid
under  their  bodies,  and  tormented  with  divers
other  sorts  of  punishments ;  that  so,  if  it  were  pos-
sible, the  tyrant  by  the  length  of  their  sufferings,
might  have  brought  them  to  deny  Christ."  I


CHAPTER  V.

There  is  satisfactory  evidence  that  many,profc*-
sing  to  be  original  witnesses  of  the  'Christian
miracles,  passed  their  lives  in  labours,  dan-
gers, ana  sufferings, '  voluntarily  undergone
in  attestation  of  the  accounts  which  they  de-
livered, and  solely  in  consequence  of  their  be-
lief of  those  accounts  i  and  thai  they  also  sub-
mitted, from  the  same  motives,  to  new  rules  of
conduct.


*  Shepherd  sf  Henna*,  c  xrvHi.

f  Pol.  ad  Phil.  c.  ii;  %  19  Bp.  Smvr.  &  iii.

i  Rel.  Mo'r.  Pol.  c.  ii.


EVIDENCES  Ofr/CHRISTIANITY.


985


Ott  the  history,  of  which  the  last  chapter  con-
tain* an  abstract,  there  are  a  few  observations
which  it  may  be  proper  to  make,  by-way  0/ apply-
ing its  testimony  to  the  particular  propositions  for
wjiich  we  contend.  /

I.  Although  our  Scripture  history  leaves  the

rial  account  of  the  apostles  in  an  early  ^part  of
narrative,  and  proceeds  with  the  separate  ac-
count of  one  particular  apostle^  vet  th«J  informa-
tion which  it  delivers  so  far  extends, to  the  rest,  as
it  shows  the  nature  qfthe  service:  When  we  see
one  apostle,  suffering  persecution  in  the  discharge
of  his  commission,  we  shall  not  believe,  without
evidence,  that  the  same  office  could,  at  the  same
time,  be  attended  with  case  and  safety  to  others.
And  this  fair  and  reasonable  inference  is  confirm-
ed by  the  direct  attestation  of  the  letters,  to  which
we  have  so  often  referred.  The  writer  of  these
letters  not  only  alludes,  in  numerous  passages,  to
hk  own  sufferings,  but  speaks  of  the  rest  of  the
apostles  as  enduringlike  sufferings  with  himself.
'< 1  think  that  God  hath  set  forth  us  the  apostles
last,  as  it  were,  appointed  to  death ;  -for  we  are
made  a  spectacle  unto  the  world,  and  to  angels,
and  to  men ; — even  unto  this  present  hour,  we
both  hunger  and  thirst,  and  are  naked,  ati3  are,
buffeted,  and  have  no  certain  dwelling-place ;  and
labour,  working  with  our  own  hands :  being  revil-
ed, we  bless;  being  persecuted,  we  suffer  it;  being
defamed,  we  entreat :  we  are  made  as  the  filth  of
the  world,  and  as  the  ofiscourihg  of  all  things  unto
this  day .*  Add  to  which,  that  in  the  snort  ac-
count that  is  given  of  the  other  apostles  in  the  for-
mer part  of  the  history,  and  within  the  short  pe-
riod which  that  account  comprises,  we  find,  first,
two  of  them  seized,  imprisoned,  brought  before  (he
Sanhedrim,  and  threatened  with  further  punish-
ment ;t  then,  the  whole  number  imprisoned  arid
beaten ;  t  soon  afterwards,  one  of  their  adherents
■toned  to  death,  and  so  hot  a  persecution  raised
against  the  sect)  as  to  drive  most  of  them  out  of

-  t£e  place;  a  short  time  only  succeeding,  before
one  of  the  twelve  was  beheaded,  and  another  sen-
tenced to  the  same  fate;  and  all  this  passing  in

'  the  single  city,  of  Jerusalem,  andwithin  ten  years
after  the  Founder's  death,  and  the  commencement
of  the  institution.

II.  We  take  no  credit  at -present  for  the  mi-
raculous part  .of  the  narrative,  nor  do  we  insist
upon  the  correctness  of  single  passages  of  it.
It  the  trhote  story  be  not  a. novel,  a  romance;
the  whole  action  a  dream ;  if  Peter  and  James,
and  Paul,  and  the  rest  of  the  apostles  mentioned
iii  the  account,  he  not  all  imaginary  persona;  if
their  letters  be  not  all  forgeries,  and,  what  is  more,
forgeries  of  names  and  characters  which  never
existed ;  then  is  there  evidence  in  our  hands  suf-
ficient to  support  the  only  fact  we  contend  for
(and  which.  T  repeat  again,  is  in  itself  highly

Srobable,)  that  the  original  followers  of  Jesus
hrist  exerted  .grear  endeavours  to  propagate  his
religion,  and  underwent  great  labours,  dangers,  and
sufferings,  in  consequence  of  their  undertaking.  '

III.  The  general  reality  of  the  apostolic  history
is  strongly  confirmed  by  the  consideration,  that  it,
in  truth,  does  no' more  than  assign  adequate
causes  for  effects  which  certainly  were  produced,
and  describe  consequences  naturally  resulting
from  situations  which  certainly  existed. The  ef-


fects were  certainly  these,  of  which  this  •history'
sets  forth  the  cause,  and  origin,  and  progress.  It  is
acknowledged  on  ail  hands,  because  it  is  recorded
by  other  testimony  than  that -of  the  Christians
themselves,  that  the  religion  began  to  prevail*  at
that  time,  and  in  that  cotihtry.  It  is  very  dif-
ficult to  conceive  how  it  could  begin,  or  prevail  at
all,  without  the  exertions  of  the  Founder  and  hk
followers,  .in  propagating  the  .new- persuasion.
The  history  now  in  our  hands  describes  these  ex*
ertions;  the  persons  employed,  the  means  and  en-'
deavours  made  use  of,  and  the  labours  undertaken
in  the  prosecution  of  this  purpose.  Again,  the
treatment  which  the  history  Npresents  the  first
propagators  of  the' religion  to  have  experienced,
was  no  other  than  what  naturally  resulted  from
the  situation  in  which  they  were  confessedly
placed.  It  is  admitted,  that  the  religion  was
adverse,  in  a  great  degree  to  the  reigning  opinions,
and  to  the  hones  and  wishes  of  the.  nation  to
which  it  was  first  introduced;  and  that  it  over-
threw,' so  far  as  it  was  received,  the  established
theology  and  worship  of  every  other  country.  We
cannot  feel  much  reluctanee  ir**  believing  that,
when  the  messengers  of  such  a  system  went
about  not  only  publishing  their  opinions,  but  col-
lecting proselytes,  and  forming  regular  societies
«>f  proselytes,  they  should  meet  with  opposition  in
their  attempts,  or  thattmjropposition  should  some-
times proceed  to  fatal  extremities.  Our  history
details  examples  of  this  opposition,  and  of  the  suf-
ferings and  dangers  which  the  emissaries  of  the
religion  underwent,  perfectly  agreeable  to  what
mi^ht  reasonably  be  expected,  from  the  nature  of
their  undertaking,  compared  with  the  character
of  the  age  and  country  in  which  it  was  carried  on.
IV,  The  records  before  us  supply  evidence  of
what  formed  another  member  of  our  general  propo-
sition, and  what,  as  hath  already  been  observed,
is  highly  probable,  and  almost  a  necessary  conse-
quence of  their  new  profession,  viz.  that,  together
with  activity  and  courage  in  propagating  the  re-
ligion, the  primitive  followers  of  Jesus  assumed,
upon  their  conversion,  a  new  and  peculiar  course
01  private  life.  Immediately  after  their  Master
was  withdrawn  from  theml  we, hear  of  their  '.'  con-
tinuing with  one  accord  in  prayer  and  supplica-
tion ;"  *  of-  their  "  continuing  daily  with  one  ac-
cord in  the  temple ;"+Qf  "many  being  gathered
together  praying."  *  We-  kndw  what  strict  in-
junctions were  laid  .upon  the  converts'  by  their
teachers.  Wherever  they  came,  the  first  word  of
their  preaching  was,  '"  Repent!"  We  know  that
these  injunctions  obliged  them  to  refrain  from
many  species  of  licentiousness,  which  were  not,  at
that  time,  reputed  criminaj.  We  know  the  rules
of  purity,  and  the  maxims  of  benevolence,  which
Christians  read  in  their  books ;  concerning  which
rules,  it  is  enough  to  observe,  that,  if  they  were,
I  will  hot  say  completely  obeyed}  but  in.  any  de-
cree regarded',  they  would  produce  a  system  of
conduct;  and  what  is  more  difficult  to  preserve,  a
disposition  of  mind,  and  a  regulation  oT.afTections,
different  from  any  tiding  to  which  they  had  hither-
to been  accustomed,  and  difiesent  from  what  they
would  see  jn  others.  The  change  and  distinction
of  manners,  which  resulted  from  their  new  cha-
racter, is  perpetually  referred  to  in  the  letters  of
their  teachers.  "  And  you  hath  he  quickened
who  were  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins,  wherein  in


•  1  Cor.  iv.  9,  ec  m* . . f  Acts  iv.  3. 91.
I  Acts  v.  18/40.


♦Ac*  1.14.  t  Acts  ii.  40.  tAcUxii.  12.


<m


EVIDENCE8  OP  CHRISTIANITY.


timet  -past  ye  walked,  according  to  the  course  of
this  world,  'according  to  the  prince  of  the  power
of  the  air,  the  spirit  that  now  worketh  in  the  chil-
dren of  disobedience;  among  whom  also  we  had
our  conversation  in  times  past,  in  the  lust  of  our
flesh,  fulfilling  the  desires  of  the  flesh  and  of  the
mind,  and  were  by  nature  the  children  of  wrath,
even  as  others."*—"  For  the  time  past  qf  our  life
may  suffice  us  to  have  wrought  the  will  of  the
gentiles,  when  we  walked  in  laadviousncss,  lusts,
excess  of  wine,  revelling*,  banquetings,  and  abomi-
nable idolatries;  wherein  they  thinkSt  strange
that  ye  run  not  with  them  to- the  same  excess  of
riotri  Saint  Paul,  in  his  first  letter  to  the  Co-
rinthians, after  enumerating,  as  his  manner  was,  a
catalogue  of  vicious  charactem,  adds,  "Such  were
some  of  you ;  but  ye  are  washed,  but  ye  are  sanc-
tified?'t  In  like  manner,  awf  alluding  to  the
same  change  of  practices  and  sentiments,  he  asks
the  Roman  Christians,  M  what  fruit  they  had  in
those  things,  whereof  they  are  now  ashamed  T%
The  phrases  which  the  same  writer  employs  to
describe  the  moral  condition  of  Christians,  com-
pared with  their  condition  before  they  became
Christians,  such  as  "  newnessof  life."  being  "freed
from  sin,"  being  "dead  to  sin ;"  "the  destruction
of  the  body  of  sin,  that,  for  the  future,  they
should  not  eerve  sin ;"  "  children  of  light  and  of
tip  day,"  as  opposed  to  "  children  of  darkness  and
of  the  night ;"  '*  not  sleeping  as  others ;"  imply,  at
least,  a  new  system  of  obligation,  and,  probably,  a
new  aeries  of  conduct,  commencing  with  their,
conversion.

The  testimony  which  Pliny  bean  to  the  be-
haviour of  the  new  sect  in  his  time,  and  which
testimony  comes  not  more  than  fifty  years  after
that  of  St.  Paul,  b  veryappficable  to  the  subject
under  consideration.  The  character  which  this
writer  gives  of  the  Christians  of  that  age,  and
which  was  drawn  from  a  pretty  accurate  inauiry,
because' he  considered  their  moral  principles  as
the  point  in  which  the  magistrate  was  interested,
is  as  follows: — He  tells  the  emberor,  "that  some
of  those  who  had  relinquished  the  society,  or  who,
to  save  themselves,  pretended  that  they  had  re-
linquished it,  affirmed  that  they  were  wont  to
meet  together,  on  a  stated  day,  before  it  was  light,
and  sang  among 'themselves  alternately  a  hymn-
to  Christ  as  a  god;  and  to  bind  themselves  by  an
oath,  not  to  the  commission  of  any  wickedness,
but  that  they  would  not  be*  guilty  of  theft,  or  rob-
bery, or  adultery ;  that  they  would  never  falsify
their  word,  or  "deny  a  pledge  committed  to  them,
when  called  upon  to  return  it."  This  proves  that
a  morality,  more  pure  and  strict  than  was  ordinary,
prevailed  at  that  time  in  Christian  societies.  And
to  me  it  appears,  that  we  are  authorized  to  carry
this  testimony  back  to  the  age  of  the  apostles ;  be-
cause it  is  not  probable  that  the  immediate  hearers
and  disciples  of  Christ  were  more  relaxed  than
their  successors  in  Pliny's  time,  or  the  missiona-
ries of  the  religion,  than  those  whom  they  taught.


. CHAPTER  VI.

There  is  satisfactory  evidence  that  many,  pro-
fessing to  be  original  witnesses  of  the  Chris-


fc.U.1-3.  See  also  Tit.  iii.  3. f  1  Pet.  iv.  3, 4.
pCor.Ti.ll.  $Rom.  vi.31.


tian  miracles,  passed  their  fcsertn  labours,
dangers,  and  sufferings,  voluntarily  under-
gone in  attestation  qf  the  accounts  which  they
delivered,  and  solely  in  consequence  qf  their
belief  of  those  accounts  ;  .and  that  they  also  sub-
mitted, from  the  same  motives,  to  new  rules  qf
conduct.

When  we  consider  first,  the  prevajency  of  the
religion  at  this  hour;  secondly,  the  only  credible
account  which  can  be  given  of  its  origin,  via,  the
activity  of  the  Founder  and  hisassociates ;  thirdly,
the  opposition  which  that  activity  must  naturally
have  excited*,  fourthly,  the  fate  of  the  Founder  of
the  religion,  attested  by  heathen  writers  as  well
as  our  own ;  fifthly,  the  testimony  of  the  same
writers  to  the  sufferings  of  Christians,  either  cos-'
temporary  with,  or  immediately  succeeding,  the
original  settlers  of  the  institution;  sixthly,  predion
tions  of  the  sufferings  of  his  followers  ascribed  to
the  Founder  of  the  religion,  which  ascription,
alone  proves,  either  that  such  predictions  were  de-
livered arid  fulfilled,  or  that  the  writers  of  Christ's
life  were  induced  by  the  event  to  attribute  such
predictions  to  him ;  seventhly,  letters  how  in  our
possession;  written  by  some  of  the  principal  agents
in  the  transaction,  referring  expressly  to  extreme
labours,  dangers,  and  fluttering*  sustained  by
themselves  and  their  companions;  lastly,  *  history
purporting  to  be  written  by  a  fellow-traveller  of
one  of  the  new  teachers,  and,  by'  its  unsophistica-
ted correspondency  with  letters  of  that  person  still
extant,  proving  itself  to  be  written  by  some  ode
well  acquainted  with  the  subject  of  the  narrative,
which  history  contains  accounts  of  travels'  perse*
cutions,  and  martyrdoms,  answering  to  what  the
former  reasons  lead  us  to  expect:  when  we  lay
together  these  considerations,  which  taken  sepa-
rately, are,  I  think,  correctly,  such  asl  have  stated
them  in  the  preceding  chapters,  there  cannot  much
doubt  remain  upon  our  minds,  but  that  a  number
of  persons  at  that  time  appeared  in.  the  world,
publicly  advancing  an  extaorainary  story,  and  for
the  sake  of  propagating  the  belief  of  that  story,
voluntarily  incurring  great  personal  dangers,  tra-
versing seas  and  kingdoms,  exerting  great  indus-
try .  and  sustaining  great  extremities  of  ill  usage
ana  persecution.  It  is  also  proved,  that  the  same
persons,  in  consequence  of  their,  persuasion,  or
pretended  persuasion,  of  the  truth  of  what  they  as-
serted, entered  upon  a  course  of  life  in  many  res-
pects new  end  singular.

.  From  the  clear  and  acknowledged  parts  of  the
case,  I  think  it  to  be  likewise  in  the  highest  de-
gree probable,  that  the  story,  for  which  these  per-
sons voluntarily  exposed  themselves  to  the  fatigues
and  hardships  which  they  endured,  was  a  mtro-
culous  story ;  I  mean,  that  they  pretended  to  mi-
raculous evidence  of  some  kind  or  other.  They
had  nothing  else  to  stand  upon.  The  designation
of  the  person,  that  is  to  say,  that  Jesus  of  Naxar
reth,  rather  than  any  other  person,  was  the  Mes-
siah, and  as  inch  the  subject  of  their  ininistry,
could  only  be  founded  upon  supernatural  tokens
attributed  to  him.  Here  were  no  victories,  no-
conquest,  no  revolutions,  no  surprising  elevation
of  fortune,  no  achievements  of  valour,  of  strength,
or  of  policy,'  to  appeal  to;  no  discoveries  in  any
arts' or  science,  no  great  efforts  of  genius  or  learn-
ing to  produce.  A  Galilean  peasant  was  announced
to  the  world  as  a  divine  lawgiver.  A  young  man
of  mean  condition,  of  a  private  and  simple  life,  and


EVIDENCES  OP  CHRISTIANITY.


387


who  had  wrought  no  defiverance  for  the  Jewish
nation,  wu  decked  to  be  -their  Messiah.  This,
without  ascribing  to  him  at  the  same  time  some
proofs  of  hie  mission,  (and  what  other  but  super-
natural proofs'  could  there  be  1)  was  too  absurd  a
claim  to  he  either  imagined,  or  attempted,  or  cre-
dited. In  whatever  degree,  or  .in  whatever  part,
the  religion,  was  argumentative,  when  it  came  to
the  question,  "Is  the  carpenter's  son  of  Naza-
reth the  person  whom  we  are  to  receive  and
obey  7"  there  was  nothing  but  the  miracles  at-
tributed to  him,  by  which  his  pretensions  could  be
maintained  for  a  moment.  Every  ^controversy  and
every  question  must  presuppose  these;  for,  how-
ever such  controversies,,  when  they  did  arise,
might,  and 'naturally  would,  be  discussed  upon
their  own  grounds  of  argumentation,  without.
citing- the  miraculous  evidence  which  had  been
asserted  to  attend  the  Founder  of  the  religion,
(which  would  have  been  to  enter  upon  another,
and  a  more  general  question,)  yet  we  are  to  bear
in  mind,  that  without  previously  supposing  the
existence  or  the  pretence  of  such  evidence,  them
could  haye  been  no  place  for  the  discussion  of  the
argument  at  aH  Thus,  for  example,  whether  the
prophecies,  which  the  Jews"  interpreted  to  belong
to  the  Messiah,  were/or,  were  not  applicable  to  the
history  of  Jesus  offifazareth,  was  a  natural  subject
of  debate  in  those  times;  and  the  debate  would
proceed,  without  recurring  at  every  turn  to.  his
™j*^^*.  because  it  set' out  with  supposing  these ;
Inasmuch  as  without  miraculous  marks  and  tokens,
(seal  or  pretended,)  or  without  some  such  great
change  effected  by  his  means  in  the  public  condi-
tion of  the  country,  as  might  have  satisfied  the
tihen  received  interpretation  of  these  prophecies)  I
do  not  see  how  the  question  could  ever  have  been
enlerUffled.  ApoHos,  we  read,  "  mightily  con-
vinced the  Jews,  showing'  by  the  Scriptures  that
Jesus' was  Christ;''*  but  unless  Jesus  had  ex-
hibited some  distinction  of  his  person,  some  proof
of  supernatural  power,  the  argument  from  the  old
Scriptures  could  have  had  no  place.  It  had  no-
thing to  attach  upon.'  A  young  man  calling  him-
self  the  Son  of  God\  gathering  a  crowd  about  him,
and  delivering  to  them  lectures  of  morality,  could
not  have  excited  so  much  as  a  doubt  among  the
Jews,  whether  he  was  the  object  in  whom  a  long
'  i  of  ancient  prophecies  terminated,  from  thl


completion  of  which  the\  had  formed  such  mag-
nificent expectations,  and  expectations  of  a  nature
so  opposite. to  what  appeared;  I  mean,  no  such
doubt  could  exist  when  they  had  the  whole  case
before  them,  when  they  saiw  him  put  to  death  for
his  offidousneaf,  and  when  by  his  death  the  evi-
dence concerning  him  was  dosed.  Againthee£fec*
of  the  Messiah's  coming,  supposing.  Jesus  to  have
been  he,  upon  Jews,  upon  Gentiles,  upon  their
relation  to  each  other,  upon  their  acceptance  with
God,  upon  their  duties  and  their  expectations;
his  nature,  authority,  office,  and  agency;  were
likely  to  become  subjects  of  much  consideration
with  the  early  votaries  of  the  religion,  and  to  oc-
cupy their  attention  and  writings.  I  should  not
however  expect,  that  in  these  Acquisitions,  whe-
ther preserved  in  the  form  of  letters,  speeches,  or
set  treatises,  frequent  or  very  direct  mention  of
his  miracles  would  occur.  Still  miraculous  evi-
dence lay  at  the  bottom  of  the  argument,  In  the
primary,  question,  miraculous  pretensions,  and


miraculous  pretensions  alone,  were  what  they  had
to  rely  upon.

That  the  original  story  was  miraculous,  is  very
fairly  also  inferred  from  tfye  miraculous  powers
which  were  laid  claim  to  by  the  Christians  of  .suc-
ceeding ages.  If  the  accounts  of  these  mimr!**
be  true,  it  was  a^  continuation  of  the- same  powers ;
if  they  be  false,  it  was  an  imitation,  1  will  not  say
of  what  had-  been  wrought,  but  of  what  had  been
reported  to  have  been  wrdught,  by  those  who  pre-
ceded them.  That  imitation  should  follow  reality,
fiction  should  be  grafted  upon  truth;  that,  if  mira-
cles were  performed  at  first,  miracles  should  be
pretended  afterwards;  agrees  so  well  with  the
ordinary  course  of  human  affairs,  that,  we  can
have  no  great  difficulty  in  believing  it  The  con-
trary supposition  is  very,  improbable,,  namely,  that
miracles  should  be  pretended  to,  by  the  followers
of  the  apostles  and  first  emissaries  of  the  religion,
when  none  were  pretended,  to,  either  in  their  own
persons  or  that  of  their  Master,  by  these  apostles
and  emissaries  themselves.


CHAPTER  VIL .

There  is  satisfactory  evidence  that  many,  pro-
fessing to  be  /original  witnesses  of  the*  PhrvH
tian  miracles,  passed  their  lives  in  labours^  t
dangers,  and  sufferings,  voluntary  under-  1 ^
gone  in  attestation  of  the  accounts  which  they  \ ~»
delivered,  and  solely  Hn  consequence  qf  their |
belief  qf  those  accounts  j  ana  that  they  also
submitted,  from  the  same  motives^to  new  rules
qf  conduct.

*  It  being  then  once  proved,  that  the  first  pro-
pagators of  the  Christian  institution  did  exert  ac-
tivity, and  subject  themselves  to  great  dancers  and
suffering*,  in  consequence  and  for  the  sake  of  an
extraordinary,  and,  I  tl)ink,we  may  say,  of  a  mi-
raculous story  of  some  kind  or  other;  the  next
great  question  is{  Whether  the  account,  which  our
Scriptures  contain,  be  that  story ;  that  which  these
men  delivered,  ana  for  which  they  acted  and  suf-
fered as  they  did  7  This  question  is,  in  effect,
no  other  than  whether  the  story/which  Chris-
tians have  now,  he  the  story  which  Christians  had
then  ?  And  of  this  the  following  proofs  may  be
deduced,  from -general  considerations,  and  from
considerations,  prior  to  any  inquiry  into  the  par-  _
ticular  reasons  and  testimonies  by  which  the  au-
thority of  our  histories  is  supported.

In  the  first  place,  there  exists  no  trace  or  vestige
of  any  other  story.  It  is  not,  like  the  death  of
Cyrus, the  Qreat,  a  competition  between  opposite
accounts,.or  between  the  credit  of  different  hie*
torians.  There  is  not  a  document,  or  scrap  of
account  either  contemporary  with  the  <


»Actaxviii.9a


ment  of  Christianity,  or  extant  within  many  ages
after  that  commencement,  which  assigns  a  history
substantially  different  from  ours.  The  remote,
brief,  and,  incidental  notices  of  the  affair,  which
are  found. in  heathen  writers,  so  far  as  they  do  go,
go  along  with  us.  They  bear  testimony  to  these
facts : — that  the  institution  originated  from  Jesus ;
that  the  Founder  was  put  to  death,  as  a  maleme*
tor,  at  Jerusalem,  by  the  authority  of  the  Roman
governor,  Pontius  Pilate;  that  the  religion  never-
theless spread  in  that  city  and  throughout  Judea;
and  that  it  was  propagaled.lhence  to  distant  coun-


968


EVIDENCES  OP  CHRISTIANITY.


tariff  thafcthe  converts  were  numerous ;  that  they
suffered  great  hardships  and  injuries  Tortheirpre-
fession ;  and  that  all  this  took  place  in  the  age  of
the  world  which  our  books  have  assigned.  They
go  on  further,,  to  describe  the  -manners  of  .Christ
turns  in  terms  perfectly  conformable  to  the  ac-
counts extant  in  our  books:  that  they  were  wont
to  assemble  on  a  certain  day;  that  they  sang
hymns  to  Christ  as  to  a  god;  that  they  bound
themselves  by  an  oath  not  to  dbmmit  any  crime,
but  to  abstain  from  theft  and  adultery,  to  adhere
strictly  to  their  promises,  and  net  to  deny  money
deposited  in  their  hands;*  that  they  worshipped
him  who  was  crucified  in  Palestine;  that  this
their  first  lawgiver  had  taught  them  that  they
were  all  brethren ;  that  they  had  a  great  contempt,
for  the  things  of  this  world,  and  looked  upon
them  as  common ;  that  they  flew  to  one  another's
relief :  that  they  cherished  strong  hopes  of  im-
mortality ;  that  they  despised  death,  and  surren-
dered themselves  to  sunerings.t  This  is  the  ac-
count of  writers  who  viewed  the  subject  at  a  great
distance;  who  Were  uninformed  and  uninterested
about  it.  It  bears  the  characters  of  such  an  account
upon  the  face  of  it,  because  it  describes  effects,
namely,  the  appearance-  in  the  world  of  a  new  re-
ligion, and  the  conversion  of  great  multitudes  to
it,  without  descending*  in  the  smallest  degred,  to
the  detail  of  the  transaction  upon  which  it  was
founded,  the  interior  of  the' institution,  the  evi-
dence or  arguments  offered  by  those  who  drew
over  others  to  it.  Yet  still  here  is  no  contradic-
tion of  our  story;  no-  other  or  different  -story  set
up  against  it:  but  so  far  &  confirmation  of  it,  as
that,  in  the  general  points  on  which  the  heathen
account  touches,  it  agrees  with  that  which  we
find  in  our  own  books.

The  same  may  be  observed  of  the  very  'lew
Jewish  writers,  of  that  and  the  adjoining  period;
which  have  come  down  to  us.  ,Whatever  they
.  omit,  or  whatever  difficulties  we  may  find  in  ex-
plaining the  omission,  they  advance  no  other  his-
tory of  the  transaction  than  that  which  we  acknow-
ledge. Josephus,  who  wrote  his  Antiquities^  or
History  of  the  Jews;  about  sixty  years  after  the
commencement  of  Christianity,  in  a  passage  ge-
nerally admitted  as  genuine,  makes  mention  of
John  under  the  name  of  John  the' Baptist;  that
he  was  a  preacher  of  virtue ;  that  he  baptized  his
proselytes  ;  thai  he  was  well  received  by  the  peo-
ple; that  he  was  imprisoned  and  put  to  death  by
Herod ;  and  that  Herod  lived  in  a  criminal  co-
habitation with  Hexodias,  his  brother's  wife.* .  In


*  See  Pliny's  Letter.— Bonnet,  in  bis  lively  way  of
expressing  himself,  says, — "  Comparing  Pliny's  Letter
With  the  account  of  tbe  Acta,  it  seems  to  me  that  I  had
not  taken  up  another  author,  but  that  I  was  still  read-
ing the  histdrian  of  that  extraordinary  society."  This
is  strong:  but  there  is  undoubtedly  an  affinity,  and  all
the  affinity  that  could  be  expected.

f  '.'  It  is  incredible  what  expedition  they  use  when
any  of  their  friends  are  known  to  bs  in  trouble.  In  a
word,  they  spare  nothing  upon  such  an  occasion  1— for
these  miserable  men  have  no  doubt  they  shall  be  im-
mortal and  iive  for  ever :  therefore. they  contemn  death,
and  many  surrender  themselves  to  sufferings.  More-
over, their  first  lawgiver  has  taught  them  that  they  are
all  brethren,  when  once  they  have  turned  and  renounced
the  gods  of  the  Greeks,  and  worship  this  Master  of  theirs
who  was  crucified,  and  engage  to  live  according  to  his
laws.  They  have  also  a  sovereign  contempt  for  all  the
things  of  this  world,  and  look  upon  tliem  aa  common;"—
Luaaa  de  Morte  Peregrini,  t.  i.  p.  565.  ed.  Gnev. -

X  Antiq.  j.  zviii.  cat.  v.  sect,  1, 3.


another  passage  allowed  by  many,  although  not
without  considerable  question  being  moved  about
it,  we  hear  of  "James,  the  brother  of  him.  who
was  called  Jesus,  and  of  bis  being  put  to  death."*
In  a  third  passage,  extant'  in  every  copy  that  re-
mains of  Josephus's  History,  but  the  authenticity
of  which  has  nevertheless  been  long  disputed,  we
have  an  explicit  testimony  to  the  substance  of 'our
history  in  these  words :«— "  At  that  time  lived  Je-
sus, a  wise  man,  if  he  may  be  called  a  man,  for  he
performed  man}  wonderful"  works.  He  was  a
teacher  of  such  men  as  received  the  truth  with
pleasure.  He  drew  ovar  to  him  many  Jews  and
Gentiles.  This  was  the  Christ;  and  when  Pilate,
at  the  instigation  of  the  chief  men  among  us,  had
condemned  him  to  the  cross.,  they  who  before  had
conceived  an  affection  for  him,  did  not  cease  to
adhere  to  him ;  for,  on  the*  third  day,  be  appeared
to  them  alive  again,  the  divine  prophets  having
foretold  these  •  and  many  wonderful  \hings  con-
cerning him.  And  the  sect  of  the  Christians,  so
called  from  him,  subsists  to  this  time/'t  Whatever
become  of  the  controversy  concerning  tbe  genuine-
ness of  this  passage ;  whether  Josephus  go  the
whole  length  of  our  history ,  which,  ir  the  passage
be  sincere,  he  does';  or  whether  he  proceed  only  a
very  Utile  why  with  us,  which,  if  the  passage  be
rejected,  we  confess  to  be  the  case ;  stiH  what  we
asserted  is  true,  that  he  gives  no  other  or  different
history  of  the  subject  from  ours,  no  other  or  dif-
ferent  account  of  the  origin  of  the  institution:
And  I  think  also  that  it  may  with  great  reason
be  contended,  either  that  the  passage  is  genuine,
or  that  the  silence  of  Josephus  was  designed.
For,  although  we  should  lay  aside  the  authority
of  our  own  books  entirely,  yet  when  Tacitus,  who
wrote  not  twenty,  perhaps  not  ten,  years  after  Jo-
sephus, in  his  account  of  a  period  in  which  Jose-
phus was  nearly  thirty  years  of  age,  tells  Us,  that  a
vast. multitude  of  Christians  were  condemned  at
Rome ;  thai  they  derived  their  derramination  from
Christ,  who,'  in  the  reign  of  Tiberius,  was  put  to
death,  as  a  criminal,  by  tfye  procurator,'  Pontius
Pilate ;  that  the  superstition  nad'spreaa  not  only
over  Judea,  the  source  of  the  evil,  but  had  reached
Rome  also : — when  Suetonius,'  an  historian  con-
temporary with  Tacitus,  relates  .that,  in  the  time
of  Claudius,- the  Jews  were  making  disturbances
at  Rome,  Christais  being  their  leader ;  and  that,
during  the  reign,  of  Nero,  the  Christians  were
punished;  under  both  which  emperors,  Josephus
lived :  when  -  Pliny,  who  wrote  .his  celebrated
epistle  not  more  than  thirty  years  after  the  pub-
lication of  Josephus's  history,  found  the  Christians
in  such  numbers  in  the  province  of  Bithynia,  as
to  draw  from  him  a  complaint,  that  the  contagion
had  seized  cities,  towns,  and  villages,  and  had  so
seized  them  as  to- produce  a  general  desertion  of
the  public  rites;  and  when,  as  has  elready  been
observed,  there  is  no  reason  for  imagining  that
the  Christians  were  more  numerous  in  Bithynia
than  in  many  other  parts  of  the  Roman  empire;
it  cannot,. I  should  suppose,  after  this,  be  believed,
that  the  religion,  and  the  transaction  upon  which
it  was  founded,  were  too  obscure  to*  engage- the
attention  of  Josephus,  or  to  obtain  a  place  in  his
history.  Perhaps  he  did  not  know  how  to  repre-
sent the  business,  and  disposed  of  his  difficulties
by  passing  it  over  in.  silence. Eusebius  wrote  the


*  Antiq  1.  xx.  cap.  ix,  sect.  L
f  Antiq,  I  xviii.  cap.  ft.  sect.  3.


EVIDENCES  OP  CHRISTIANITY.


file  of  Constantine,  yet  omits  entirely  the  most
remarkable  circumstance  in  that  life,  the  death  of
his  son  Grispus:  undoubtedly  far  the  reason  here
given.  The  reserve  of  Josephus'upon  the  subject
of  Christianity  appears  also  in  his  passing  over
the  banishment  or  the  Jews  by  Claudius,  which'
Suetonius,  we  have  seen,  has  recorded  with  an
express  reference  to  Christ  This  is  at  least  as
remarkable  as  his  silence  about  the  infants  of
BetMehem.*  Be,  however,  the  fact/or  the  cause
of  the  omission  in.  Josephus.t  what  it1  may,  no
other  or  different  history  on  tne  subject  has  been
given:  by  him,  or  is  pretended  to  have  been  given.
But  farther;-  the  whole  series  of  Christian
writers,  from  the  first  age  of  the  institution  down
to  -the  present*  in  their  discussions,  apologies,
arguments,  and  controversies,  proceed  upon  the
general  story  which  our  Scriptures  contain,  and
upon  no  other.  The  main  facts,  the  principal
agents,  are  alike  in  aJJL  This  argument  will  ap-
pear to  be  of  great  force,  when  it  is  known  that
we  are  able  to  trace  back  the  series  of  writers  to  a
contact 'With  the  historical  books  of  the  New  Tes-
tament, and  to  the  age  of  tjie  first  emissaries  of
the  religion,  and  to  deduce  it,  by.  an  unbroken.
continuation,  from  that  end  of  the  train  to  the


The  remaining  letters  of  the  apostles,  (and
what  more  original  than  their  letters  can  we
haw)  1)  though  written  without-  the  remotest  de-
sign of  transmitting  the  history  of  Christ,  or  of
Christianity,  to  future  ages,  or  even  of  making  it
known  to  their  ^contemporaries,  incidentally  dis-
close to  us  the  following  circumstances : — Christ's
upseent  and  family ;  his  innocence ;  the  meekness
and  gentleness  of  his  character;  (a  recognition
wjuch  goes  to  the  whole, Gospel  history;)  his  ex-
alted nature;  lmr circumcision;  his  transfigura-
tion; hie  lift  of  opposition  and  suffering;  his  pa-
tience and  resignation;  the  appointment  of  the
encharist,  and  the  manner  of  it ;  his  agony ;  his
epn&saion  before  Pontius  Pilate ;  his  stripes,  cru-
cifixion, and  burial ;  his  resurrection ;  his  ap-
pearance after  it,  first  to  Peter,  then  to  the  rest
of  the^aposttes ;  his  ascension  into  heaven ;  and
his  designation  to  he  the  future  judge  of  man-
kind;— the  stated  residence  of  the  apostles  at  Je-
rusalejm;  the  working  of  miracles  by  the  first
preachers  of  the  Gospel,  who  were  also  the  hear-
ers of  Qhrist  ;*— the  successful  propagation  of  the


*  Michaelis  has  computed,  and,  -as  it  should  asem,
fairly  enough,  that  probably  not  more  than  twenty
children  perished  by  ibis  cruel  precaution.— ftlichaelis's


Introduction  to  the  New  Testament,  translated  by
Manh.  vol.  i.  c  ii.  sect.  II.

t  There  is  no  notice  taken  of  Christianity  in  the
Mishna.  a  collection  of  Jewish  traditions  compiled
about  the  year  IK) ;  although  it  contains  a  Tract  "  Da
"tadta  peregrino,"  of  strange  or  idolatrous  worship ;  yet.
it  cannot  be  disputed  but  that  Christianity  was  per-
■  feetly  well  known  in  the  world  at  this  time.  There  is
extremely  little  notice'  of  the  subject  in  the  Jerusalem
Talmud,  compiled  about  the  year  300,  and  not  mush
more  in  the  Babylonish  Talmud,  qf  the  year  500 ;  al-
though, both  these  works  are  of  a  religious  nature,  and
although,  wh*n  the  first  was  compiled.  Christianity
was  on  the  point  of  becoming  the  religion  of  the  state,
and,  when  the  latter  was  published,  had  bteaso  for  »0


%  Heb.  ii.  3.  "  How  shall  we.  escape,  if  we  neglect  to
great  salvation,  which,  at  the  first,  began  to  be  spoken
by  the  Lord,  and  was  confirmed  onto  us  fyttem.  that
hoard  Mm,  God  ano  bearing  them  witness,  both  with
s>m  mnd  wndert,  and  with  divert  miracles,  and  gifts
of  the  Holy  Guest  f*  laltege  this  tpisUe  without  basi-


religion;  the  persecution  of  its  followers;  the  mi-
raculous conversion  of  Paul;  miracles  wrought
by  himself  and  alleged  in  his  controversies  with
his  adversaries,  and  in  letters  to  the  persons
amongst  whom  they  were  wrought.;  finally,  that
mir agues  were  the  signs  of  an  apostle*  '
,  In  an  epistle,  bearing  the  name  of  Barnabas,
tye  companion  of  Paul,  probably  genuine,  cer-
tainly belonging  to  that  age,  we  have  the  suf-
ferings of  Christ,  his  choice  of  apostles  and  their
number,  his  passion,  the  scarlet  robe,  the  vinegar
and  sail,  the  mocking  and  piercing,  the  casting
lots  for  his' coat,  t  his  resurrection  jon  the  eighth
{i.e.  the  first  day  of  the  week,?)  and,  the  con*-
memorative  distinction  of  that  day,  his  manifesta-
tion after  his  resurrection,  and  lastly,  his  ascen-
sion. We  have  also  his  miracles  generally  but
positively  referred  to  in  the  following  words: —
"  Finally,  teaching  the  people  of  Israel,  and  dry-
ing many  wonders  and  signs  among  them,  he
preached  to  them,  and  showed  the  exceeding
great  love  which  he  bare  towards  them."S

In  an  epistle  of  Clement,  a  hearer  of  St.  Paul
although  written  for  a  purpose  remotely  connected
with  the  Christian  history,  we  have  the  resurrrec-
tion  of  Christ,  and  the  subsequent  mission  of  the
apostles,  recorded  in  these  satisfactory  terms:
"The  apostles  have  preached  to  us  from  our
Lord  Jesus  Christ  from  God : — For,  having  -re-
ceived their  command,  and  being  thoroughly
assured  by  the  resurrection  of -cur  Lord  Jesus
Christ,  they  went  abroad,  publishing  that  the
kingdom  of  God  was  at  hand."ll  We  find  no-
ticed also,  the  humility,  yet  the  power  of  Christ.1T
his. descent  from  Abraham,  his  crucifixion.  We
have  Peter  and  Paul  represented  as  faithful  and
righteous  pillars  of  the  church  j  the  numerous
sufferings  of  Peter ;  the  bonds,  stripes,  and  stoning
of  Paul,  and  more  particularly  his  extensive  and
unwearied  travels.

In  an  epistle  of  Polycarp,  a  disciple  of  St  John,
though  only  a  brief  hortatory  letter,  we  have  the
humflity,  patience,  sufferings,  resurrection,  and
ascension  of  Christ,  together  with  the  .apostolic
charactenrof  St.  Paul,  distinctly  recognised.**  Of
this  same  father  we  are  also  assured  by  lreneus,
that  he  (Irensus,)  had  heard  him  relate,  "what
he  had  received  from  eye-witnesses  concerning
the  Lord,  both  concerning  hi*  miracles  and  his
doctrine."tt

■  In  the  remaining  works  of  Ignatius,,  the  con-
temporary of  Polycarp,  larger  than  those  of  Poly-
carp (yet,  like  those  of  Polycarp,  treating  of  sub-
jects in  nowise  leading  to  any  recital  of  the
Christian  history,)  the  occasional  allusions  are
proportionably  more  numerous.*— The  descent  of

tntjon ;  for,  whatever  doubts  may  have  b*en  raised
about  its  author,  there  can  be  none  concerning  t-be  age
in  which  it  was  written.  No  epistle  in  the  collection
carries  about  it  more  indubitable  marks  of  antiquity
than  thin  does,  ft  speaks,  for  instance,  throughout,  of
the  temple  as  than-  standing,  and  of  the  worship  of  the
temple  as  then  subsisting.  Heb.  viii  4;  "For.  if  he
were  on  earth,  be  should  not  be  a  priest,  seeing  there
are  priests  that  offer  according  to  the  law."-  Again,
Heb  xiii.  10:  "We  have  an  altar  whereof  thfy  have
no  right  to  eat  which  serve  iht  tabernacle."

»  "Truly  Uu  signs  sfan  apostle  ware  wrought  among
you  in  all  patience,  in  signs,  and  wonders,  and.  mighty
deeds.*"*-? Cor.  xii.  13.  _. ._.. _

t  Ep.  Bar.  c.  vii.  X  Ibid.  c.  vl.  $  Ibid\  c.  V.

|  Ep  Clem.  Rome.  alii. V  Bp.  Ctens.  Rom.  o.  xn.

**  Pol.  Ep.  sd  Phil.  c.  v.  tiii.  ii.  iii.

ft  ».  ad  Flor.  ap.  Euaeb.  I.  v.  c.  20.


990


EVIDENCES  OP  CHRISTIANITY.


Christ  from  Dsvffl,  his  mother  Mary,  hi*  rnlracur
loos  conception,  the  star  at  hie  birth,  hie  baptism
by  loan,  toe  reason  assigned  for  it,  his  appeal  to
the  prophets,  the  ointment  poured -tin  his  head,
bis  sufferings  under  Pontius  Pilate  and  Herod
the  tetrarch,  his  resurrection,  the  Lord's  day
called  and  kept  in  commemoration  of  it,  and  the
eucharisf,  in  both  its  parts,— are  unequivocally
referred  to.  Upon  the  resurrection,  this  writer  is
even  circumstantial.  He  mentions. the  apostles'
eating  and  drinking  with  Christ  after  ne  had
risen,  their  feeling  and  their  handling  him;  from
which  last  circumstance  Ignatius  raises  this  just
reflection j — "They  believed,  being  convinced
'  both  by  his  flesh  and  spirit ;  for  this  cause,  they
despised  death,  and. were  found  to  be  above  it."*

(tuadratus,  of  the  same  age  with  Ignatius,  has
left  us  the  following  noble  testimony: — "The
works  of'  our  Saviour  were  always  conspicuous,
for  they  were  real ;  both  those  that  were  healed,
and  those  that  were  raised  from  the  dead;  who
were  seen  not  only  when  they  were  healed  or
raised,  but  for  a  long  time  afterwards :  not  only
whilst  he  dwelled  on  this  earth,  but  also  after  his
departure,  and  for  a  good  while  after  it,  insomuch
that  some  of  them  have  reached  to  our  times."t

Justin  Martyr  came  little  more  than  thirty
years  after  Qjiadratus.  From  Justin's  works,'
which  are  still  extant,  might  be  collected  a  tole-
rably complete  account  of  Christ's  life,  in  all  points
agreeing  with  that  which  is  delivered  in  pur
Scriptures;  taken  indeed,  ina  great  measure,  from
those  Scriptures,  but  still  proving  that  this  ac-
count, and  no  other,  was  the  account  known  and
extant  in  that  age.  The  miracles  in  particular,
which  form  the  part  of  Christ's  history  most  ma-
terial to  be  traced,  stand  fully  and  distinctly  re-
cogniaed  in  the  following  passage : — "  He  healed
those  who  had  been  bind,  and  deaf,  and  lame
from  thei/  birth;  causing,  by  his  word,  one  to
leap,  another  to  hear,  and  a  mild  to  see :  and  by
raising  the  dead,  and  making  them  to  live,  he  in-
duced, by  bis  works,  the  men  of  that  age  to  know
him.»±

It  is  unnecessary  to  carry  these  citations  lower,
because  the  history,  after  this  time,  occurs  in  an-
cient Christian  writings  as  familiarly  as  it  is  wont
to  do  in  modern  sermons ;— occurs  always  the
tame  in  substance,  and  always  that  which  our
evangelists  represent

This  is  not  only  true  of  those  writings  of  Chris-
tians, which  are  genuine,  and  of  acknowledged
authority ;  but  it  is,  in  a  great  measure,  true  of
all  their  ancient  writings  which  remain ;  although
some  of  these  may  have  been  erroneously  ascribed
to  authors  to  whom  they  did  not  belong,  or  may
contain  false  accounts,  or  may  appear  to  be  unde-
servingof  credit,  or  never  indeed  to  have  obtained
any.  Whatever  fables  they  have  mixed  with  the
narrative,  they  preserve  the  material  parts,  the
leading  facts,  as  we  have  them ;  and,  so  tar  as  they
.  do  this,  although' they  be  evidence  of  nothing  else,
they  are  evidence  that  these  points  weremfixed,  were
received  and  acknowledged  by  all  Christians  in  the
ages  in  which  the  books  were  written.  At  least,
it  may  be  asserted,  that,  in  the  places  where  we
were  most  likely  to  meet  with  such  things,  if
such  things  bad  existed,  no  reticles .  aopear  of
any  story  substantially  different  from  the  present,


♦AdSmyr.ciii.  f  Ap.  Euseb.  H.  E.  lib.  4.  o.  8.

X  Just.  Dial  cumTryph.  p.  886.  ad.  Thirl.


as  the  cause,  or  as  the  pretence  of  the  mstttfi-
tion.  w

Now  that  the  original  story,  the  story  delivered
by  the  first  preachers  of  the  institution,  should
have  died  away  so  entirely  as  to  have  left  no  re-
cord or  memorial  of  its  existence,  although  so  many
records  and  jnemorials  of  the  time  and  transaction
remain;  and  that  another  story  should  have  step-
ped into  its  place,  and  gained  exclusive  possession
of  the  belief  of  all  who  professed  themselves  dis-
ciples of  the  institution,  is  beyond  any  example
of  the  corruption  of  even  oral  tradition,  and  sbll
less  consistent  with  the  experience  of  written  his-
tory :  and  this  improbability,  which  is  very  great,
is  rendered  still  greater  by  the  reflection,  that  no
such  change  as  the  oblivion  of  one  story,  arid  the
substitution  of  another,  took  place  in  any  future
period  of  the  Christian  era.  Christianity  hath
travelled  through  dark  and  turbulent  ages;  never-
theless it  came  out  of  the  cloud  and  the  storm,
suchr  in  substance,  as  it  entered  in.  Many  ad*
ditions  were  made  to  the  primitive  history,  and
these  entitled  to  different  degrees  of  credit ;  many
doctrinal  errors  also  were  from  time  to  time  graftea
into  the  public  creed ;  but  still  the  original  story
remained  and  remained  the  same.  In  aU  its  prino-
palparts,  it  has  been  fixed  from  the  beginning.

Thirdly :  The  religious  rites  and  usages  that
prevailed  amongst  the  early  disciples  of  Chris-
tianity, were  such  as  belonged  to,  and  sprung  out
of,  the  narrative' now  in  our  hands;  which  ac-
cordancy  shows,  that  it  was  the  narrative  upon
which  these  persons  acted,  and  which  they  bad
received  from  their  teachers.  -Ouf  account  makes
the  Pounder  of  the  religion  direct  that  his  disci-
ples should  be  baptised:  we  know,  that  the  first
Christians  were  baptised.  Our  account  makes
him  direct  that  they  should  hold  religions  assem-
blies :  we  find,  that  they  did  hold  religious  assem-
blies. Our  accounts  make  the  apostles  assemble
upon  a  stated  day  of  the  week :  we  find,  and  that
from  infbnnationperfectly  independent  of  our  ac-
counts, that  the  Christians  of  the  first  century  did
observe  stated  days  of  assembling.  Our  histories
record  the  institution  of  the  rite  which  we  omit  the
Lord's  Supper,  and  a  'command  to  repeat  it  in
perpetual  succession :  we  find,  amongst  the  early
Christians,  the  celebration  of  this  rite  universal.
And  indeed^  we  find  concurring  in  all  the  above-
mentioned  observances,  Christian  societies  of  many
different  nations  and  languages,  removed  from  one
another  by  a  great  distance  of  place  and  dissimili-
tude of  situation.  It  is  also  extremely  material  to
remark,  that  there  is  no  room  for  insinuating  that
our  books  were  fabricated  with  a  studious  accom-
modation to  the  usages  which  obtained  at  the  time
they  were  written;  that  the  authors  of  theTxwks
found  the  usages  established,  and  framed  the  story
to  account  for  their  original.  The  Scripture  ac-
counts, especially  of  the  Lord's  Supper,  are  too
short  and  cursory,  not  to.  say  too  obscure,  and,  in
this  view,  deficient,,  to  allow  a  place  for  any  such
suspicion."

Amongst  the  proofs  of  the  truth -of  our  proposi-
tion, viz.  that  the  story,  which  we  have  nene,  is,  in
substance,  the  story  which  the  Christians  had


•  THe  reader  who  is  conversant  In  these  researches,
by  competing  the  short  Scripture  accounts  of  the  Chris*
tian  rites  above-mentioned,  with  the  minute  and  cir-
cumstantial direction*  contained  in  the  pretended  apos-
tolical constitutions,  will  see  the  fores  of  this  observa-
tion: the  diflerenee  between  truth  and  forgery.


EVIDENCES  OF  CHRISTIANITY.


991


then,  or,  in  other  words,  that  the  accounts  in  our
Gospels  are,  as  to  their  principal  parts  at  least,  the
accounts  which  the  apostles  and  original  teachers
of  the.  religion  delivered,  one  arises  from  observing,
that  it  appears  by.  the  Gospels  themselves,  that  the
story  was  public  at  the  time ;  that  the  Christian
community  was  already  in  possession  of  the  sub-
stance and  principal  parts  of  the  narrative.  The
Gospejs  wen?  not  the  original  cause  of  the  Chris-
tian history  being  .believed,  but  were  themselves
among  the  consequences  of  that  belief.  This  is
expressly  affirmed  by  Saint  Luke,  in  his  brief,
but,  as  I  -think,  very  important  and  instructive
preface : — "  Forasmuch  (says  the  evangelist)  as
many  have  taken  in  hand  to  set  forth  in  iorder  a
declaration  of  those  thingB  which  are  most  surely
believed  amongst  us,  even  as  they  delivered  them
unto  us,  which,  from  the  beginnings  were  eye-
witnesses a~nd  ministers  of  the  word;  it  seemed
good  to  me  also,  bavins  had  perfect  understand-
ing of  all  things  from  the  very  first,  to  write  unto
thee  in  order,  most  excellent  Theqphilus,  tha|
thoumigntcst  know  the  certainty  of  those  things
wherein  thou  hast  been  instructed." — This  short
introduction  testifies,  that  the  substance-  of  the
history,  which  the  evangelist  was  about  to  write,
was  already  believed  'by  -Christians;  that  it  was
believed  upon  the  declarations  of  eye-witnesses
and  ministers  of  the  word ;  that  it  formed  the  ac-
count of  their  religion  in  which.  Christians  were
instructed;  that  the  office  which  the  historian
proposed  to  himself  was  to  trace  each  particular
to  its  origin,  and  to  fix  the  certainty  of  many
dungs  which  the  reader  had  before  heard  of.  In
Saint  John's  Gospel,  the  same  point  appears
hence',  that  there  are  some  principal  facta,  to.
which  the  historian  refers,  .but  which  he  does  not
relate.  A  remarkable  instance  of  this  kind  is  the
ascension,  which  is  not  mentioned  by  Saint  John
in  its  place,  at  the  conclusion  of  his  history ;  but
which  is  plainly  referred  to  in  the  following  words
of  the  sixth  chapter  :♦ — "  What  andif  ye  shall  see
the  Son  of  man  ascend  up  where  he.  was  before  1"
And  still  more  positively  in  the  words  which
Christ,  according  to  our  evangelist,  spoke  to  Mary
after  his  resurrection,  "  Touch  me  not,  for  I  am
not  vet  ascended  to  my  Father :  but  go  unto  my
brethren,  and  say  unto  them,  I  ascend  unto  my
Father  and  your  Father,  unto  my  God  and
your  God."t  This  can  only  be  accounted  lor
by  the  supposition  that  Saint  John  wrote  un-
,der  a  sense  of  the  notoriety  of  Christ's '  ascen-
sion, amongst  those  by  whom  his  book  was  likely
to  be  read.  The  same  account  must  also  be  given
of  Saint  Matthew's  omission  of  the  same  import-
ant ftc*.  The  "thing  was  very  well  known,  and
it  did  not  occur  to  the  historian  that  it  was  neces-
sary to  add'  any  particulars  concerning  it  It
agrees  ako  with  this  solution,  and  with  no  other,
that  neither  Matthew,  nor  John,  disposes  of  the
person  of  our  Lord  in  any  manner  whatever.
Other  intimations  in  Saint  John's  Gospel  of  the
then  general  notoriety  of  the  story  are  the  follow-
ing :  His  manner  of  Introducing  his  narrative  (eh.
L  ver.  15:)  "  John  bare  witness  of  him,  and  cned,
saying,"— evidently  presupposes  that  his  readers
knew  who  John  was.  His  rapid  parenthetical
reference  to  John's  imprisonment,  '<  for  John  was
not  yetcast  into  prison,"*  could  only  come  from  a


writer  whose  mind  was  in  the  habit  of  conaider-
ing  John's  imprisonment  as  perfectly  notorious.
The  description- of  Andrew  by  the  addition  "  Si-
mon Peters  brother,"*  takes  k  for  granted,  that
Simon  Peter  was  well  known.  His  name  had
not  been  mentioned  before.  •  The  evangelist's
noticingt  the  prevailing  misconstruction  of  a  dis-
course, which  Christ  lield  with  the  beloved  dis-
ciple, proves  that  the  characters  and  the  discourse
were  already  public.  And  the  observation  which
these  instances  afford,  is  of  equal  validity  far  the
purpose  of  the  present,  argument,  whoever  were
the  authors  of  the  histories.

These  four  circumstances ;  first,  the  recognition
of  the  account  in  its. principal  parts,  by  a  series  of
succeeding  writers;  secondly,  the  total  absence  of
any  account  of  the  origin  of  the  religion  substan-
tially different  from  ours;  thirdly,  the  early  and
extensive  prevalence  of  rites  and  institutions,
which  result  from  our  account;  fourthly,  bur  ac-
count bearing,  in  its  construction,  proof  that  it  is
an  account  of  facts,  which  were  known  and  be-
lieved at  the  time; — are  sufficient,  I  conceive,  to
support  an  assurance,  that  the  story  which  we
have  now,  is,  in  general,  the  story  which  Chris-
tians had  at  the  beginning.  I  say  in  general ;
by  which  term  I  mean,  that  it  is  the  same  in  Its
texture,  and  in  its  principal'  facts.  For  instance,
I  make  no  doubt,  for  the  reasons  above  stated,  but
that  the  resurrection  of  the  Founder  of  the  reli-
gion was  always  a  part  of  the  Christian  story.
Nor  can  a  doubt  of  this. remain  upon  the  mind  of
any  one  who  reflects  that  the  resurrection  is,  in
some  form  or  other,  asserted,  referred  to,  or  as-
sumed, in  every  Christian  writing,  of  every  de-
scription, which  hath  come  down  to  us.

And  if  our  evidence  stepped  here,  we  should
have  a  strong  case  to  offer :  for  we  should  have  to
allege,  that  in  the  reign  of  Tiberius  Cesat,  a  cer-
tain number  of  persons  set  about  an  attempt  of
establishing  a  new  religion  in  the  world:  in  the
-prosecution  of  which  purpose,  .they  voluntarily
encountered  great  dangers,  undertook  great  la-
boors,  sustained  great  Bufferings,  all/or  a  miracu-
lous story  which  they  published  wherever  they
came ;  and  that  the  resurrection  Of  a. dead  man,
whom  during  his  life  they  had  followed  and  ac-
companied, was  a  constant  part  of  this  story.  .  I
know  nothing  in  the  above  statement  which  can.
with  any  appearance  of  reason,  be  disputed ;  ana
I  know  nothing,  in  the  history  of  the  human  spe-
cies, similar  to  it.


♦  AlsoioiiniiL13;ai>dxvi.9B. fJoonxx.  17.


CHAPTER  Via

TJiere  is. satisfactory  evidence  that  many  profess-
ing to  be  original  witnesses  qf  the  Christian
miracles,  passed  their  lives  in  labours,  dangers,
and  sufferings,  voluntarily  undergone  in  at-
testation of  the  accdunts  which  they  delivered,
and  solely  in  consequence  of  their  belief  qf
those  accounts  ;  and  that  they  also  submitted,
from  the  same  motives,  to  new  rules  qf  conduct.

Th>t  the  story  which  we  have*  now  is,  in  the
main,  the;  story  which  the  apostles  published,  is,
T  think,  nearly  certain,  from  the  considerations
1  which  have  been  proposed.  But  whether,  when
we  come  to  the  particulars,  and  the  detail  of  the


•  John  1. 40.


t  IBM.  xzi  M.


EVIDENCES  OF  CHRISTIANITY.


narrative,  the  historical  books  of  the  New  Tcs-
■  tament  be  deserving  of  credit  as  histories;  00  that .
a  fact  ought  to  be  accounted  true,  because  it  is
found  in-tnem ;  or  whether  they  are  entitled  to  be
considered  as  representing  the  accounts-  which,
true  or  false,  the  apostles  published; — wjielher
their  authority,  in  either  of  these  views,  can  be
trusted  to,  i*a  point  whicji  necessarily  depends
upon  what  we  know  of  the  books,  and  of  their
authors.

Now,  in  treating  of  this  part  of  our  argument,
tile  first)  and  most  material  observation  upon  the
subject  is,  that  such  was  the  situation  of  the  au-
thors to  whom  the  four  Gospels  are  ascribecL  that,
if  any  one  of  the  four  be  genuine,  it  is  sufficient
for  our  purpose.  The  received  author  of  the  first,
was  an  original  apostle  and  emissary  of  the  re-
ligion. The  received  author  of  the  second,  was
an.  inhabitant  of  Jerusalem  at  the  time,  to  whose
house  the  apostles  were  wont  to  resort,  and  him-
self an  attendant  upon  one  of  the  most  eminent
of  that  number.  The  received  author  of -the  third,
was  a  stated  companion  and  fellow-traveller  of  the.
most  active  of  alHhe  teachers  of  the  religion,  and
in  the  coarse  of  his  travels  frequently  in  the
society  of  the  original  apostles.  The  received  au-
thor of  the  fourth,  as  well  as  of  the  first,  was  one  of
these  apostles.  Nor  stronger  evidence  of  the  truth
of  a  history  can  arise  from  the  situation  of  the
historian,  than  what  is  here  offered.  The  authors
of  all  the  histories  lived  at  the  time  and  upon  the
spot.  The  authors  of  two  of  the  histories  were
present  at  many  of  the  scenes  which  they  de-
scribe; -eye-witnesses  of  the  facts,  ear- witnesses
ef  the  discourses;  writing  from  personal  know-
ledge and  recollection;  and,  what  strengthens
their  testimony,  writing  upon  a  subject  in  which
their  minds  were  deeply  engaged,  and  in  which,
as  they  must  have  been  very  frequently  repeating
the  accounts  to  others,  the  passages  of  the  history
would  be  kept  continually  alive  in  their  memory.
Whoevenreads  the  Gospels  (and  they  ought  to  be
read  for  this  particular  purpose,)  will  find  in  them
not  merely  a  general  affirmation  of  miraculous
powers,  but  detailed  circumstantial  accounts  of
miracles,  with  specifications  of  time,  place,  and
persons;  and  these  accounts  many  and  various.
In  the  Gospels,  therefore,  which  bear  the  names
of  Matthew  and  John,  these  narratives,  if  they
really  proceeded  from  these  men,  must  either  be
true,  ss  far  as  the  fidelity  of  human  recollection  is
usually  to  be  depended  upon,  that  is,  must  be  true
in  substance,  and  in  their  principal  parts  (which
is  sufficient  for  the  purpose  of  proving  a  super-
natural agency,)  or  they  must  be  wilful  and  medi-
tated falsehoods.  Yet  the  writers  who  fabricated
and  uttered  these  falsehoods,  if  they  be  such,  are
of  the  number  of  those  who,  unless  the  whole
contexture  of  the  Christian  story  be  a  dream,  sa-
criiiced  their  ease  and  safety  in  the  cause,  and  for
a  purpose  the  most  inconsistent  that  is  possible
With  dishonest  intentions.  They  were  villains
for  no  end  but.  to  teach  honesty,  and  martyrs
without  the  least  prospect  of  honour  or  ^advan-
tage. ~
.  The  "Gospels  which  bear  the  name  of  Mark
and  Luke,  although  not  tho  narratives  of  eye-wit-
nesses, are,  if  genuine,  removed  from  that  only
by  one  degree.  They  are  the  narratives  of  •con-
temporary writers ;  or  writers  themselves  mixing
with  the  business ;  one  of  the  two  probably  living
in  the  place  which  was  the  principal  scene  of*  ac-


tion: both  living  in  habits  of  society  and  ajims-
pondenee  with  those  who  had  been  present  at  die,
transactions  which  they  relate.  The  latter  of  them'
accordingly  tells  us,  (and  with  apparent  sincerity,
because  he  tells  it  without  pretending  to  personal
knowledge,  and  without  claiming  for  his  work
greater  authority  than  belonged  to  it,)  that  the
things  which  were  believed  amongst  Christians,
came  from  those  who  from  the  beginning  were
eye-witnesses  and  ministers  of  the  word;  that
he  had  traced  accounts  np  to  their  source ;  and
that  he  was  prepared  to  instruct' his  reader  in  the
certainty  of  the  things  which  he  related  ♦  Very
few  histories  tie  so  Close  to  their  facts;  very  few
historians  are  so  nearly  connected  with'  the  sub-
ject of  their  narrative,  or  possess  such  means  0/
authentic  information,  as  tnese.

The  situation  of  the  writers  applies  to  the  truth
of  the  facts  which  they  record.  But  at  present  we
use  their  testimony  to  a  point  somewhat  short  of
this, -namely,  that  the  facts  recorded  in  the  Gcav
pels,  whether  true  or  false,  are  the  facts,  and  the  .
sort  of  Acts,  which  the  original  preachers  of  the
religion  alleged.  Strictly  speaking,  I  am  con-
cerned only  to  show,  that  what  the  Gospels  con-
tain is  the  same  as  what  the  apostles  preached.
Now,  how  stands  the  proof  of  tlns-Jpoint.?  A  set
of  men  went  about  the  world,  publishing  a  story
composed  of  miraculous  accounts,  (for  nuraculoue
from  the  very  nature  and  exigency  of  the  ease
they  must  have  been,)  and,  upon  the  strength  of-
these  accounts^  called  upon  mankind  to  quit  the  ■
religions  in  which  they  had  been  educated,  and  to
take  up,  thenceforth,  a  new  system  of  opinions,
and  new  rules  of  action.  What  is  more  in  attes-
tation of  these  accounts,  that  is,  in  support  of  an
institution  of  which  these  accounts  were  the  foun-
dation, is  that  the  same  men  voluntarily  exposed
themselves  to  harassing  and  perpetual  labours,
dangers,  and  sufferings.  We  want  to  know  what'
these  accounts  were.  We  have  the  particulars,
t.  e.  many  particulars,  from  two  of  their  own  nam- '
ber.  We  have  them  from  an  attendant  of  one  of
the  number,  and  who,  there  is  reason  to  believe,
was  an  inhabitantrof  Jerusalem  at  the  time.  We
have  them  from  a  fourth  writer,  who  accompanied
the  most  laborious  missionary  of  the  institution  in
his  travels;  who,  in  the  course  of  these  travels,
was  frequently  brought  into  the  society  of  4he
rest;  and  who^  let  it  be  observed,  begins  his  nar-
rative by  telling  us  that  hels  about  to  relate  the
things  which  had  been  delivered  by  those  who
were  ministers  of  the  word,  and  eye-witnesses  of
the  fact*. '  I  do  not  know  what  information  can
be  more  satisfactory  than  this.  We  may,4>erhaps,
perceive  the  force  end  value  of  it  more  sensibly,  it
we  reflect  how  requiring,  we  should  have  been  if
we  had  wanted  it.  Supposing' it  to  be  sufficiently
proved,  that  the  religion  now  professed  among  us,
owed  its  original  to  the  preaching  and  ministry
of-  9  number  of  men,  who,  about  eighteen  cen-
turies ago,  set  forth  in  the  world  a  new  system  of
religious  opinions,  founded  upon  certain  extraor-
dinary things  which  they  related  of  a  wonderful
person  who  had  appeared  in  Judea ;  suppose  it  to

*  Vfhy  should  not  the  candid  and  modest  preface  of
this  historian  be  believed,  as  well  as  that  which  Dion
Qaasitis  prefixes  to  his  Life  of  Oommodiis  f  "  These
things  and  the  following  I  write  hot  from  toe  report  of
dinars,  hut  from  my  own  knowledge  and  observation."
I  see  no  reason  to  doubt  but  that  both  passages  describe
truly  enough  the  situation  of  the  authors.


EVIDENCES  OF  CHBIBTIAIQTY.


be  aleosttfrsemiy  proved,  that  in  the  course  and
pwjsemtion-of  their  laniisiry,  these  men  had  sub-
jected themselves  to  extreme  hardships,  fttifue,
and  peril;  bat  suppose  the  accounts  which  they
published  had  not  been  committed  to  writing  till
aome  ages  after  their  tunes,  or  at  least  that  no
histories,  but  what  had  been  composed  seme  ages
afterwards,  had  reached  our  hands;  we  should
have  said,  and  with  reason,  that  we  were  willing
to  behove  these  men  under  the  drcumstances  in
winch  they  delivered  their  testimony,  but  that' we
did  not,  at  this  day,  know  with  sufficient  evidence
what  their  testimony  was.  Had  we  received  the
particulars  of  it  from  any  of  their  own  number,
from  any  of  those  who  lived  and  conversed  with
them;  from  any  of  their  hearers,  or -even  from  any
of  their  contemporaries,  we  should  have  had  some-
thing to  rely  Upon.  Now,  if  our  books  be  genuine,
we  have  all  these.  We  have  the  very  species  of
information  winch,  as  it  appears  to  me,  our  imagi-
^nation  would  have  carved  outfor  us,  if  it  had  been
wanting.

But  1  have  said,  that  if  any  one  of  the  four
Gospels  be  genuine,  weneve  not  only  direct  his-
torical testimony  to  the  point  we  contend  for,'  hut
testimony  which,  so  fur  as  that  point  is  concerned,
cannot  reasonably  be  rejected.  Ifthe  first  (jfospei
was- really  written  by  Matthew,  wehave  the  narra-
tive of  one  of  the  number,  from  which  to  judge  what
were  the  miracles,  and  the  kind  of  miracles,  which
the  apostles  attributed  to  Jesus.  Although,  for
argument's  sake,  and  only  for  argument's  sake,
we  should  allow  that  this  Gospel  had  been  erro-
neousbrascribed  to  Matthew;  yet,  if  the  Gospel
of  Saint  John  be  genuine,  the  observation  holds
with  no  less  strength.  Again,  although  the  Gos-
peb  both  of  Matthew  and  John  could  be  supposed
to  he  spurious,  yet,  if  the  Gospel  of  Saint  Luke
were  truly  the  composition  of  that  person,  or  of
any  person,  be  his  name  what  it  mignt,  who  was
actually  in  the  situation  in  which  the  author  of
that  Oospel  professes  himself  to'  have  been,  or  if
the  Gospel  which  bears  Ae  name  of  Mark  really
proceeded  from  him ;  we  still,  even  upon  the  low-
est supposition,  poustea  the  accounts  of  one  writer
at  least,  who  was  not  only  contemporary  with  the
apostles,  but  aaaociated  with  them  in  tneir  minis-
try; which  authority  seems  sufficient,  when  the
ODjestion  is  simply  what  it  was  which  these  apos-
tles advanced.

I  think  it  material  to  have  this  well  noticed.
The  New  Testament  contains  a  great  number  of
distinct  writings,  the  genuineness  of  any  one  of
which  is  almost  sufficient  to  prove  the  truth  of  the
religion :  it  contains,  however,  four  distinct  histo-
ries, the  0snuineness  of  any  one  of  which  is  per-
fectly sufficient  If,  therefore,  we  must  be  con-
sidered as  encountering  the  risk  of  error  in  as-
signing, the  authors  of  our  books,  we  are  entitled
to  the  advantage  of  so  many  separate  probabilities,
And  although  it  should  appear  that  some  of  the
evangehata  had  seen  and  used  each  other's  works ;
this  discovery,  whilst  it  subtracts  indeed  from
their  characters  as  testimonies  strictly  independ-
ent, diminishes,  I  conceive,  tittle,  either  their  se-
parate authority  (by  which  I  mean  the  authority
of  any  one  that  is  genuine,)  or  their  mutual  con-
firmation. Fot^  let  the  most  disadvantageous
supposition  possible  be  made  concerning  thein;
let  it  be  allowed,  what  I  should  have  no  great  dif-
ncuttyin  admitting,  that  Mark  compiled  his  his-
tory almost  entirely  from  those  of  Matthew  and


Luke:  and  tetitalao  for  a  inoment  be  <
4hat  these  hfateries  were,  not,  in  met,  written  by N
Matthew  and  Luke;  yet,  if  H  be  true  that  Mark,
a  contemporary  of  the  apostles,  living  in  habits  of
society  with  the  apostles,  a  fellow-traveller  and
fellow- labourer  with  some  of  them;  if,  I  say,  it  be
true  that  this  person  made  the  compilation,  it  fol-
lows, that  the.  writings  from  which  he  made  it
existed  in  the  time  of  the  apostles,  and  not  envy
so,  but  that  they  were  then  in  such  esteem  and
credit,  that  a  companion  of  the  apostles  formed  a
history  out  of  them.  Let  the  Gospel' of  Mark  be
catted  an  epitome  of  that  of  Matthew;  if  a  person
in  the  situation  in  which. Mark  is  described  to
have  heen,  actually  made  the  epitome,  it  affords
the  strongest  possible  attestation  to  the  character
of  the  original.

•  Again,  parallelisms  in  sentences,  in  words,  and
in  the  order  of  words,  have  been  traced  out  between
the  Gospel  of  Matthew  and  that  of  Luke;  which,
concurrence  cannot  easily  be  explained  otherwise
thatf  by  suprosing,  either  that  Luke  had  consulted
Matthew's  history,  or,  what  appears  to  me  in  no-
wise mcredible,  that  minutes  or  some  of  Christ's
discourses,  as  well  aa  brief  memoirs  of  some  pas-
sages of  has  life,  had  been  committed  to  writing  at
the  time;  and  that  such  written  accounts  had  by
both  authors  been  oecasionaDy^admitted  into  their
histories.  Either  supposition  is  perfectly  consist-
ent with  the  acknowledged  formation  of  St  Luke's
narrative,  who  profoasco  not  to  write  as  an  eye-
witness, but  to  have  investigated  the  original  of
every  account  which  he  delivers:  in  other  words,
to  have"  collected  them  from  such  documents  and
testimonies,  aa  he,  who  had  the  best  opportunities
of  making  inquiries,  judged  to  be  authentic.
Therefore,  allowing  that  this  writer  also,  in  some
instances,  borrowed  from  the*  Gospel  whieh  we
call  Matthew's,  and  once  more  allowing,  for  the
sake  of  stating  the-ergument,  that  that  Gespel  was
not  the  production  .'of  the  author  to  whom  we
ascribe  it;  yet  still  we  have,  in  Saint  Luke^e  Gos-
pel, a  history  given  by  a  writer  immediately  con-
nected with  the  transaction,  with  the  witnesses  of
it,  with  the  persons- engaged  in  it,  and  composed
from  materials  which  that  person,  thus  wtaatea*,
deemed  to  be  safe  sources  or  mtelhgence;  mother
wards,  whatever  supposition  be  made  concerning
any  or  all  the  other  Gospels,  if  Saint  Luke's  Gos-
pel be  genuine,  we  have  in  it  9.  credible  evidence
of  the  point  which  we  maintain.
-The  Gospel  accosding  to  Saint  John  appears  to
be,  and  is  on  all  bands  allowed  to  be,  anindepenc%
ent  testimony,  stripy  and  pjoperry  so  called.  Not-
withstanding, therefore,  any  connexion,  or  supt
posed  connexion,  between  some  of  the  Gospels,  I
again  repeat  what  I  before  said,  that  if  any  one  of
the  four  be  genuine,  we  have,  in  that  one  strong
reason,  from  the  character  and  situation  of  the
writer,  to  believe  that  we  possess  'the  accounts
which  the  original  enuasaries  of  the  religion  de»
bvered.

Secondly:  In  treating  of  the  written  evidences
of  Christianity,  next  to  their  separate,  we  are  to,
consider  their  aggregate -authority.  Now,  there
is  in  the  evangelic  history  a  cumulation,  of  testi-
mony which  belongs  hardly  to  any  other  history,
but  which  our  habitual  mode  of  reading  the'Scrip-
tures  sometimes  causes  us  to  overlook.  When  a
passage,  in  any  wise  relating  to  the  history  of
Christ,  is  read  to  ua  out  of  the  epistle  of  Clemens
Romanus,  the  epistles  of  Ignatina,  of  Peiycarp,^*


9*4


EVIDENCES  OF  CHRISTIANITY.


Awn  any  other  writing  of  that  age,  we  are  imme-
diately eensible  of  the  confirmation  which  it  affords
to  the  Scripture .  account.  .  Here  is  a  new  witness.
Now,  if  we  had  been -accustomed  to  read  the  Gos-

Ci  of  Matthew  alone,  and  had  known  that  of
uke  only  aa  the  generality  of  Christiana  know
the  writings  of  the  apostolical  fathers,  that  is,  had
known  that  such,  a  writing  was  extant  and  ac-
knowledged ;  when  we  came,  for  the  first  time,  to
look  into  what  it  contained,  and  found  many  of
the  frcta  which  Matthew  recorded,  recorded  also
there,  many  other  facts  of  a  similar  nature  added,
and  throughout  the  whole  work  the  same  general
aeries  of  transactions  stated,  and  the  same  general
character  of  the  person  who  waa  the  subject  of  the
history  preserved.  I  apprehend  that  we  should  feel
our  minds  strongly  impressed  by  this  discovery  of
fresh  evidence.  We  should  feet  a  renewal  of  the
same  sentiment  in  first  reading  the  Gospel  of  Saint
John.  That  of  Saint  Mark  perhaps  would  strike
us  as  an  abridgment  of  the  history  with  which  we
were  already;  acquainted ;  hut  we  should  naturally
reflect,  that  if  that  history  waa  abridged  by  such  a,
person  as  Mark,  or  by  any  person  o?  so  early  an
age,  it  afforded  one  -of  the  highest  possible  attest-
agons  to  the  value  of  the  work.  This  successive
disclosure  of  proof  would  leave  us  assured,  that
there  must  have  been  at  least  some  reality  in  a
story  which  not  one,  but  many,  had  taken  in  hand
to  commit  to  writing.  The  very  existence  of  four
separate  histories  would  satisfy  us  that  the  subject
had  a  foundation;  and  when,  amidst  the  variety
which  the  different  information  of  the  different
writers  had  supplied  to  their  accounts,  or  which
their  different  choice  and  judgment  in  .selecting
their  materials  had  produced,  we  observed  many
frets  to  stand  the  same  in  all;  of  these  facta,  at
least,  we  should  conclude,  that  they  were  fixed  in
their  credit  and  publicity.  If,  after  this,  we  should
come  to  the  knowledge  of  a  distinct  history,  and
that  also  of  the  same  age  with  the  rest,  taking  up
the  subject  where  the  others  had  left  it,  and  carry-
ing on  a  narrative  of  the  effects  produced  in  the
world  by  the  extraordinary  causes  of  which  we
bad  already  been  informed,  and  which  effects  sub-
sist at  this  day,  we  should  think  the  reality  of  the
original  story  in  no  little -decree  established  by  this
supplement  If  subsequent  inquiries  should  bring
to  our  knowledge,  one  after  another,  letters  writ-
ten by  some  of  the  principal  agents  in  the  business,
upon  the  business,  and  during  the  time  of  their
activity  and  concern  in  it,  assuming  all  along  and
recognising  the  original  story,  agitating  the  ques-
tions that  arose  out  of  it,  pressing  the  obligations
which  resulted  from  it,  giving  advice  and  direc-
tions to  those  who  acted  upon  it;  I  conceive 4hat
We  should  find,  in  every  one  of  these,  a  still-  fur-
ther support  to  the  conclusion  we  had  formed.  At
present,  the  weight  of  this  successive  confirmation
is,  in  a- great  measure,  unperceived  by  us.  The
evidence  does  not  appear  to  us  what  it  is :  for,  being,
from  our  infancy  accustomed  to  regard  the  New
Testament  as  one  book,  we  see  in  it  only  one  testi-
mony. The  whole  occurs  to  us  as  a  single  evidence;
and  lis  different  parts;  not  as  distinct  attestations,
but  a»  different  portions  only  of  .the.  same.  Yet  in
this  conception  of  the  subject,  we  are  certainly
mistaken ;  for  the'  very  discrepancies  among  the.
several  documents  which  form  our  volume,  prove,
if  all  other  proof  were  wanting,  that  in  their  origi-
ns! composition  they  were  separate,  and  most  of
them  independent  productions.


If  we  dispose  our  ideas  in  a  different  order,  the)
matter  stands  thus:— Whilst  the  transaction  waa
recent,  and  the  original  witnesses  were  at  hand  to
relate  it ;  and  whust  the  apostles  were  busied  in
preaching  and  travelling,  in  collecting  disciples,  in
forming  and  regulating  societies  of  converts,  in
supporting  themselves  against  opposition;  whilst
they  exercised  their  ministry  unoerHhe  haraasinga
of  frequent  persecution,  and  in  a  state  of  almost
continual  alarm,  it  is  not  probable  that,' in  this-  en-
gaged, ejixioua,  and  unsettled  condition  of  life,
they  would  think  immediately  of  writing  histories
for  the  information  of  the  public  or  of  posterity.*
But  it  is  very  probable,  that  einersencies  might
draw  from  some  of  them  occasional  letters  upon
the  subject  of  their  mission,  to  converts,  or  to  mf-'
cieties  of  converts,  with  which  they  were  connect-
ed ;  or  that  they  might  address  written  discourses  -
and  exhortations  to  the  disciples  of  the  institution:
at  largej  which  would  be  received  and  read  with  a
respect  proportioned  to  the  character  of  the  writer.
Accounts  in  the  mean  time  would  set  abroad  of
the  extraordinary  things  that  had  been  passing,
written  with  differerit  degrees  of  infermatioo  ana
correctness.  The  extension  of  the  Christian  so-  *
ciety,  which  could  no  longer  be  instructed  by  a
personal  intercourse  with  the  apostles,  and  the
possible  circulation  of  imperfect  or  erroneous  nar-
ratives, would  soon  teach  eome  amongst  them  the
expediency  of  sending  forth  authentic  memoirs  of
the  life  and  doctrine  of  their  Master.  When  ac-
counts appeared  authorized  by  the  name,  and- cre-
dit, and  situation  of  the  writers,  recommended  or
recognised  by  the  apostles  and  first  preachera^of
the  religion,jer  found  to  coincide  with  what  the
apostles  and  first  preachers  of  the.  religion  had
taught,  other  accounts' would  fall  into  disuse  and
neglect ;  whilst  these  maintaining  their  reputation
(as,  if  genuine  and  well  foundedVthey  would  do)
under  the  test  of  time,  inquiry,  and  contrajd&ction,
might  be  expected  to  make  their  way  into  the
hands  of  Christians  of  all  countries  of  the  world.

This  seems  the  natural  progress  of  the  business  r
and  with  this  the  records  in  our  possession,  ana
'the  evidence  concerning  them,  correspond.  We
have  remaining,  hi  the  first  place,  many-  letters
of  the  kind  above  described,  which  have  been  pre-
served with  a  care  and  fidelity  answering  to  the
respect  with  which  we  may  suppoee4hat  such  tot-
ters would  be  received.  But  as  these  tetter*,  were
not  written  to  prove  the  truth  of  the  Christian  re-
ligion, in  the  sense  in  which  we  regard  that  ques-
tion-: nor  to  convey  information  of  tacts,  of  which
those  to  whom  the  letters- were  written  bad  been
pre vioualy  informed;  we  are  not  to  Jock  in  them
for  any  thing  more  than  incidental  allusions  to
the.  Christian  history.  We  are  able,  however,  to
gather  from  these  documents,  various  particular
attestations  which  have  been  already  enumerated;
and  t)iis  is  a  speciesxrf  written  evidence,  as  far  as
it  goes,  in  the  highest  .degree  satisfactory,  and  in
point  of  time  perhaps  the  first  But  for  our  more
circumstantial  information,  we  have  in  the  next
place  five  direct  historit*,'  bearing  the  names  of
persons  acquainted,  by. their  situation,  with  the
truth  of  what  they  relate,  and  three  of  them  pur-
porting, in  the  very  body  of  the  narrative,  to  be


*This  thought  occurred  to  Eusebius :  "  Nor  were  the
aportles  of  Christ  greaClyconcerrted  about  tba  writing
of  books,  being  engaged  in  a  mora  excellent  ministry,
wine*  is  above  all  human  power."— Eccles.  Hist.  1.  iii.
c.  94„  The  same  consideration  accountaalso  for  the  pau-
city of  Christian  writings  in  the  first  century  of  its  era.


EVIDENCES  OP  CHRISTIANITY.


S06


written  by  such  pnom ;  of  which  books  we  know,
that  some  were  in  the  hands  of  those  who  were
contemporaries  of  the  apostles,  and  that,. in  the  age
immediately  posterior  to  that,  they  were  in  the
hands,  we  may  say,  of  every  one,  and  received  by
Christians  with  so  much  respect  and  deference,  as
to  be  constantly  quoted  -and  referred  to  by.  them,
without  any  'doubt  of  the  truth  of  their  accounts.
They  were  treated  as  such  histories,  proceeding
from  such  authorities,  might  expect  to  oe  treated
In  the  preface  to  one  .of  out  histories,  we  have  in-
timations left  us  of  the  existence  of  some  ancient
accounts  which  are  now.  lost.  There  is  nothing
in  this  circumstance  .that  can  surprise  us.  It  was
to  be  expected,  from  themagoituue  and  novelty  of
the  occasion,  that  such  accounts  would  swarm.
When  better  accounts  came  forth,  these  died
away.-  Our  present  histories  superseded  others.
They  soon  acquired  a  character  and  established  a,
reputation  which  does  not  appear  to  have  belonged
to  any  other :  that,  at  least,  can  be  proved  concerning
them,  which/cannot  be  proved  concerning  any  other.

But  to  return  to  the  point  which  led  to  these
reflections.  By  considering,  our  records  in  either
of  the  two  views  in  which, we  have  represented
them,  we  shall  perceive  that  *we  possess  a  collec-
tion of  proof*,  and  not  a  naked  or.  solitary  testi-
mony; and  that  the  written  evidence  is  of  such  a
fcind\  and  comes  to  us  in  such  a  state,  as  the  na-
tural order  and  progress  of  things,  in- the  infancy
of  the  institution,  might  be  expected  to  produce.

Thirdly:  The  genuineness  of  the  historical
books-  of  the  New  Testament  is  undoubtedly  a
point  of  importance,  because  the  strength  of  their
evidence  is  augmented  by  our  knowledge  of  the
situation  of  their  authors,  .their  relation  to  the  sub-
ject, and  the  part  which  they  sustained  in  the
traiisacrbn;  -and  the  testimonies  which  we  are
able  to  produce,  compose  a  fjrm  ground  of  per-
suasion, that  the  Gospels  were  written  by  the
persons  whose  names  they  bear.  Nevertheless,  I
must  be  allowed  to  state,  that  to  the  argument
which  I  am  endeavouring  to  maintain,  this  point
is  not  essential;  I  mean,  so  essential  as  that  the
site  ofvthe  argument  depends  upon  it  The  ques-
tion Jiefore  us  is;  whether  the  Gospels  exhibit  the
story  which  the  apostles  and  first  emissaries  of  the
leMgkm  published,  and  Jot  which  they  acted  and
suffered  in  the.  manner  in  which,  for  some  mira-
culous story  or  other,  they  did  act  and  suffer.
Now  let  us  suppose  that  we-  possessed  no  other
mfennation-  concerning  these  books  than  that  they
were  written  by  early  disciples  of  Christianity,
Chat  they  were  -known  and  read  during' the  time,
or  near  the  time,  of  the.  original  apostles  of  the  re-
ligion; '  that  by  Christians  whom  the  apostles  in-
structed, by  societies  of  Christians  which  the
apostles,  founded,  these  books  were  received,  (by
which  term  "received,"  I  mean  that  they  were
believed  to  contain  authentic  accounts  of  the  trans-
actions upon  which  the  religion  rested,  and  ac-
counts wnkh  were  accordingly  used,  repeated,  and
relied  upon/)  this  reception  would  be  a  valid  proof
that  these  books,  whoever  were  the  authors  of
them,  must  have  accorded  with  what  the  apostles
taught  A  reception  by  the  first  race  of  Chris-
tians, is  evidence  that  they  agreed  with  what  the
Hist  teachers  of  the  religion  delivered.  In  parti-
cular, if  they  had  not  agreed  with  what  the  apos-
tles themselves  preached,  now  could  they  have
gained  credit  in  churches  and  societies  which  the
II


Now  the-fact  of  their  early  existence,- and  not
only  of  their  existence  but  their  reputation,  if
made  out  by  some  ancient  testimonies  which  do
not  happen  to  specify  the  names  of  the  writers;
add  to.  which,  what  hath  been  already  hinted,  that
two  out  of  the  four  Gospels  contain  averments  in
the  body  of  the  history,  which,  though  they  do  not
disclose  the  names,  fix  the  time  and  situation*  of
the  authors,  viz.  that  one  was  written  by  an  eye-
witness of  the  sufferings  of  Christ,  the  other  by  a
contemporary  of  the  apostles.  In  the  Gospel  of
Saint  John,  (xix.  35,)  after  describing  the  cruci-
fixion) with  the  particular  circumstance  of  piercing
Christ's  side  with  »  spear,  the  historian  adds,  as
for  himself,  "and  he  that  saw  it  bare. record,
and  his  record  is  true,  and  he  knoweth  that  he
saith  true,  that  ye  might  believe."  Again,  (xxi
24,)  after  relating  a  conversation  which  passed
between  Peter  and  "  the  disciple,"  as  it  is.  there
expressed,  "  whom  Jesus  loved."  it  is  added,  "  this
is  the  disciple  which  testinetn  of  these  things,
and  wrote  these  things."  This  testimony,-  let  it
be  remarked,  is  not  the  less  worthy  of  regard,  be-
cause it  is.  in  one  view,  imperfect.  The  name  is
not  mentioned: ^which,  if  a  fraudulent  purpose
had  been  intended,  would  .have  been  done.  The
third  of  our  present  Gospels  purports  to  have  been
written  by  the  person  who  wrote  the  Acts  of  the
Apostles;  in  which  latter Jbistory, or  rather,  latter
part  of  the  same  history,  the  author,  by  using,  in
various  places,  the  first  person  .plural,  declares
himself  to  have  been  a  contemporary  of  all,  and  a
companion  of -one,  of  the  original  preachers  of  the
religion.


CHAPTER  IXt  < »  -

There  is  satisfactory  evidence  that  many,  pro-
fessing to  be  original  witnesses  of  the  Christian

-  miracles,  passed  their  lives  in  labours,  dangers,
and  sufferings,  voluntarily  undergone  in  at-
testation  of  the  accounts  which  they  delivered,

,  and  solely  in  consequence  of  their  belief  of
those  accounts  ;  and  that  they  also  submitted)
yrotfi  the  same  motives,  to  new  rules  qfcenducL

THE  AUTHENTICITY  OF*  THE  SCRIPTURES.

Not  forgetting,  therefore,  what  credit  is  due  to
the  evangelical  history,  supposing  even  any  v,ne
of  the  four  Gospels  to  be  genuine-;  what  credit  is
due  to  the  Gospels,  even  supposing  nothing"  to  be
known  concerning  them  but  that  they  were  writ-
ten by  .early  diaciples-of  the  religion,  and  received
with  deference  by  early  Christian  churches :  morn
especially  not  forgetting  what  credit  is  due  to  the
New  Testament  in  its  capacity  of  cumulative  evi-
dence; we  now  proceed  to  state  the  proper  and
distinct  proofs,  which  show  not  only  the  general
value  of  these  records,  but  their  specific  authority,
and  the  high  probability  there  is  that  they  actual-
ly cam*  from  the  parsons  whose  names  they  bear.

There  are,. however,  a  few  preliminary -reflec-
Jtions,  by  which  we  mtjr  draw  up  with  more  regu-
larity to  the  propositions  upon  which  the  tdose
and  particular  discussion  of  the  subject  depends.
Of  which  nature  are  the  following:

I.  We  are  able  to  produce  a  great  number  of
ancient  manuscripts,  found  in  many  different
countries,  and  in  countries  widely  distant  from
each  other,  all  of  them  anterior  to  toe  art  of  print-


s*


EVIDEWCES  OP  CHRISTIANITY.


tug,  some  certainly  gereri  or  eight  bandied  years
e>la,  and  some  which  have  beenjmaerved  probably
above  a  thousand  years  *  We  Have  also  many
ancient  version*  of  these  books,  and  some  of  them
into  languages  which  are  not  at  present,  nor  for
many  ages  nave  been,  spoken  in  any  part  of  the
world.  The  existence  of  these  manuscripts  and
versions  proves  that  the  Scriptures  were  not  the
production  of  any  modern  contrivance.  It  does
away  also  the  uncertainty  which  hangs  over  such
pubacatiens  as  the  works,  real  or  pretended;  of
Ossien  and  Rowley,  in  which  the  editors  are
challenged  to  produce  their  manuscripts,  end  to
show  where  they  obtained  their  copies.  The
number  of  manuscripts,  far  exceeding  those  of  any
other  book}  and  their  wide  dispersion,  aflord  an  ar-
gument, in  some  measure  to  the  senses,  that  the
Scriptures  anciently,  in  like  manner  as  at  this
day,  were  more  read  and  sought  after  than  any
other  books,  and  that  also  in  many  different  coon-
tries.  The  greatest  part  of  spurious  Christian
writings  are  utterly  lost,  the -rest  preserved  by
sosnesuigle  manuscript  There  is  vseight  also  in
Dr.  Bentley's  observation,  that  the  New  Testa-
ment has  suffered  less  injury  by  the  errors  of
transcribers,  than  the  works  of  any  profane  author
of  the  same  stse  and  antiouity ;  that  is,  there  ne-
ver was  any  writing,  in  the  preservation  and  pu-
rity of  which  the  world  was  so  interested  -or  so
eererul.  ' •  *•

If.  An  argument  of  great  weight  with  those
who  are  judges,  of  the  proofs  upon  which  it  is
founded,  and  capable,  through  their  testimony,  of
being  addressed  to  every  understanding,  is  that
which  arises  from  the  style  and  language  of  the
New  Testament  It  is  just  such  a  language  as
might  be  expected  from  the  apostles,  from  persons
of  their  age  and  in  their  situation,  and  from  no
other  persons,  It  is  the  style  neither  of  classic
authors,  nor  of  the  ancient  Christian  Fathers,  but
Greek  coming  from  *nen  of  Hebrew  origin;
abounding,  that  is,  with  Hebraic  and  Syriac
idioms,  such  as  would  naturally  be  found  in  the
writings  of  men  who  used  a  language  spoken  in-
deed where  they  lived,  but  not  the  common  dia-
lect of' the  country.  Thuhappy'pecttuarityisa
strong  proof  of  the  genuineness  of  these  writings:
lor  who  should  forge  them?  The  Christian  la-
thers were  for  the  most  part  totauV  ignorant  of
Hebrew,  and  therefore  were  not  likely  to  insert
as  andSyriasmsintO'their  writings.  The
had  a  knowledge  of  the  Hebrew,  as  Jus-
tin Martyr,  Origen,  and  Epiphanies,  wrote,  in  a
language  vrinchbears  no  resemblance  to  that  of
the  H ew  Testament  The  Nazarenes,  who  un-
derstood Hebrew,  used  chiefly,  perhaps  almost
entirely,  the  Gospel  of  St  Matthew,  and  therefore
cannot  be  suspected  of  forging  the  rest  of  the  sa-
cred writings.  The  argument,  at  any  rate,  proves
the  antiquity  of  these  books;  that  they  belonged
to n the  «o  of  the  apostles;  that  they  could  be
eomposed  indeed  in  no  other.t

ift.  'Why  should  we  question  the  genuineness
of  these  books  1  Is  ifrfiir  that  they  contain  accounts
of  supernatural  events  1 '  I  apprehend  that  this,  at
the  bottom,  is  the  real,  though  secret,  cause  of  our
■  i . .  ■■ ..  ■ i --*  ~ • . I. .. ■

•Tns  Alexandrian  manuscript,  now  in  die  British
Museum,  was  written  probably  in  us  fourth  or  fifth
century.

t  See  this  argument  stated  more  at  large  in  MicfaaeuVs
IstrodueUoa  (Marsh's  translation,)  vol.  i.  c.  ii.  sect,.  10,
Aw  whJehthsseoessrvatfcwsM  taken. '


hesitation  about  them:  for,  had  the  writings  in-
scribed with  the  names  of  Matthew  and  John,  re-
lated nothing  but  ordinary  history,  there  would
have  been  no  more  doubt  whether  these  writings
were  theirs,  than  there  is  concerning  (be  acknow-
ledged works  of  Josephus  or  Phho }  that  is,  there
would  have  been  no  doubt  at  sTL  £Jow  it  ought
to  be  considered  that  this  reason,  however  it  mar
apply  to  the  credit  which  is  given  to  a  writer's
judgment' or  veracity,  affects  the  question  of
genuineness  very  indirectly.  The  works  of  Beds
exhibit  many  wonderful  relations  i  but  who,  for
that  reason,  doubts  that  they  were -written  by
Bede  ?  The  same  of  a  multitude  of  other  author*.
To  which  may  be  added,  that  we  ask  no  more  for
our  books  than  what  we  allow  to  other  books  in
some  sort  similar  to  ours:  we  do  not  deny  the  ge-
nuineness of  the  Koran;  we  admit  that  the  history
of  ApoUoniue  Tysiueus,  purporting  to  be  written
by  Philostmtus,  was  really  written  by  Philostrmtos.

IV.  If  it  had  been  an  easy  thing  in  the  early
times  of  the  institution  to  have  forged  Christian
writings,  and  to  have  obtained  currency  and  re-
ception to  the  forgeries,  we  should  have  had  many
appearing  in.  the  name  of  Christ  hunsaut  .No
writings  would  have  been  received'.wkh  so  much
avidity  and  respect  as  these:  consequently  none
afforded  so  gieat'temptation  to  forgery.  Yet  have
we  heard  but  of  one  attempt  of  thai  sort,  deserving
of  the  smallest  notice,  thai  in  a  niece  of  a  very  few
lines,  and  so  for  from  succeeding,  I  mean,  from
obtaining  acceptance  and  reputation,  or  an  accepts
ance  and  reputation  in  any  wise  similar  to  that
which  can  dp  proved  to  have  attended  the  books)
of  the  New  Testament,  that  it  is  not  so  much  as
mentioned  by  any  writer  of  the  first  three  centu-
ries. The  learned  reader  need  not  be  informed
that  I  mean  the  epistle  of  Christ  to  AbcaiosJ king
of  Edessa,  found  at  present  in  the  work  of  Ease*
Hub,*  as  a  -piece  acknowledged  by  him,  though
not  without  considerable  doubt  whether  the  wheat
passage  be  not  an  mterpoiaaon,  as  it  hi  moat  cer-
tain, that,  after  the  .publication  of  Eusehius's.wock,
this  epistle  was  universally  reiectad.t.

V.  Ifthe  ascription  of  tU  Gospels  to  their  res-
pective authors  had  been  arbitrary  or  oonjectusel,
they  would  hawj  been  ascribed  to  more  eminent
men.  This  observation  holds  concerning  the
first  three  Gospels,  the  reputed  authors  of  which
were  enabled,  by  their  situation,  to  obtain  true  in-
telligence, and  were  likely  to  deliver  an  honest  ac-
count of  what  they  knew,  but  were  persons  not
distinguished  in  the  history  by  extraotdinary
marks  of  notice  or  comrnrndabpn.  Of  the  apos-
tles, I  hardly  know  any  one  of  whom  less  is  said
than  of  Matthew,  or  of  whom  the  little  that  It
said,  is  less  calculated  to  magnify  his  character.
Of  Mark,  nothing  is  said  in  the  Gospels;  and
what  is  said  of  any  person  of  that  name  in  the


•HrsLEccl.lib.i.c.15.

t  Augustin,  A  D.  895, (De  Consens.  Evang.  e.  3ft)  had
I  that  the  Psjahsjtostejfeed  to  be  pussisssd  of  an
foohChrist  to  Peter  aad  Paul ;  but  he  had  never
seen  it,  and  appears  to  doubt  of  the  existence  of  any
such  piece,  either  genuine  6r  Spurious.  No  other  an-
cient writer  mentions  it.  He  also,  and  he  atone,  notices,
and  that  in  order  to  eoadenn  it,  sn  epistle  ascribed
to  Christ  by  the  Msjnehses,  A.  D.  OTVaad  a  sheet  hyam
attributed  to  aim  by  the  prisciUianisti,  A.  D.  37&  [cont.
Faust.  Man.  lib.  xxviii.  e.  4.J  The  lateness  of  the  wri-
ter who  notices  these  things,  the  manner  in  which  he
notices  them,  and,  above  aft*  the  sttenee  of  every  arses*
dittf  writer,  render  them  unworthy  of  consklsraUOn. .


EVIDENCES  OF  CHRISTIANITY.


*7


•  Acta,  and  in  the  Epistles,  in  nopart  bestows
praise  tor  eminence  upon  trim.  The  -name  of
Lake'  is  mentioned  only  in  Saint  Paul's  Epistles/*
and  that  very  transiently.  The  judgment,  there-«-
fore,  which  assigned  these- writings  to  these  au-
thors proceeded,  it  may  be  presumed',  upon  proper
knowledge  and  evidence,  ana  not  upon  a  voluntary
choice  oi  names.

VI.  Christian  writers  and  Christian  churches
ttppear  to  have  soon -arrived  at  a  very  genera]
agreement  upon  the  suBieft^jfna'  that  without  the
interposition  of  any  public  authority. — When  the
^diversity  of  opinion,  which  prevailed,  an/1  prevails

•  among  Christians  in  other  points  is  considered,
their  concurrence  in  the  canon  ofc  Scripture  is  re-
maskabie.  and  of  great  weight,  especially,  as  it
seems  to  nave  been. the  result  of  private  and  free

.  inquiry.  We  have  no  knowledge  of  any  interfe-
rence of  authority  in  the  question)  before  the
council  of  Laodicea  in  the  year  363.  Probably
the  decree  of  this  council  rather  declared  than  re-
gulated the  public  judgment,  or,  more  properly
■peaking,  the  judgment  of  -some  neighbouring
churches ;  the  council  itself  consisting  of  no  more
than  thirty  or  forty- bishops  Of  Lydia  and  the  ad-
joining countries,  i  Nor  does  its  authority  seem
to  have  extended  further ;  for  we  find  numerous
Christian  writers,  after  this  time,  discussing  the
qoeJtKMi,  "  What  books  wese  entitled  to  be  re-
ceived as  Scripture,"  with  great  freedom,  upon
•proper  grdunds  of  evidence,  and.  without  any  re-
tfifMiffft  to  the  dffSsion  at  Laodicea.


These  considerations  are  not  to  be  neglected :
hot  of  an  argument  concerning  the  genuineness  df
ancient  writings,  the  substance,  undoubtedly,  and
etrengUh  is  ancient  testimony.

Thai  testimony  it  4s  necessary  to  exhibit-some-
what in  detsil;  for  when  Christian  advocates
merely  tell  us,  that  we  have  the  'same  reason  for
believing  the  Gospels  to  be  written  by  the  evan-

.  gelists  whose  name  they  bear,  as  we  have  for  be-
Eeving  -the  Commentaries  to  be,  Cesar's, .  the.
^finem  Virgil's,  or  the  Orations  Cicero's,  they
content  themselves  with  an  imperfect  representa-
tion. .  They  state  nothing  more  than  what  is  true,
but  they  do  not  state  the  truth  correctly.  .  In  the
number,  variety,  arid  early  date  of  our  testimonies,

.  we  for  exceed  aU  other  ancient  books.  For  one,
which  the  most  celebrated  work  of  the  most  cele-
fasjated  Greek  or  Roman  writer  can  allege,  we.pro-
dnee  many.  But  then  it  is  more  requisite  in  our
books,  than  in  theirs,  to  separate  ana  -distinguish
theai  from  spurious  competitors.  The  result,  I
am  convinced,  will  be  satisfactory  to  every  fair  in-
but  this  circumstance  renders  an  inquiry


to  place  before*  the  reader,  in  one  view,  the  prepo-
sitions which  comprise'  the  several  beads  of  oar
testimony,  and  afterwards  to  repeat  the  same  pro-
positions in  so  many  distinct  sections,  with  the
necessary  authorities  subjoined4o  each.  *

The  following,  then,  are  the  allegations  upon
the  subject,  which  are  capable  of  being  etf  ablisLajl
by  proof: — .

I.  That  the  historical  bodks  of  the  New  Tes-
tament,-meaning  thereby. the  four  Gospels  and
the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  are  quoted,  or  alluded
to,  by  a  series  of  Christian  writers,  beginning  with
those  who  were  contemporary  with  the  apostles,
or  who  immediately  followed  them,  and  proceed-
ing in  close  and  regular  succession  irom  their  time
to  the  present.

I}.  That  when  they  are  quoted,  or  alluded  to,
they  are  quoted  or  alluded  to  with  peculiar  respect,
as  books  sui generis;  as  possessing  an  authority
which  belonged  to  nO  other  books,  and  as  conclu-
sive in  all  questions  and  controversies  amongst
Christians.

HI.  That  they  were,  in  very  early  times,  col-
lected into  a  distinct  volume.

IV.  That  they  were  distinguished  by  appropri-
ate .names  and  *  titles  qf  respect.
'  V.  That  they  were  publicly  read  and  expound-
ed in  the  religious  assemblies  of  toe  early  Chris-
tians;

VI.  That  commentaries  were  written  upon
them,  harmonies  formed  out  nf  them,  different
copies  carefully  collated,  and  versions  of  them
made  into  different  languages.

VII.  That  they  were  received  by  Christiana
of  different  sects,  by  many  heretics  as  well  as
catholics,  and  usually  appealed  to  by^both  aides  in
the  controversies  which  arose  in  those  days.

VIII.  That  the  four  Gospels,  the  Acts  of  the
Apostles,  thirteen  Epistles  of  Saint  Paul,  the  first
Epistle  of  John,  ana  the  first  of  Peter,  were  re-
ceived, without  doubt,  by  those  who'doubted  con-
cerning the  other  books  which  are  included  in,  our
present  canon.  '

IX.  That  the  Gospels  were  attacked  bytne
early  adversaries  of  Christianity,  as  books  contain-
ing the  accounts  upon  which  the  religion  was
founded.

X.  That  formal  catalogues  of  authentic  Scrip-
tures Fere  published;  in  all  which  our  present
sacred  histories  were' included.

•XI.  That  these  propositions  cannot/be  affirm-  '
ed  of  any  other  books  claiming  to  be  books-  0/
Scripture ;  by  which  are.  meant  those  books  which  -
are  commonly  vailed  apocryphal  books  of  the  Nejr
Testament


( In  a  work,  however,  like  the  present,  there  is  a
difficulty  in  findjng  a  place  for.  evidence  of  this
kind.  To  pursue  the  details  of  proofs  throughout,
would  be  to  transcribe  a  great  part' of  Dr.  Gard-
ner's eleven  octavo  volumes :  to  leave  the  argu-
~ment  without  proofs,  is  to'  leave  it  without  effect ;
for  the  persuasion  produced  by  this  species  of
evidence  depends  upon  a  view  and  induction  of  the
particulars  which,  compose  it.  .«.
.v  The  msthoit which  Ipropeee  to  myself  is,  first


•  CoL  iv.  14. 9  Tim.  iv.  11. Fhileto.  *L  .
t  LaimwlCM.voLytitp.»l,st«H-


SECTION  I.

The  Historical  books  of  the  New  Testament^
meaning  thereby  the  four  'Gospels  and  the  Acts
of  the  Apostles,  are  quoted,  or  oUvded.to,  fry  a

'  series  of  Christian  writers,  beginning  yntk
those  who  were  contemporary  with  the  apostles,
•or  who  immediately  followed  them,  and  pro-
ceeding in  close  and  regular  succession  from
their  time  to  the  present.


.  •  Tb&resaer,  when  be  has  the  proposition!  beibrs  him,
will  observe  that  the  aif  ument,  if  he  should  omit  the
sections,  proceeds  connectedly  from  this  point.


a*


EVIDENCES  OP  CHRISTIANITY.


The  medium  of  proof  stated  in  4his  proposition
if,  of  all  others,  the  most  unquestionable,  the  least
liable  to  any  practices  of  fraud,  and  is  net  dimi-
nished by  the  lapse,  of  ages.  Bishop  Burnet,  in
the  History  of  biff  Own  Tunes,  inserts  Various  er-
tract&from Lord  Clarendon's  History.  One  such
insertion  is  a  prjoof,  that  ^ord  Clarendon's  Histo-
ry was  extant  at  the  time  when  Bishop  Burnet
wrote,  that  it  had  been  read  by  Bishop  Burnet,
that  it  was  received  by  Qishop  Burnet  as  a  work
of  Lord  Clarendon,  and  also  regarded  by  him  as
an  authentic  account  of  the  transactions  which  it
relates ;  and  it  will  be  a  proof  of  these  points  a
thousand  years  hence,  or  as  Ions  as  the  books
exist  Cluintillian  having  quoted  as  Cicero's,*
that  well-known  trait  of  dissembled  vanity:—

*  Si  <juid  est  in  me  ingenii,  Judices,  quod  sentio  quam
ait  exigifom  ;*— "'

the  aiaotatioa  ttDftsffbe  strong  evidence,  were  there
airy  Jaufct,  that  the  oration  which  opens  with  this
ffttesa,  sKfcually  lame  from  Cicero's  pen.  These
jftsfoiices,  however  simple,  may  serve  to  point  out
to  a  reader,  who  is  little  accustomed  to  such  re-
searches, the  nature  ana1  vajue  of  the  argument'
'  The  testimonies  which  we  have  to  bring  for-
ward under  this  proposition  are  the  following :

I.  There  is  extant  an  epistle  ascribed  to  Barna-
bas, t  the  companion  of  PauL  It  is  quoted  as  the
apskle  of  Barnabas,  by  Clement  of  Alexandria,
A.  D.  exciv;  by  Origen,  A.  D.  cexxx.  it  is
mentioned  by  Eusebtus,  A.  D.  eccxv,  and  by
Jerome,  A.  D.  cccxcn,  as  an  ancient  work  in
their  time,  bearing  the  raune  of  Barnabas,  and  as
well  known  and  read  amongst  Christians,  though
not  accounted  a  part  t>f  Scrjpture.  It  purports  to
have  been  written^aoon  after  the  destruction  of  „
Jerusalem,  during  the  calamities  which  followed
that  disaster  ?  and  it  bears  the  character  of  the
age  to  which  it  professes  to  belong.

In  this  epistle  appears  the  following  remarka-
ble passage; — "Let  us,  therefore,  be  ware  lest  it
come  upon  us,  a*  if  i»  written;  There  are  many
called,  few  chosen." .  From  the  expression,  ''  as  it
is- written,"  we  infer  with  certainty,  that  at  the
time  when  the  author  of  this  epistle  lived,  there
was  a  book  extant,  well  known  to  Christians,
and-  of  authority  amongst  them,  containing  these
words : — "  Many  are  called,  few  chosen."  .  Such-
a  book  if  our  present  Gospel  of  Saint  Matthew,
in  which  this  text  is  twice  found,  t  and  is  (buncfin
no  other  book  now  known.  Tnere  is  a  further
observation  to  be  made  upon  the  terras  of  the  tfuo-
tation.  The  writer  of  the  epistle  was.  a  Jew.
The  phrase  "is  written,"  was  the  very  form  in
which  the  Jews  quoted  their  Scriptures.  It  is
not  probable,  therefore,  that  he  would  have  used
this  phrase,  and  without  qualification,  of  any
books  but  what  had  acquired  a  kind  of  ScripturaJ
authority.  If  the  passage  remarked  in  this  an-
cient writing  had  been  found  in  one -of  St  Paul's
Epistles,  it  would  have  been  esteemed  by  every
one- a  high  testimony;  to  Saint 'Matthew's  Gospel.
It  ought,  therefore,  to  <be  remembered,  that  the
writing  in  which  it  is  found  was  probably  by  very
*  few  years  posterior  to  those  of  Saint  Paul.


•  (taint  lib.  xi.  c  i.

t  Gardner,  Cred  edit.  1755,  vol.  i.  p.  S3,  ct  $eq.  The
reader  wilt  observe  from  the  reference*,  tharthe  mate-
v  rials  of  these  sections  are  almost  entirely  extracted  from
Dr.  Lardner'a  work ;— my  office  consisted  in  arrange-
ment and  selection.

!Mau.xx.l6;xxiL14.


Beside  this  passage,  there  are  also-ill  the
epistle  before  us  several  others,  in  which  the  sen-
timent is  the  same  with  what-  we  meet  with  in
Saint  MatthewVGospel,  and  two  or  three  in
which  we  recognise  the  same  words.  In  particu-
lar, the  author,  of  the*  epistle  repeats  the  precept,
" Give  to  every  one' that  asketh  thee;'*  *  and  earth
that  Christ  chose  as  his  apostles,  who  were  to
preach  the  Gospel,  men  who  were  great  sinners,
that  he  might  show  that  he  earned'  not  to  call  the
righteous,  but  sinners  to  repentance."  t

II.  We  are  in  possession  of  an  epistle  written
by  Clement,  bishop  of  Rome,*  whom  ancient
writers,  without  any  doubt  or  scruple,  assert  to
have  been  the  Clement  whom  Saint  Paul  mentions,
Ehil.  iv.  3 ;  "  with  Clement  'also,  and  other  my
fellow/labourere,  whose -names  are  in  the  book  of
life."  This  epistle  is  spoken  ofby  the  ancients  as
an  epistle  acknowledged  by  all ;  and,  as  Irenasus
well  represents  its  value,  "written  by  Clement,
who  had  seen  the  blessed  apostles,  and  Conversed
with  them ;  who  had  the  preaching  of  the  apostles
still  sounding  in  his  ears,  -and  their  traditions  be-
fore his  eyesv*  It  is  addressed  to  the  church  of
Corinth;  and  what  alone  may  seem  almost  .deci-
sive of  its  authenticity,  Dionysius,  bishop  of  Co-
rinth, about  the  year  170,  i.  e.  about  eighty  or
ninety  years  after*  the  epistle  was^writtenj  bean
witness,  "  that  it  had  been  wont  to  be  read  in  that
church  from  ajident  times."

This  epistle  affords,  amongst  others,  the  follow-
ing valuable  passages: — "  Especially  remembering
the  words  of  the  Lord  Jesus  which  lie  spake,
teaching  gentleness  and  long-buffering :  for  thus
he  said:§* '  Be  ye  merciful,  that  ye  may  obtain
mercy ;  forgive,  that  it  may  be  forgiven  unto  you ;
as  you  do,  so  shall  it  be  done  unto  you ;  as  you
give,  so  shall  it  be  given  unto  you ;  tfs  ye  judge/so
shall  ye  be  judged;  as  ye'show  kindness,  so  shall
kindness  be  shown  unto  you  r  with  what  measure
ye*  mete,  with  the  same  shall  it  be  measured  to
you.'  By  this  command,  and  by  &ese  rules,  let
us  establish  ourselves,  that  we  may  always-  walk
obediently  tenia  holy  words."

Again  r  "Remember  the  words  of  the  Lord  Je-
sus, for  he  said, '  Wo  tothat  man  by  whom  oflenbes


come ;  it  were  better  for  him  that  he  had  not  1
born,  than  that  he  should  offend  one  of  my  elect ;
it  were  better  for  him  that  a  mill-stone  should  be
tied  about  his  heck,  and  thqt  he  should  be  drowned
in  the  sea,  than  that  he  should  offend  one-  of  my
little  ones.'  "II

In  both  these  passages,  we  perceive  the  high
respect  paid  to  the  words  of  Chiwt  as  recorded  by
the  evangelists;  "Remember  the  words  'of  the
Lord  Jesus  j — bj  tins  command,  arid  by  these  rules,
let  us  establish  ourselves,  that  we  may  always -walk

*  Matt.  v.  49.  c t  Matt.  ix.  13.

1  Lardner,  Cred-  vol.  i.  p.  68,  «t  *f.

§  "  Bleated  are*  the  merciful,  for  they  shall  obtain
mercy,"  Matt.  v.  7.  ".Forgive,  and  ye  sbaH  be  forgiven ;
give,  and  it  shall  be  given  unto  you,"  Luke  vi.  37.  38.
"  Judge  not  that  ye  be  not  judged ;  for  with  whar  judg-
ment ye  judge,  ye  shall  <be  judged ;  and  with  what  mea-
sure ye  mete,  it  shall  be  meanred  to  you  again,"  Matt,
vii.  1.  8.

v  |  Matt,  zviii.  6.  "  But  whoso  shall  offend  one  of  these
litle  ones  which  believe  in  me,  it  were  better  for  him
that  a  mill-atone  were  hanged  about  his  neck,  and  that
he  wen*  cast  into  the  sea."  The  latter  part  of  the  pas-
sage in  Clement  agree*  more  exactly  with  Luke  xvii.S:
"  It  were  better  for.  nira  that  a  milestone  were  hanged
about  hhf  neck,  and  he  east  into  the  sea,  than  that  he
•should  oflfend  one  of  these  little  ones.-


EVIDENCES  OF  CHRISTIANITY.


89*


obediently  to  his  holy  words.1'  We  perceive  ajsjo
in  Clement  a  total  unconsciousness  of  doubt,  whe-
ther these  were  the  real  words  of  Christ;  which
are  read  as  such  in  the  Gospels.  This  observation
indeed  belongs  to  the  whole  series  of  testimony,
and  especially  to  the  most  atfcient  part  of  it.
Whenever  any  thing  now  read  in  the  Gospels  is
met  with  in  an  early  Christian  writing,  it  is. al-
ways observed  to  stand  there  as  acknowledged
truth,  i.  e.  to  be  introduced  without  hesitation,
doubt,  or  rfpology.  It  is  to  be  observed  also,  that,
as  this  epistle  was  written  in*  the,  name  of  the
church  of  Rome,  and  addressed  to  the  church  of
.Corinth,  it  ought  -to  be  taken  as  exhibiting  the
judgment  not  only  of  Clement,  who  drew  up  the.
letter,  but  of  these  churches  themselves,  at  feast
as  to  the  authority  of  .the  books  referred  to.

It  may  be  said,  that{  as  Clement  has  not  used
yrord*  of  quotation,  it  is  not  certain -that  he  refers
to  any  book  whatever.  The  words  of  Christ,
which  he  has'  put  down,  he  might  himself  have
heard  from  the  apostles,  or  might  have  received
through'  the  ordinary  medium  of  oral  tradition.
This  has  been  said:  but  that  no  such  inference
can  be  drawn  from  theabsence  of  words  of  quota-
tion, is  proved  by  the  three  following  considera-
tions?— First,  that  Clement,  in  the  very  same
manner,  namely,  without  any  mark  of  reference,
uses  a  passage  bow.  found  in  the  epistle  to  the  Ro-
mans;* which  passage,  from  the  peculiarity  of  the
words  which  compose  it,  and  from  .their  order,  it
is  manifest  that  he  must  have  taken  from  the  book.
Tbe  same  remark  may  be  repeated  of  some  very
singular  sentiments  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews.
Secondly,  that  there  are  many  sentences*  of  Saint
Paul's  First  Epistle  to  the  Corinthians  standing  in,
Clement's  epistle  without  any  sign  of  quotation,
whicn  yet  certainly  are  quotations ;  because  it  ap-
pears that  Clement  had- Saint  Paul's  epistle  Before
him,  inasmuch  as  in  one  place  he  mentions  it  in
terms  too  express  to  leave  us  in  any  doubt  :—
"  Take  into  your  hands  the  epistle  of  the  blessed
apostle  Paul."  Thirdly,  that  this,  method  jof
adopting  words  of  Scripture  without  reference  or
acknowledgment,  was,  as  will  appear  in  the  sequel,
a  method  in  general  use  amongst  the  most  ancient
Christian  writers. — These  analogies  not  only  re-
pel the  objection,  but  cast  the  presumption  on  the
other  side,  and  aflbrd  a  considerable  degree  of  posi-
tive proof,  that  the  words  in  question  have  been
borrowed  from,  the  places  of  Scripture  in  which
we  now.  And  them.  t

But  take  it  if  you  will  the  other  way,  that  Cle-
ment had  heard  these  words  from  the  apostles  or
first  teachers  of  Christianity;  with  respect  to  the
precise  point  of  our  argument,  viz.  that  the  Scrip-'
tares  contain  what  the  apostles  taught,  this  suppo-
sition may  serve  almost  as  well.,

III.  Near  the  conclusion  of  the  Epistle  to  the
Romans,  Saint  Paul,  amongst  others,  sends  the
following  salutation :  "  Salute  Asyncritus,  Ptile-
gorj,  £fermos,  Patrobaa,  Hermes,  and  the  brethren
which  are  With  them."

Of  Hennas,  who  appears*  in  this  catalogue  of
Roman  Christians  as  contemporary  with  Saint
Paul,  a  book  bearing  the  name,  and  it  is  most  pro-
bable Tightly,  is  still  remaining.  It  is  called  the
Shepberdjt  or  Pastor  of  Hennas.  .  Its  antiquity  is.
Incontestable,  from  the  quotations  of  it  In  .Irencus,


A.  D.  178-  Clement  of  Alexandria,  A.  D.  194;
TertuMan,  A.  I).**?;.  Orlgen,  aTd.  230.  The
notes  of  time  extant  m  the  epistle  itself,,  agree
with  this  title,  and  with  the  testimonies  concern-,
ing  it,  for  it  purports  to  have  been  written  during
tfee  life-time  of  Clement.

In  this  piece  are  tacifh  allusions  to  Saint  Mat*
thew's,  Saint  Luke's,  and  Saint  John's  Gospels  j
that  is  to. say,  there  are  applications  of  thought*
and  expressions  found  in  these  Gospels,  without
citing  the  place  or  writer  from  which  they  were
taken,  in  this  form  appear  in  JEiermas,  the  con-
fessing and  denying  of  Christ;*  the  parable  of  the
seed  sown  ;t  the  comparison  of  Christ's  disciples  to
little  children.;  the  saying,  "  he  that  ^utteth  away
Jus,  wife,  and  marrieth  another,  committeth  adul-
tery;!: the  singular  expression  "having  received
all  power  from  his  Father,"  in  probable  allusion  to
Matt,  xxviii.  18;  and  Christ  being  the  "gate,."  or


,drsd.


voLip.HL


only  way  of  coming,"  to  God,"  in  plain  allusion  to
Jomi  xiv.  6 ;  x.  7.  9.  There  is  also  a  probable  el-  *
lusion  to  Acts  v.  32.

This  piece  is  the  representation  of  a  vision,  and
has  by  many  been  accounted  a  weak  and  fanciful
performance.  I  therefore  observe,  that  the  charac-
ter of  the.  writing  has  little  to  do  with  the  purpose
for  which  we  adduce  it  It  is  the  age,  in  which  it
was  composed,  that  gives  the  value  to  its  testimony.

IV.  Ignatius,  as  it  is  testified  by  ancient  Chris-
tian'writers,  became  bishop  of  Antioch :  about
thirty-seven  years  after  Christ's  ascension  ;  and,
therefore,  from  his  time,  and  place,  and  stationt  it
is  probable  that  he  had  knowrrand  conversed  with
many  of  the  apostles.  Epistles  of  Ignatius  are  re*
ferred  tq  by  Polycarp,  his  contemporary.  Pas-
sages found  in  the  epistles  now  extant  under  his
name,  are  quoted  by  Irensms,  A..D.  178 ;  by  Ori-
gen,  A.  D.  230 :  and  the  occasion  of  writing  the
epistles  is  given  at  large  by  Eusebiusand  Jerome.
What  are  called  the  smaller  epistles  of  Ignatius,
apa  generally  deemed  to  be  those  which  were  read
by  Iremeus,  Origen,  and  Eusebius'J

In  these  epistles  are  various  undoubted  allusions
to  the  Gospels  of  Saint  Matthew  and  Saint  John ;
yet  so  far  of  the  same  form  with  those  in  the  pre-
ceding articles,  that,  like  them,  they  are  not  ac-
companied with  marks  of  quotation.

Qf  these  allusion*  the  following  are  clea/specf-
mens:  ■  *•.

(il  Christ  was  baptized  of  John,  that  all
righteousness  might  be  fulfilled  by  him/9
"Be  ye  as  wise  as  setpents  in  all
things,  and  Jiarmless  as  a  dowe.u
"  Yet  the  Spirit  is  not  deceived,  being
from  God :  for  it  knows  whence  U  comes,
and  whither  it  goes.1*
Jbhn.K  \  "  He  (Christ)  is  the  door  of  the  Fa-
ther, by  which  enter,  in  Abraham,  and
Isaac,  and  Jacob,' and  the  apostles  and
the  church."'


*  Matt,  x.38, 33,  or,  Luke  xji.  8,  9.
'  f  Msit.  xiii.  3,  or,  Luke  viii.  5.  . *

t  Luke  xvi.  ia  '  • •§  Lardifer.  Cred.  vol.i.  p.  147.

f  Chap.  iii.  15.  "  For  thus  it  becomelb  us  to  nilfll  all
righteousness."

Chap.  x.  16.  "  Be  ye  therefore  wise  pi  serpents,  and
.harmless  as  doves."  . .,

IT  Chap.  iii.  8.  "  The  wind  bloweth  where  ft  listeth,
and  thou  nearest  the  sound  thereof,  but  canst  not  tell
wftmes  it  cometh  and  whitksr  it  gosth;  so  is  every  ©ne
that  is  born  of  the  Spirit."

.  Chap.  x.  ». "  I  am  the  door;  by  me  if  any  man  enter
in,  he  shall  bs  saved."


EVIDENCES  OF  CHRISTIANITY.


As  to  the  manner  of  quotation,  this  is  ehserv-
aMe;— (gnatius,  in  one  place,  speaks  of  Saint  Paul
in  terms  of  high  respect,  and  quotes  his  Epistle  to
the  Ephesians  by  name;  yet,  in  severe]  other
places,  he  .borrows  words  and  sentiments  from  the
same  epistle  without  mentioning  it;  whirlr  shows,
that  thin  was  his  general  manner  ofusing  and  ap-
plying writings  then  extant,  and  then  of  high  au-
thority.

V.  Polycarp*  had  been  taught  by  the  apostles ;
had  conversed  with  many  who  had  seen  Christ ;
was  also,  by  the  apostles,  appointed  bishop  of
Smyrna.  This  testimony  concerning  Polycarp  is
given  by  Ireneus,  who  in  his  youth  had  seen  him :'
-— "  I  can  tell  the  place,"  saith  Ircneua,  "  in  which
the  blessed  Polycarp  sat  and  taught,  and  his  going
oat  and  coming  in,  and  the  manner  of  his  life  and
the  form  of  his  person;  and  the  discourses  he*made
to  the  people,  and  how  he  related  his  conversation
with  John,  and  others  who  had  seen  the  Lord,
and  how  he  had  related  their  sayings,  and -what
he  had  heard  concerning  the  Lord,  both  concern-
ing his  miracles  and  his  doctrine,  as  he  had  re-
ceived them  from  the  eye-witnesses  of  the  word  of
life:  all  which  Polycarp  related  agreeable  to  the
Scriptures."  - .

Of  Polycarp,  whose  proximity  to  the  age  and
country  and  persons  of  tn*>apost]e*  is  thus  attested,
we  have  ene  undoubted  epistle  remaining.  And
this,  though  a  short  letter,  contains  nearly  forty
dear  allusions  to  books  of  the  New  Testament;
which  is  strong  evidence  of  the  respect  which
Christiana  of  that  age  bore  "for  these  hooka.

Amongst  these,  although  the.  writings  of  Saint
Paul  are  more  frequently  used  by  Polycarp,  than
any  other  parte  of  Scripture,  there  are  copious  al-
lusions to  the  Gospel  of  Saint  Matthew,  some  to
passages  found  in  the  Gospels  both  of  Matthew
and  Luke,  and  some  Which  more  nearly  resemble
the  words  in  Luke.

I  select  the  following,  as  fixing  the  authority  of
the  Lord's  prayer,  and  the -use  of  it  amongst  the
primitive  Christians  :  "  If  therefore  we  pray  the
Lord,  that  he  wift  forgive  us,  we  ought  also  to
forgive.11

"With  supplication  beseeching  the. all-seeing
God  not  to  lead  us  into  temptation.1*

And  the  following,  for  the  sake  of  repeating  an
observation  already  made,  that  words  of  our  Lord
found  in  our  Gospels,  were  at  this  early  day  quoted
as  spoken  by -him;  and  "not  only  so,*  but  quoted
with  so  little  anestion  or  consciousness  of  doubt
about  their  being  really  his  words,  as  not  even  to
mention,  much  less  to  eanvass,  the  authority  from
which  they  were  taken :

"  But  remembering  what  the  Lord  said,  teach-
ing, Judge  not,  that  ye-  be  not  judged ;  forgive,
ana  ye  shall  be  forgiven ;  be  ye  merciful,  that  ye
may  obtain  mercy ;  with  what  measure  ye  mete,
it  shall  be  measured  to  you  again."t

Supposing  Polycarp  to  have  had  these  words
from  the  books  in  which  we  now  find  them,  it  is
manifest  that  these  books  were  consiHered  bv  him,
ami.  as  he  thought,  considered  by  his  readers,  as
authentic  accounts  of  Christ's  discourses;  and  that
that  point  was  incontestable.

The  following  is  a  decisive,  though , what  we
call  a  tacit,  teference  to  Saint  Peter's  speech  in


*  IaiuneA,Cra4.  vol.  I. >  199.
~~  it. vU.  1,1  v. 7. Ltikevi.37,1


the  Acts  of  the  Apostles  .-—"whom  God  hath
raised,  having  loosed  the  pains  of  death.'"1*

VI.  Paptas,t  a  bearer  of  John,  and  companion
of  Polycarp,  as  frenams  attests,  and  of  that  age,  as
all  agree,  1n  a  passage  quoted  by  Eusebios,  from  s>
work:  now  lost,  expressjy  ascribes  the  respective
Gospels  to  Matthew  and  Mark.;  and  in  a  manner
which  proves  that  these  Gospels  must  have  pub-
licly' borne  the  names  of  these  authors 'at  that'
time,  and  probably  long  before ;  for  Papia*  does
not  say  that  one  Gospel  was  written  by  MatJthew,
and  another  by  Mark ;  but,  assuming  this  as  per-
fectly well  knowiy.  he  tells  us  from  what  materials
Mark  collected  his  account,  viz.  from  Petei*s
preaching,  end  in  what  language  Matthew  wrote,
viz.  in  Hebrew.  Whether  Papias  was  well  in-
formed in  this  statement,  or  not :  to  the  point  for
which  I  produce  this  testimony,  namely,  that  these
books  bore  these  names  at  this  time,  his  authority
is  complete. *

The  writers  hitherto  alleged,  had  all  lived  tfntf
conversed  with  some  of  the  apostles.  The  works
of  theirs  which  remain,  are  m  general  very  short
pieces,  yet  rendered  extremely  valuable  by  their
antiquity;  and  none,  short  aa  they  are,  bait  what
contain  some  important  testimony  to  our  histori-
cal Scriptures.* .

VII.  Not  long  after  these,  that  is,  not  much
more  than  twenty  "years  after  the  last,  follows
Justin  Martyr.!  His  remaining  works  are  much
larger  than  any  that  have  jet  been  noticed.  Al-
though the  nature  of  hjs  two  principal  writings,
one  of  which  was  addressed  to  heathens,  and  the
other  was  a  conference  with  a  Jew',  did  not  lead
him  to  such'  frequent  appeals  to  Christian  books,
as  would  Have  appeared  in  a  discourse  intended
for  Christian  readers;  we  nevertheless  reckon  up  ,
in  ihem  between  twenty  and  thirty  quotations  of
the  Gospels  and  Acts  of  the  Apostles,,  certain,
distinct,  and  copious:  if  each  verse  be  counted
separately,  a  much  greater  number  j  if  each  ex-
pression, a  very  great  one.ll

We  meet  with  quotations  of  three  of  the  Gos-
pels within  the  compass  of  half  a<page: . "  And  in
other  words  he  say's,  Depart  from  me  into  outer'
darkness,  which  the  Father  hath  prepared  for
Satan  and  his  angels,"  (which  is  from  Matthew
xxv.  41.)  "  And  again  he  -said  in  other  words,  I
give  unto  you  power  to  tread  upon  serpents,  and
scorpions,  and  venomous  beasts,  and  upon  all  the
power  of  the  enemy."  (This  from  Luke  x.  19.)
<(  And  before  he'  was  crucified,  he  said,  The  Son
of  Man  must  suffer  many  things,  and  he  rejected
of  the  Scribes  and  Phariseea,  and  he  crucified,

•  Acts  ii.  94.  t  Lardner,  Cwd.  vol  i.  p.  93ft.

J  That  the  quotations-  are  move  thinly  strown  in
them,  than  in  the  writings  of  the  net!  and  of  succeeding
ages,  in  in  a  good  measure  accounted  for  by  the  observa-
tion, that  the  Scriptures  of  the  New  Testament  had*  not
yet.  nor  by  their  recency  hardly  could  have,  become  a
general  part  of  Christian  education^  read  as  the.  Old
Testament  was  by  Jews  and  Christians  Nfrora  their
childhood,  and  thereby  intimately  mixing,  as  that  hall  ~
long  done.  with*»U  their  religious  ideas,  and  with  their
language  upon  religious  subjects.  In  ^proeess  of  time,
and  as  xoon  perhaps  as  could  be  expected  this,  came  to
be  the  cane.  And  then'w*  perceive  the  effect,  in  a  pro.
portionably  greater  frequency,  as  well  as  copiousness  of
allusion.  1T

{Lardner,  Cred.  vol.  i.  p.  SS&  *
".He  cites  our  present  canon,  .and  jpartisnlarly  oar
four  gospels,  continually,  I  dare  say,  above  two  hun-
dred times." Jones's  New  and  fail  Method. Append.
vol.  i  p.  589  ed.  179ft.  ' ,

f  Mica.  Introd.  cii,  sect  vj.


EVIDENCES  OP  CHRISTIANITY.


and  rise  a^ain  the  tbiid  day.*  (This  firom  Mark
riii.  31.)

„  In  another  place,  Justin  quotes  a  passage  in
the  nistory*of  Christ's  birth;  as  delivered  by  Mat-
thew and  John,  ana*  fortifies  his  quotation  typhis
remarkable  testimony:  "As  they  bave'iaught,
who  have  written  "the  history  of  all  things  con-
cerning our  Saviour  Jesus*  Christ:  and  we  be-
lieve them."

Quotations'  Are  also  found  from  the  Gospel  of
Saint  John.  •

-  What,  moreover,  seems  extremely  material  to
be.  observed  is,  that  in  all  Justin's  works,  from
which  might  be  extracted  almost  a  complete  life
of  'Christ,- there  are  but  two  instances,  in  which
be  refers  to  any  thing  as  said  or  done  by  Qhrist,
which  is  not  related  concerning  him  in  our  pre-'
sent  Gospels;-  which  shows,  that  these  Gospels,
and' these,  we  may  say}  alone,  were  the  authori-
ties from  which  the 'Christians  of  that  day  drew,
the  information  upon  which  they  depended*  One
of  these  instances  is  of  a  saying  or  Christ,  not
met  with  in  any  book  now  extant.* .  The  other,
of  a  circumstance  in  Christ's  baptism,  namely,  a
fiery  or  luminous  appearance  upon  the  water,
which,  sccordingto  Epiphanius,  is  noticed  in  the
Gospel  of  the  Hebrews:,  and  which  -might  be
true :  but  which,  whether  true  or  false,  is  men-
tioned by  Justin,  with  a  plain  mark  of  diminution
when  compared  with  what  he  quotes  as  resting
upon  Scripture  authority.  The  reader  will  ad-
vert to  this  distinction:  "And  then,  when  Je-
sus came  to 'the  river  Jordan,  where  John- was
baptizing,  as  Jesus  descended  into  the  water,  a
fire  also  was  kindled  in  Jordan;  and  when  he
came  up  out  of  the  water,  the*  apostles  of  this  our
Christ  We  written  that  the  Holy  Ghost  lighted
Upon  him  as  a  dove.

All  the  references  in  Justin  are  made  without
mentioning'  the  author;  which  proves  that  these
books  were  perfectly  notorious,  and  that  there
were  no  other  accounts  of  Christ  then  extant,  or,
at  bast,  no  others  so-  received  and  credited  as  to
make  it  necessary  to  distinguish  these  from  the
jest

But  although  Justin  mentions  not  the  author's
name,  he  cabs  the  books,  "Memoirs  composed
by  thev  Apostles;?  "  Memoirs  composed  by  the
Apostles  and  their  Companions';"  which  descrip-
tions, the  latter  especially,  exactly  suit  with  "the
titles  which  the  Gospel*  and  Acts  of  the  Apostles
bow  bear.

VIII.  pegesfppust  came  about  thirty  years
•Iter  Justin. His  testimony  is  remarkable  only
font  tins  particular ;  that  he  relates  of  himself,  that,
,-»  . i *

*  *  therefore  also  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  has  said,  la
Whatsoever  I  shall  And  you,  in  the  saiAe  F  will  also  judge

Cu."  Possibly  Justin  designed  not  to  quote  any  text,
tlo  represent  the  sense  ormany  of  our  Lord's  sayings.
P&bricus  has  oBeerred;  that  this  saying  has  been  quoted
by  man#>  'writers,  and  that  Justin  is  the  onjy,  one  who
ascribes  it  to  oar  Lord,  and  that  perhaps  by  a  slip  oftiis

resembling  these  are  read  repeatedly  la  Era-

" t  to  their  ways  C

rkabTe  that  Justin

Esekiel. Mr.  Jones


Mel:  *<I  will  Judge  them  according  to
(ehap.  rli.  3 ;  xxxiii.  30.)  It  is  remarkabl
Jttd  just  before  expressly  quoted  Esekie


Esekiel ;  and  that  some  transcriber,  imagining  these  to
be  the  words  of  Christ,  inserted  in  -bis  copy  the  addition
"Jesus Christ." Vol.  i.  ft 339.


.  ft  £39.

t  Lardner.  Cred.  vol.  L  s.  SJ^


301

,  ha  voted,  on
i  every


travelling  from  Palestine  to -Ron
his  jourjiey,- many  bishops;  and
succession,  and  in  every  city,  the  same  doctrine  if
taught,  which  the  Law  and  the  Prophets,  and  the
Lord teacheth."  This  ban  important  attestation,
from  good  authority,  and  of  high  antiquity.'  It  is
generally  understood,  that  by  the  word  "  Lord,"
Hegesippus  intended  'some  writing  or  writings,,
containing  the  teaching  of  Christ;  in  which  sense
alone  the  .term  combines  &rith  the  other  terms
"Uw  «nd  Prophets,"  which  denote  writings;
and  together  with  them admit"  of  the  verb  "teach-
eth" in  the  present  tense.  Then  that  these
writings  were  some  or  all  of  the  books  of  the
New  Testament,  is  rendered  probable  from
hence,  that  in  the  fragments  of  his  works,  which
are  preserved  in  Euseoius,  and  in  a  writer  of  the
ninth  century^  enough/tfcough  it  be  tittle,  is  left
to  show,  that  vHegeaippW  expressed  divers  things
in  the  style  of  the  Gospels,  and  of  the  Acts  of  the
Apostles;  that'  he  referred  to  the  history  in  the
second  chapter  of  Matthew,  and  recited  a  text  of
that  Gospel  as  spoken  by  our  Lord.

IX.  At  this  time,  viz.  about  the  year  170,  the
churches  of  Lyons  and  Vienne,  in  France,  sent
a  relation  of  the  sufferings  of  their  martyrs  to  the
churches  of  Asia  and  Phrygia.  *  The  epistle  je
preserved  entire  by  Eusebtus.  And  what  carries
in  some  measure  the  testimony  of  these  churches
to  a  higher  age*,  is,  that  they  had.  new  for-  their
bishop,  Pothinns,  who  was  ninety  years  old,  and
whose  early  life  consequently  must  have  imme-
diate^ joined  on  with  the  times  of  the  apostles.
In  this  epistle  are  exact  references  to  the  Gospels
of  Luke  and  John, 'and  to  the -Acts  of  the  Apos-
tles} the  form  of  reference  the  .same  as  in  all  the
preceding  articles..  That  from  *  Saint  John  is  in
these  words : "  Then  was- fulfilled  that  which  was
spoken  by  the  Lord,  Jhat  whosoever,  killeth  you,
wiU  think  that  he  doeth  God  service."  t

X.  The  evidence  now  opens  -upon  us  rail  and
clear.  Irensust  succeeded  Pothinus  as  bishop
of  Lyons.  In  his  youth  he  had  been  a  disciple  of
Polycarp,  who  was  a  disciple  of  John*  In  the
time  in  which  he  lived,  he  was  distant  not  much
more  than  a  century  from  the  publication  of  the
Gospels ;  in  his  instruction,  only  by  one  step  sepa-
rated from  the  persons  of  the  apostles.  He  as-
serts of  himself  and  his  contemporaries^  that  .they
were  able  to  reckon  up/  in  all  the  -principal
churches,  the  succession  of  bishops  from  the  first  f
I  remark  these  particulars  concerning  IrensMU
with  mere  formality  than  usual ;  because  the  tes-
timony which  this  writer  affords  to  the  historical
books  of  the  New  Testament,  to  their  authority,
and  to  the  titles  which  they  bear,  is  express,  posi-
tive, and  exclusive.  'One  principal  passage,  in
which  this  testimony  is  contained,  opens  with  a
precise  assertion  of  the  point  which  we  have  laid
down  as  the  foundation  of  our  argument,  viz.  that
the  story  which  the  Gospels  exhibit,  is  the  story
which  the  apostles  told.  "  We  have  not  jeceived/*
sakh  Ireiueus,  "  the  knowledge  of  the  way  of  our
salvation  by.  any  ethers  than  those  by  whom  the
.Gospel  has  been  brought  to  us.  Which  Gospel
they  flrst  preached,  and  afterwards,  by  the. will  of
God^committed  to  writing,  that  it  might  be  for  time
to  come  the  foundation  and  pillar  of  our  lakh.-—


•  Leidnef,  Orei.  vol.  i.  p.  338.

ixvi.a.  J  La«dner,vol.Lp.3li.


§  Adv.


LUtc.3.
26


300


EVIDENCES  OP  CHRISTIANITY,


For  titer  that  our  Lord  rote  from  the  dead,and
they  (the  apostles)  were  endowed  from  above  with
the  power  of -the  Holy  Ghost  coming  down  upon
them,  the;  received  a  perfect  knowledge  or  all
things.  They  then  went  forth  to  all  the  ends  of
the  earth,  declaring  to  men  the  blowing  of  hea-
venly peace,  having  all  of  them,  and  every  one,
alike  the  Gospel  of  God.  Matthew;  then  among
the  Jews,  wrote  a  Gospel  in  their  own  language,
while  Peter  and  Paul  were  preaching-  the  Gospel
at  Rome,  and  founding  a  church  there :  and  after
.their  exit,  Mark  also,  the  disciple  and  interpreter
of  Peter,  delivered  to  us  in.  writing  the  things  that
had  been  preached  by  Peter;  and  Luke,  the  com-
panion of  Paul,  put  down  in  a  book  the  Gospel
preached  by  him  (Paul.)  -  Afterwards  John,  the
disciple  of  the  Lord,  who  also  leaned  upon  his
breast,  he  likewise  published  a  Gospel  while  he
dwelt  at  Ephesus  in  Asia."  If  any  modern  divine
should  write  a  book  upon,  the  genuineness,  of  the
Gospels,  he  could  not  assert  it  more  expressly,  or
state  their  original  more  distinctly,  than  Ireocus
hath  done  within  little  more  than  a  hundred  years

^  after  ibey  were  published.

:  The  correspondency,  in  the  days  of  Ireneras,  of
the  oral  and  written  tradition,  and  the.  deduction
of  the  oral  tradition  through  various  channels
Jrom  the  age  of  the  apostles,  which  was  then  late-
ly passed,  add,  by  consequence,  the.  probability
that  the  books  truly  delivered. what  the  apostles
taught,  is  inferred  also  with  strict  regularity  from  ■
another  passage  of  his  works.  "  The  tradition  of
the  apostles,"  this  father  saith,  "hath  spread  it-
self over  the  whole  universe ;  and  all  they,  who
search  after  the  .sources  of  truth,  will  find  this
tradition  to  be  held  sacred  in  every  church.  We
might  enumerate  all  those  who  have  been  appoint-
ed toshops  to  these  churches  by  the  apostles,  and
all  (heir  successors  up  to  our  days.  It  is  by  this  "un-
interrupted succession  that  we  have  received  the
tradition  which  actually  exists  in  the  church,  as
also  the  doctrines  of  truth,  as  it  was  preached  by/
the  apostles."* The  reader  will  observe  upon

.  this,  that  the  same  Ireneus,  who  is  now  stating

'  the  strength  and  uniformity  of  the  tradition,  we.
have  before  seen  recognizing,  in  the  fullest  man*
ner,rthe  authority  of  the  written  records*;  from
which  we  a«*  entitled  to  conclude,  that  they  were
then  conformable  to  each  other.  -
-  I  have  said,  tliat  the  testimony  of  hensus  in
favour  of  our  Gospels  is  exclusive  of  all  others.^,  I
allude  to  a  remarkable  passage  in  his  works,  in
which  for  'some  reasons  sufficiently  fanciful,  he
endeavours  to  show,  that  there  could  be  neither
more  nor  fewer  Gospels  than  four..  •  With  his
argument  we  have  no  concern.  •  The  position
itself,  proves  that  four,  and  only  four,  Gospels  were  at
that  tune  publicly  read  and  acknowledged.  That
these  were  our  Gospels,  and  in  the  state  in  which
we  now  have  them,  is  shown,  from  many  other,
places  Of  this  writer  beside  that  which  we  have
already  alleged.  He  mentions  how  Matthew
begins  his  Gospel,  how  Mark  begins  and  ends  his,
and  their  supposed  reasons  for  so  doing.  He  enu-
merates at  length  the  several  passages  of  Christ's
history  in  Lulce,  which  are  not  found  in  any-of
the  other  evangelists.  He  states  the  particular
design  with  which  St  John  composed  his  Gospel,
and  accounts  for  the  doctrinal  declarations  which
pweede  the  narrative.


•  Ircn.  in  Her.  L  iii.  c  %


To  the  book  of  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  jfg
author,  and  credit,  the  testimony  of  IreiuBos  is  no
less  explicit  Referring  to  the  account  of  Saint
Paul's  conversion  and  vocation,  in  the  ninth  chap*
ter  of  that  book,  "  Nor  can  they,"  says  he,  mean-
ing-the  parties  with  whom  he  argues,  "  show  that
he  is  not  to  be  credited,  who  has  related  to  us  the
truth  with  the  greatest  exactness."  In  another
place,  he  has  actually  collected  the  several  texts,
in  which  the  writer  of  the  history  is  represented
as  accompanying  St  Paul ;  which  leads  him  to
deliver  a  summary  of  almost  the  whole  of  the  last
twelve  chapters  of  the  book.

In  an  author  thus  abounding  withr  references
and  allusions  to  the  Scriptures,  there  is  not  one
to  any  apocryphal  Christian  writing  whatever..
This  is  a  broad  line  of  distinction  between  our
sacred  books,  and  the  pretensions  of  all  others.

The  force  of  the  testimony  of  the  period*  which
we  have  considered,  is  greatly  strengthened  by
the  observation,  that  it  is  the  testimony,  and  the
concurring  testimony,  of  writers  who  lived  in  coun-
tries remote  from  one  another.  Clement  flourish^
ed  at  Rome,  jgnatius  at  Antloch,  Polycarp  at
Smyrna,  Justin  Martyr  in  Syria,  and  XrensSus  in
Fiance.

XI.  Omitting  Athenagoras  and  Theophilns,
who  lived  about  this  time;*  in  the  remaning
works  of  the  former  of  whom  are  clear  references
to  Mark  and  Luke;  and  in  the  works  of  the  lat-
ter, who  was  bishop  of  Antioch,  the  sixth  in  suc-
cession from  the  apostles,  evident  allusions  to
Matthew  and  John,  and?  probable  allusions  to
Luke,  (which,  considering  the  nature  of  the  com-
positions, that  they  were  addressed  to  heathen
readers,  is  as  much  as  could  be  expected \\  obeerv-  *
ing  also,  that  the.  works  of  two  learned  Christian
writers  of  the  same  age,  Miltiades,  and  PanUenust
are  now  lost;  of  which  Miltiades,  Eusebios
records,  that  his  writings'*1/ were  monuments  of
seal  for  the  Divine  'Oracles ;"  and  which  Pan-
tcnus,  as  Jerome  testifies,  was  a  man  of  prudence
and  learning,  both  in  the  Divine  Scriptures  and
secular  literature,  and  had  left  many  commenta-
ries upoirthe  Holy  Scriptures  then  extant ;  passing
by  these  without  further  remark,  we  come  to  oneof
the  most  voluminous  of  ancient  Christian  writers,
Clemen(  of  Alexandria,  t  Clement  followed  Ire-
neus at  the  distance  of  only  sixteen  years,  and
therefore  may  be  said  to  maintain  the  series- of  tes-
timony in  an  uninterrupted  continuation.

In  pertain  of  Clement's  works  now  lost,  but  of
which  various  parts  are  recited  by  Euaebius,  there
is  given  a  distinct  account  of  the  order  in  which
the  four  Gospels  were  written.*  The.  Gospels
which  contain  the  genealogies,  were  (he  says)
written  first ;  Mark's  next,  at  the  instance  or
Peter's  .followers ;  and  John's  the  last:. -and  this
account  he  tells*  us  that  he  had  received  from  pres-
byters of  more  ancient  tiroes.  This  testimonT
proves  the  following  points;. that  these  Gospels
were  the  histories  of  Christ  then  publicly  received,
and  relied  upon ;  and  that  the  dates,  occasions,  and
circumstances  of  their  publication,  were  at  that
time  subjects  of  attention  and  inquiry  amongst
Christians.  In  the  works  of  Clement  which  re-
main, the  four  Gospels  are  repeatedly  quoted  by  the
of  their  authors,  and  the  Acta  of  the  Apoa-


*  Lardner,  voL  i.  p.  400. 422.
f  Lardner,  vol.  i.  p.  413.  450.
X  Lardner,  voL  ft  p.  408. ,


EVIDENCES  OF  CHRISTIANITY.


303


Has  b  exprady  ascribed  to  Luke.  In  one  place,
•Iter  mentioning  a  particular  circumstance,  he  adds
these  remarkable  words :  "  We  have  not  this  pas-
sage in  the  four  GoapeU  delivered  to  u»}  but  irr
that  according  to  the  Egyptians;"  which  puts  a
marked  distinction  between  the  four  Gospels  and
all  other  histories,  or  pretended  histories,  of  Christ.
In  another  part  of  his  works,  the  perfect  confi-
dence, with*  which  he  received  the  Gospels,  is  sig-
nified bj  himr  in.  these  words :  "  That  this  is  true,
appears  from  hence,  tnat  it  is  written  in  the  Gos-
pel according  to  St  Luke;"  and  again,  4<  I  need
not  use  many  words,  -but  only  to  allege  the  evan-
gelic voice  of  the  Lord."  £ur  quotations  are  nu-
'  merons.  The  sayings  of  Chrfct,  of  which  he
alleges  many,  are  all  taken  from  ou*  Gospels ;  ihe
single  exception  to  this  observation  appearing  to
be  a  loose  *  quotation  of  a  passage  in  Saint  Mat-
thew's GospeL

XII.  In  ihe  age  in- which  they  Jived,  t  Tertol-
han  joins  on  with  Clement.  The  number  of  the
Gospels  then  received,  the  names  of  the  evangelists,
and  their  proper  descriptions,  are  exhibited  by
this  writes  in  one  short  sentence :  "  Among  the
apostles,  John -and  Matthew  teach  us.  the.  faith  ;-
among  apostolical  men,  Luke  and  Mark  refresh  it."
The  next  passage  to  be  taken  from  Tertullian,
afiprds  as  complete  an  attestation  to  the.  authenti-
city of  our  books  as  can  be  weU  imagined.  After
enumerating  the  churches  which  had  been  found-
ed by  .Paul,  at  Corjnth/in  Galatia,  at  Philippi,
Theasmlonioa,  and  Ephesus ;  the  church,  of  Rome
established  by  Peter  and  Paul,  and  other  churches
derived  from  John ;  he  proceeds  thus : — "  I  say
then,  that -with  them,  but  not  with  them  onhr
Which  are  apostolical,  but  with  all  who  have,  fel-
lowship with.them  in  the  same  faith,  js  that  Gos-
pel of  Luke  received  from  its  tint  publication,
which  we  so  zealously  maintain ;"  and  presently
afterwards  adds;  "The  same  authority  of  the
apostolical  churcheawill  support  the  other  Gospels,
which  we  have  from  them  and  according  to  them,
I  mean  John's  and  Matthew V;  although  that
-likewise  which  Mark  published  may  be  said  to  be
ISeter'SjWhosetotefpretei1  Mark  was."  In  another
i  Tertullian  affirms,  that  the  three  other
i  were  in  the  hands  of  the  churches  from
the  WgiYining,  as  well  as  Luke's.  This  noble
testimony  fixes  the'  universality  with  which  the
Gospels  were  received,  and  their  antiquity ;  that
they  were  in  the  hands  of  alL  and  had  been  so
from  the  first,  And  this  evidence'  appears  not
mote  than  one  nundred  and  fifty  years  after  the
publication  of  the  books.  The  reader  must  be
given  to  understand,  that  when  Tertullian  speaks
•of  mautsuning  or  defending  (tuendi)  the  Gospel
of  Saint  Luke,  he  only  means  maintaining  or
defending  the  integrity  of  the  copies  of  Luke  re-
ceived by  Christian  churches,  in  opposition  to  cer-
tain curtailed  copies  used  by  Maroon,  against
whom  he  writes.

This  author  frequently  cites  the  Acts  of  the
Apostles  under  that  title,  once  calls  it  Luke's


*  M  Ask  freat  things,  and  the  small  shall  be  added
unto  you.**  Cleafcnt  rather  chose  to  expound  the  words
of  Matthew  (chap.  vi.  33,)  than  literally  to  cite  them;
and  this  is  most  sndeniably  proved  by  another  place  in
the  same  Clement,  where  he  both  prodaees  the  text  and
these  words  as  an  exposition :— "  Seek  ye  firtt  the  king-
dam  of  heaven  and  its  righteousness;  for  these  are  the
great  things;  but  the  small  things,  and  things  relating
J  to  this  life,  shall  be  added  unto  you."— Joaes7s  New  and
Fttll  Metbod,.vot.  i.  p.  553,

I-axdoer ,  vol  lip.  StL *


Commentary,  and  observes  •  how  .Saint  Paul's
epistles  confirm  it

After  jthis  general  evidence,  it  is  unnecessary
to  add  particular  quotations.  These;  however,
are  so  numerous  and  ample,' as  to  have  led  Dr.
(jardner  to  observe,  "that  there  are  more,  and
larger  quotations  of  the  small  volume  of  theJNew
Testament  in  this  one  Christian  author,  than
there  are  of  all  the  works  of  Cicero  in  writers  of
all  characters  for  several  aces."  *
.  Tertullian  quotes  no  Christian  writing  as  of
equal  authority  with  the  Scriptures,  and  no  spu-
rious books  at  all ;  a  broad  line  of  distinction,  we
may  once  more  observe,  between  our  sacred  books
and' all  others.  '

We  may  again  likewise  remark  the  wide*  ex*
tent  through  which  the  reputation  of  the  Gospels,
and  of  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  had  spread,-  ana
the  perfect  consent,  in  this  point,  of  distant  and
independent  societies.  •  it  is  now  only  about  one
hundred  and  fifty  years  since  Christ  was  crucified ;
and  within  this  period,  to  say  nothing  of  the  apos-
tolical fathers  who  have  been  noticed  already,  we
have  Justin  Martyr  at  Neapolis,  Theophifus  at
Antioch,  irehsus  in  France-,  Clement  at  Alexan-
dria.-Tertullian  at  Carthage,  quoting  the. same
books  of  historical  'Scriptures,  and,  I  may  say,
quoting  these  alone.

XIIi.  An  interval  of  only  thirty  years,  and  that
occupied  by  no  small  number  of  Christian  writers  t
whose  works  only  remain  in  fragments  and  quo-
tations, and.  in.  every  one  of  which  is  some  re-
ference or  other  to  the  Gospels,  (and  in  one  of
them,  Hippoly  tus,  as  preserved  in  Theodoret,  is  an
abstract  of  the  whole  Gospel  history,)  brings  us
to  a  name  of  great  celebrity  in  Christian  antiquity,
Origen  t  of  Alexandria^  who  in  the  quantity  or
his  writings,  exceeded  the  mosf  laborious  of  the
Greek  and  Latin  authors.  Nothing  can  be  more
peremptory  upon  the  subject  now  under  consider-
ation, and,  from  a  writer  of  his  learning  and  in-
formation, more  satisfactory,  than  the  declaration
of  Origen,  preserved,  in  an  extract  from  his  works,
«hy  Eusebius ;  "  That  the  four  Gospels  alone  are  ,
received  without  dispute  t?y  the  whole  church  of
God  under  heaven :  to  which  declaration'  is  im-
mediately subjoined  a  brief  history  of  the  respect-
ive authors,  to  whom  they  were  tnen,  as  they  are
.now,  ascribed.  The  language  hoideu  concerning
the  Gospels,  throughout  the  works  of  Origen
which  remain,  entirely  corresponds  with  the  tes-
timony here  cited.  His  attestation-  toJthe  Acts  of
the  Apostles  is  no  less  positive :  "  And  Luke  also
once  more  sounds  the  trumpet,  relating  the  acts
of  the  apostles."  The  universality  with  which
tjie  Scriptures  were  then  read,  is  well  signaled  by
this  writer,  in  a  passage  in  which  he  has  occasion,
to  observe  against -Celsus,'"  That  it  is  not  in  any
private  books,  or  such  as  are  read  by  a  fow  only,
and  those  studious  persons^  but  in  books  read  by
every  body,  that  it  is  written,  The  invisible  things
of  God,  from  the  creation  of  the  world,  are  clearly
seen,  being  understood  by  things4hat  are  made. '
It  is  to  no  purpose  to  single  out  quotations  of
Scripture  from  such  a  writer  as  this.  We  might
as  well  make  a  selection  of  the  quotations '  of
Scripture  in  Dr.  Clarke's  Sermons.  They  are  so
» ■  ■■  •■-■■..,

*  Lardnat,  vol.  ih  p.  647.  ^  . V _. - _

f  Minudua  Felix,  A  polio  n  In*,  Cams,  asterlus,  tfe
banus,  Alexander  bishop  of  Jerusalem,  Hippolytua,

Julius  Afticanua

,  votltt.p.334.


nmoniaa,  Julius  Afticanua
|  Xjardner.  i


304


EVIDENCES  OF  CHRISTIANITY.


thickly  aown  in  the  works  of  Origan,  that  Dr.
Mill  says,  "  If  we  had  all  hi*  works  semaining,
we  should  have  before  as  almost  the  whole  text  of
the  Bible.'* *  .  .  _

Origen  notices,  in  older  to  censure,  certain
apocryphal  Gospels.  He  also' uses  -four  writings
of  this  sort ;  .that  is,  throughout  hie  forge  works
he- once  or  twice,  at  the  most,  quotes  each  of  the
•four;  1but  always  with  some  mark,  eitberof  direct
reprobation  or  of  caution  to  hi*  readers,  manifest-
ry  esteeming  them  of  little  or  no.  authority.

XIV.  Gregory,  bishop  of  Neocssarea,  and
Dionysius  of  Alexandria,  were  scholars  of  Origen.
Their  testimony/  therefore,  though  full  and  parti-
cular, may  bs  reckoned  a  repetition  only  of  his.
The  aeries,  however,  of  evidence,  is  continued  by
Cyprian,  bishop  of  Carthage,  who  nourished  with-
in, twenty  years  after  Origen.  V  The  church,"
says  this  father,  "  is  watered,  like  Paradise,  by
four  rivers,  that  is,  by  lour  Gospels,"  The  £cts
of  the  Apostles  is  alas  frequently  quoted  by  Cy-
prian under  that  name,  and  under  the  name  of  the
"  Divine  Scriptures."  In  his  various  writings  aw
such  constant  and  copious  citations  of  Scripture,
as  to  place  this  part  of  the  testimony  beyond  con-
troversy. Nor  is  there^  in  the- works  of  this  emi-
nent African  bishop,  one  quotation  of  a  spurious'
or  apocryphal  Christian  writing.  ■*•

XV.  Passing  over  a  crowdt  of  writers  foflowhig
Cyprian  at  different  distances,  but  all  within  forty
yean  of  his  time]  and  who  all,  in  the  imperfect
remains  of  their  works,  either  cite  the  historical
Scriptures  of  the  New  Testament,  or  speak  .of
them  in  terms  of  profound  respect;  I  single  but
Vktorin,  bishop  of  Pettaw  in  Germany  2  merely
on  account  of  the  remoteness  of  hi*  situation  from
that  of  Origen  and  Cyprian,  who  were  Africans ;
by  which  circumstance  his  testimony,  taken  in
conjunction  with  theirs,  proves  that  the  Scripture
histories,  and  the  same  histories,  were  known  and
received  from  one  side  of  the  Christian  world  to
the  other.  This  bishopt  lived  about  the  year  290:
and  in  a  commentary,  upon  this  text  of  the  Reve-
lation, "  The  first  waslike  a  lion,  the  second  was
like  a  calf,  the  third  like  a  man,  and  the  fourth
like  a  flying  eagle,"  he  makes  out  that  by  the  four
creatures  are  intended  the  four  Gospels ;  and  to
show,  the  propriety  of  the  symbols,  he  -recites  the
subject  with  which  each  evangelist  opens  his  his-
tory. The  explication  is  fanciful,  but  the  testi-
mony positive.  He  also  expressly  <ates  the  Acts
of  the  Apostles.

XVI.  Arnobiue  and  Laetantius,f  stout -the
year  900,  composed  formal  arguments  upon  the
credibility  of  the.  Christian  religion.  Aa  these
arguments  were  addressed  to  Gentiles,  the  au-
thors abstain  from  quoting'  Christian  books  by
names  one  of  them  giving  this  very  reason  for  his
reserve ;  but  when  they  come  to  state,  for  the  in7
formation  of  their  readers,  the  outlines  of  Christ's^
history,  it  is  apparent  that  they  draw  their  ac-
counts from  our  Gospels,  and  from  no  other'
sources:  fo>  these  statements  exhibit  a  summary
of  almost  every  thing  .which  is  related  of  Christ V
actions  and  miracles  by  the  four  evangelists.  Ar-
nobius vindicates,  without  mentioning  their  names,


♦Mill,  Prole*,  cap.  vi.  p.  66.

t  Novates,  Rome,  A.  0. 851 ;  Dionyrios,  Rome,  A.  D.
3»;  Oommoaian,  A.  D.  270;  Anatoliua,  Laodicea,  A.
B.  970;  llieognostus,  A.  D.  282 ;  Methodius,  Lycia,  A.
a  ao^Phiieas,  Egypt,  A.  D.  886.

JLardner,  vol.v.pjbt §  lb,  vol.  vii.  p.  43:  »1.


the  credit  of  these  historians ;  observing;  that  they
were  eye-witnessf*  of  the  facts  which  thef  relate,
andTthat  their  ignorance  of  the*  arts  of  composition
was  rather  a  confirmation  of  their  testimony,  than
an-objection  to  it.  Lactantius  also  argues  in  de-
fence of  the  religion,  from  the  consistency,  simpli-
city, disinterestedness,  and  sufferings  of  the
Christian  historians,  meaning  bythat  term  our
evangelists.

X  VII.  "We  clone  the  series  of-testunonies  with
that  of  Eusebius,*  bishop  of  Ccsarea,  who  fio*>
riahed  in  the  year  315;  contemporary  with,  or
posterior  only  bv  fifteen  years  to2  the  two  authors
last  cited.  This  voluminous  writer,-  and  most'  di-
ligent collector  of  the  writings  of  others,,  beside  a
variety  of  large  works,  composed  a  history  of  the
affairs  of  Christianity  from -its  origin  to  his  own,
time.  His  testimony  to  the  Scriptures  is  the  tes-
timony of  a  man*  much  conversant  in  the  works  of
Christian  authors;  written  during  the  first  three
centuries  of  Us  era,  and.  Who  had  read  many
which  are  now  lost.  In  a  passage  of  his  Evange-
lical Demonstration,  Eusebius  remarks,  with  great
nicety,  the  delicacy  of  two  of  the  evangelists  in
their  manner  of  noticing  any  circumstance  which
regarded  themselves ;  and  of  Mark,  aa  \


derTeter's  direction,  in  the  circumstances  wh
regarded  him.  The  illustration  of  this  remark
leads  him  to  bring  together  long  quotations  from
each  of  the  evangelists;  and  the  whole  passage  as
a  proof,  that  Eusebius,  and  the  Christians  of  (Lose
days,  not  only  read  the  Gospels,  but  studied  them
with  attention  and  exactness..  In  a  passage  of  his
Ecclesiastical  History,  he  treats,  in  form,  and  at
large,  of  the  occasions  of  writing  the  four  Gospels,
ana  of  theM  order  in  which  they  were  written.
The  title  of  the  chapter  is,  "  Of  the  Order  of  the
Gospels  j"  and  it  begins,  thus:  "Let  us  observe
the  writings  of  this  apostle  John,  which  are  not
contradicted  by  any;  and,  Qrst  of  aH.  must  he
mentioned,  as  acknowledged  by  all,  the  Gospel
according  to  him,  well  known  to  all  the  churdnas
under  heaven ;  and  that  ft  has  been  justly  placed
.by  the  ancients  the  fourth  in  order,  and  after  the
other  three,  may  be  made  evident  in  this  man-
ner."— Eusebius  then  proceeds  to  show  that  John
wrote  the  last  of  the  four,  and  that  his  Gospel  was
intended  to  supply  the  omissions  of.  the  others;
especially  in  the  part  of  our  Lord's  ministry,
which  took  place  before  the  imprisonment  of  John
the  Baptist  He  observes,  "that  the  apostles  of
Christ  were  not  studious  of  the  ornaments  of  com-
position, nor  indeed  forward  to- write  at  all,  being
wholly  occupied  with  their  ministry."

This  learned  author  makes  no  use  at.  aD  of
Christian  writings,  forged  with  the-  names  of
Christ'sapostles,  or  then*  companions;

We  dose  this  branch  of  our  evidence  here,  he-
cause,  after  Eusebius,  there  is  no  room  for  any
question  upon  the  subject ;  the  works  of  Christian
writers  being  as  full  of  texts  of  Scripture,  and  of
references  to  Scripture,  as  the  discoursesof  modern
divines.  Future  testimonies  to  the  book's  of  Scrip-
ture could  only  prove  that  they  never  lost  their
character  oi  authority .

8ECTION  II. .

When  the  Scripture*  are  gwrted,  or  alluded  to,
. they  are  quoted  with  peculiar  respect,  aa  booh*


,voLriiI.p.33.


EVIDENCES .  OF  CHRISTIANITY*


806


.sui 'generis ;  as  possessing  an  authority  tehieh
belonged  to  no  other  books' ,  and  as  conclusive.

-in  all  questions  and-  controversies  amongst
Christian*.  ■


Beside  the  general  strain  of reference  and  .quo-
tationy  which  uniformly  and  strongly  indicates
this  distinction,  the  following,  may,  be  regarded  as
specific  testimonies :'

L-  Theophilus,*!  bishop  of  Antioch,  the  sixth  in
succession  from  the  apostles,  and  who-flourished
Rttle  more  than  a  century  after  the  books  of  the
New  Testament  were  wriUen^vmgoceasian  to
quote  one  of  oar  Gospels,  writes,  thus :  "  These
things  the  Holy  Scriptures  teach  us,  and  aU  who
were  moved  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  among  whom
John  says/  In  tl^e  beginning  was  the  Word,  and
the  Word'  was  with  Cfod."  -  Again :  "  Concerning
the  righteousness  which  the  law  teaches,  the  like
things  are  to  he  found  in!  the  Prophets  and  the
Gospels',  .because  that  aH,  being  inspired,  spoke  by
one  and  the  same  Spirit  qf  God."t  No  words  can
testify  more  strongly  than  these  do,  the  high  and
-peculiar  respect  in  which  these  books  were  holden.

II.  A  writer  against  Artemon,t  who  may  be
supposed  to*  come  about  one  hundred  and.hfty-
eigbt  years  after  the  publication  of  the  Scripture,
in  a  passage  quoted  by  Eusebius,  uses  these  ex-
pressions: "Possibly' what  .they  (out  adversaries)
say,  might  have  been  credited,  if  first  of  alt  the
Divine  Scriptures  did  not  contradict  them;"  <*»"*
then  the  wntings  of  certain  brethren  more  ancient
than  the  times  of  Victor."  The  brethren  "men,
tiooed  byname;  are  Justin,  Miltiadcs,  Tatian,
Clement,  Ireneus,  Melitpj  with  a  general  appeal
to  many  more  not  named.  This  passage  proves,'
fijst,  that  there,  was  at  that  time  a  collection  called
Divine  Scripture*;  secondly,  that  these  Scrip-
tares  were  esteemed  of  higher  authority  than  the
writings  of  the  most  early  and  celebrated  Chris-
tians. /  -  ....

III.  In  a  piece  ascribed,  to  fiippolytus,§  who
lived  near  the  same  time,  the  author  ■  professes,  in
giving  his  correspondent  instruction  in  the  things
about  which"  he  inquires,  "  to.  draw  out  of  the  sd~
ercdfoUntaiUy  and  to  set  before  Fum  from  the  Sa-»
end  Scriptures,  what  may  afford  him  satisfaction."'
He  then  quotes  •immediately  Paul's v epistles  to,
Timothy,*  and  a/terwardV  many  books  oLthe  New
Testament.  This  pre&ee  to  the  quotations  car-
ries in  it  a  marked  aistinctkm  between  the  Scrip-
tures and  other  books. .  , -

TV.  "  Our 'assertions  and  discourses,"  saith
OrigenJI  "-are  unworthy  of  credit;  we  must  re-
ceive the  Scriptures  as  wtBiesBes."  After  treat-
ing of  the  -duty  of  prayer,  -he  proceeds  with  his
argument  thus:  "What  we  have,  said,  may  be
proved  from  the  Divine  Scriptures."  In  his  books
againstCeJsas,  we  find  this  passage ;  "  That  our
Jeligion  teaches  us  to  seek  after  wisdom,  shall  be
shown,  both  out  of  the  ancient  Jewish  Scriptures,
which  we  also  use,  and  out  of  those  written  since
Jesus,  which  are  .believed  in  the*  churches  to /Be
divine."  These  expressions 'afford' abundant  evi-
dence of- the  peculiar  and- exclusive  authority
which  the  Scriptures  possessed.

V.  Cyprian,  bishop  of  Carthage^  vftoso  age


lies  closeto  that  ofOrigen,  earnestly  exhorts  Chris-
tian, teachers,  in  all  doubtful  cases,  "to  go  back  to
the  fountain;  and  if  the  truth  has  in  any  ease
rbeen -shaken,  to  recur  to  the  Gospels  and  apostolic
^vritings^'-r-Theprecepts  of  the  Gospel,"  says  he
in  another  place/"  are  nothing  less  than  author*-
tative  ^divine  {essoris,  the  foundations  of  our"  hope,  -
the  supports  of  our  faith,  the  guides  of  our  way,
the  safeguards- of  our  Course  to  heaven.".

YI,  Novatus,*  a  Roman,  contemporary  with
Cyprian,  appeals  to.  Che  Scriptures,  as  the  authori-
ty py  which'  all  errors  Were  to  be  repelled,  and
disputes  decided  "  That  C  hrist  is  not  only  man.
hut  Grod  also,  is  proved  bv-the  sacred  authority  or
the  Divine  Writings."— r«  The  Divine  Scripttws  *
easily  detects  and  confutes  the  frauds  of,  heretics."
— u  It  is  not  by  the  fault  of  the  heavenly  Scrip*
tures,  which' never  deceive."  Stronger  assertions
than  these  could  not  be  used.

VII.  At  thculistance  of  tweflty  years  from  the
writer  last  cited,  Amtfolius,+  a  learned  Alexan-
drian, and  bishop  of  Laodicea,  speaking'  of  the
rule  foY  keeping  Easter,  a  question  at  that  day
agitated  with:  much  earnestness,  says  of  those
whom  he  opposed,  "  They  can  -by  no  means  prove
their  point  by  the  authority  of  the  Divine  Scrip-
tune/  ' . • '-

VIII.  The  Arians,.who  sprung  up  ahout  fifty
years  after  this,  argued  strenuously  against  the
use  of  the  words  consubstantiol  and  essence,  and
like  phrases  ;s"6ccau*e  they  were  not  iri  Scrip*
ture.t  And  in  the  same  strain  one  of  their  ad-
vocates opens  a  conference  with  Augustine,  after
the.  following  manner :  "  If  you  say  what  is  rea-


*  hardner, -Gred.  partii.  vol.  i.  p.  439.
.  t  lb.  vol.  i.  p.  44&  1  Ih/vpL  iii.  p.  4*

lib.  vol.  iii.  p.  11*  fib.  voL  UL  £287-880.

f  Is.  VOL  iv.  p.  840,


sonable,  I  must  submit.  If  you  allege  any  thing
from  the  Divine  Scriptures,  whicbT  are  common  to
both,  I  must  hear.  But  unscrfptural  expressions]
(qiifc  extra  Scripturam  sunt)  deserve  no  regard/1
-  Atlianasius,  the  great  antagonist  of  A  nanism-
after  having  enumerated:  the  books  of  the  Old  ana
New  Testament;  adds,  "  These  are  the  fountain
of  salvation,  that  he  who  thirst**  may  be  satisfied
with  the  oracles  contained  in  them.  In  these
alone  the  doctrine  of  salvation  is  proclaimed..  Let
no  man  add  to  them  or  take  any  thing  from  them,"!
IX.  Cyril,  bishop  of  Jerusalem,!)  who  wrote
about  twenty  years  after  the  appearance  of  Arian-
ism, uses  these remarkable  words : — "Concerning .
the  divine  and  holy  mysteries  of  faith,  not  the
least  article  ought  to  be  delivered  without  the  Di-
vine Scriptures."  We  are  assured  that  Cyril's
Scriptures  were  the  same  as*  ours,  for  he  has  left
us  a  catalogue  of  the  books  included  under  that


X.  £piphanius,1T  twenty  years  after  Cyril,
challenges  the  Arians,'  and'  the  followers  of  On-
sen, "  to  produce  any  passage  of  the  Old  and  New
Testament,  favouring  their  sentiments."

-  XI.  Poebadius,  a  Gallic  bishop,  who  lived  about
thirty  years  after,  the*  council  of  Nice,  testifies*,
that  "  the  bishops  of  that  council  first  consulted
the  sacred  volumes",  and  then  declared  their  faith."**

XII.  Basil,  bishop  of.  Osjsdrea,  in  Cappalocia,
contemporary  with  Epiphanrus,  says,  "  that  hear-
ers instructed  in  the  Scri|)tures  ought  to  examine
what  is  said  by  their  teachers,  and  to *~


•  Laniner,  Cred.  vol.  v.  p.  102.

ilb.  p.  146.  |  lb.  vol.  vh.  p.  283, 984.

lb.  vol.  xii.  p.  188. I  lb.  vol.  viii.  p.  278.
lb.  vol.  via.  p.  314. *•  ».


vol.  ix.  p.  53.


m


EVIDENCES  OF  CHRISTIANITY.


to  the  Scriptures,  and  to  reject


what  is
what

£111.  fcphraim,  the  Syrian,  *  celebrated  writer
of  the  same  times,  bears  this  conclusive'  testimony
to  the  proposition  -which  forms  the  subject  of  our
present  chapter :  "  The  truth  written  in  the  Sa,
crjed  Volume  of  the  Gospel,  is  a  perfect  rule.  No-
thing can  be  taken  from  it  nor  added  to  itrwithout


great  giiilL"t

"I  v .  If  we~add  Jerome  to. these,  it  is  only  for


XI^


the  evidence  which  he  affords  of  the  judgment
preceding  ages.  Jerome  observes,  concerning  the
quotations  of  ancient  Christian  writers,  tint  is.  of
writers  who  were  ancient  in  the  year  400,  that
they  made  a  distfactieiU>etw*en  books]  some  they
quoted  aa  of  authority,  and  others  not:  which  ob-
servation relates  to  the  books  of  Scripture,  com-
piled with  other  writings,  apocryphal  or  heathen,?


SECTION  III.

7fye  Scripture*  were  in  very  early  time*  collected
iftto  a  distinct  volume,  _

Ignatius,  who  was  bishop,  of  Antioch  within
fbrtt  years  after  the  Ascension,  and  who  had
lived  anil  convened  with  the  aposj^es,  speaks  of
the  Gospel  and  of  the  apostles  in  terms  which
lender  it  very  probable  that  he  meant  by  the  Gos-
pel, the  book  or  volume  of  the  Gospels,  arid  by
die  Apostles,  the  book  or>olumeof  their  Epiatks.
His  words  in  one  >lace  are,*  "Fleeing  to  the
Gospel  as  the  flesh  of  Jesus,  and  to  the  apostles  as
the  presbytery  of  the  church ;"  that  is,  as  Le  Clerc
interpBets  them,  "in  order  to  understand  the.  will
'of  God,  he  fled  to  the  Gospels,  which  he  believed
no  less  than  if  Christ  in  the  flesh  had  been  speak-
inff-tohhn;  and  to  the  writings 'of  the  apostles,
whom  he  esteemed  as  the  presbytery  of  the  whole
Christian  church.*"-  It  must  be  observed,  that
about  eighty  years  after  this,  we  have  direct  proof
in  the  writings. of  Clement  of  Alexandria,!!  that
these  two  names;  "  Gospel,"  and  "  Apostles/'
were  the  iiames  by  winch  the  writings  of  the  New
Testament  and  the  division  of  these  writings
were  usually  expressed.  '

Another  passage  from  Ignatius-is  the  following :
— u  But  die  Gospel  has  somewhat  in  it  more  ex-
cellent, the  appearance  of  our  Lord  Jqpus  Christ,
ms  passion  and  resurrecfion/'IT
*  And  a  third:  "  Ye^  ought  to  hearken  to  the  Pro-
phets, but  especially  to  the  Gospel,  in  which  the*
passion  has  been -manifested  tolls,  and  the  resur-
rection perfected."  In  this  last  passage,  the  Pro-
phets and  the  Gospel  are  put  in  conjunction ;  and
as  Ignatius  undoubtedly  meant  by  the  Prophets  a
collection  of  writings,  it  is  probable  that  he  meant
the  same  by  the  Gospel,  the  two  'terms  standing
ioevident  parallelism  with  each  other.

This  interpretation  of  .the  wonT"  Gospel,"  in
the  passages  above  quoted  from  Ignatius,  is  con-
'nrmed  by  a  piece  jpt  nearly  equal  antiquity, 'the
relation  of  the'  martyrdom  of  Polycarp  by  the
church  ^of  Smyrna.  ."  AllHhtn^,"  ary  they,
"that  went  before,  were  done,  that  the  Lord
might  show  us  a  martyrdom  according  to  the  Gos-

•  Laidnar,  Cred.  vol.  ix.  p.  124.

iIb.vol.ix.  p.  308.  |  lb.  vol.  x.  p.  123,  iStC

lb.  part  ii.  vol.  1.  p.  180. |  lb.  vol.  U.  p.  016.  .
DkyoLitikias.  '


ne1>  for  he  expected  to  be  delivered  up  aa  the
Lord  also  did."*  And  in- another  place,' "  We  de>
not  commend  those  whd  orT«x  themselves,  nrae?
much  as  the  Gospel  teaches  us  no  such-  thtng."t
In  both  these  places,  what  is  called  the  Gospels.
seams  to  be  the  history  of  .Jesus  Christ,  and  of
his  doctrine,  ,  ' •  *„

s  -If  this  be  the  true  sense  of  the  paastgee,  they
are  not-  only  evidences  ef  our  .propositions,  but
strong  and  very  ancient  proofaof  the  high  esteem
in  which  the  books  of  the  ISTew  Testament  were
.holden.

II.  EoJeWs  relates,  that  jGLuadratus  and  some
others,  who  were  the  immediate  successors  of  the
apostles;  travelling  abroad  to  preach  Christy  cer--
ned  the  Gospels  with  them,  and  delivered  diem
to  their  converts.  The  words  of  Eusebrus  are :
"  Then  travelling  abroad,  they  performed  the  work
of  evangelists,  being  ambitious  to  preach  Christ,
and  deliver  the  Scripture  of  tip  dtorine  GoepeU.'t  '
Eusebius  had  before  him  the  .writings 'both  of
Gtuadratus  himself,  and  of  many  others  of  that
age,  which  are  now  lost.  It  is  reasonable,  there-
fore, to  beheve,  that  he 'had  good  grounds  for  his
assertion. .  What  is  thus  recorded  of  the  Gospels,
took jriaee  within-  sixty,  or,  at  the  most,  seventy
years  after  they  were  published:  and  it  is  evident
that  they  must,  before  this  time  (arid,  it  is  proba-
ble, long  before  this  time,)  have  oeen  in  general
use,  anq  in  high  esteem  in  'the  pcfeurehes  planted
by  the  apostles,  inasmuch  as  they  were  new.  we
find,  collected  info  a  volume ;  and*  the  immediate
successors  of  the  apostles,  they  who  preached  the
religion  of  Christ  to  those  who  had  not  already
heard  it,  carried  the  volume  with  them/  and  de-
livered" it  to  their  converts.  f ^ -

III.  Ireneus,  in  the  year  178,1  puts  the  evan-
gelic and  apoBtolic  writings  in  connexion  with  the
Law  4in4  the'  Prophets,  manifestly-  intending  by
(he  one  a"  code  or  collection  of  Christian  sacred
writings,  as  the  other  expressed  the  code  or  col*
lection  'of  Jewish  sacred  writings.' And;

IV.  Melito,  at  this  time  bishop  of  Sardis,  writ-
ing to  one  Onesimus,'  tells  his  correspondent,!
that  he  had  -procured  an  accurate  account  -of  the  •
books  of  the  Old  Testament  The  occurrence,  in
this  passage, '  of  the  term  Old  Testament*  -na*
been  Drought  to  prove,  and  it 'certainly  does 'Drove,
that  there  was  then  fa  volume  'or  collection  of
writings  called  the  New  Testament  *

•  V:  In  the  time  of  Clement  of  Alexandria,  about
fifteen  years  alter  the  last-quoted  testimony,  H  Is
apparent  that  the  Christian  Scriptures  were  di-
vided into  twd  parts,  under  the  general  titles  of  the
Gospels  and  Apostlesy^and  that  both- these  were
regarded  as  of  the  highest  authority.  One,  out  <£
many  ^expressions  of  Clement,  alluding  to  this
distribution,  is  the  following:—"  There  is  a'Otm-
scnt  and  harnjony  between  the  Law  an<J  the  Pro-
phets^the  Apostles  and  the  Gospel.'IT

VI.  The  same  division,  "Prophets,  Gospels,
and  Apostles,"  appears  in  Tertullian**-the  con-
temporary of  Clement  The*  collection  *  of*  the
Gospels,  is  'likewise  called  by  "this  writer  the
"■Evangelic  Instrument  ;'*tt  the  whole  volume,  the
"  New  Testament ;"  and  the  two  parts,  the  "  Gos-
pels^and  Apostles, "«


■u^v.!.  \  IbTc. tv.  .

+ 5ner,T3red.  part  ii.  vol.  i.  p.  835.

§  is.  vol.  i.  p.  383.  L Ik  p.  331.

*" —  **lb.>  631.


**  Ignat.  Ep.  C*.
itlaraV**-  '


IT  lb.  vol.  ii.  p.  516.
tt  lb.  p.  674.


tflklH


EVIDENCES  OF  CHRISTIANITY.


.  VIL  From  many  writers  also  of  the  third  cen-
tury,,«nd  especially  from  Cyprian,1  who  lived  in
tike  middle  of  it,  its  collected  that' the  Christian
Scriptures  wererdhided  into  two  codes,  01  volumes,
one  called  the  •♦'Goapelft  ox  Scripture*  of  the  Lord,"
the  other,  the.  "Apostles,  or  Epistles  of  the  Aposv

VIII.  Eosebius,  sf  ws  nave  already  seen*,  takes
some  pains  to  show,  that  the  Gospel  of  Saint  John
had  beenjustly  placed  oy  the  ancients  '.'the  fourth
in  order,  and  after  the  other  three.t  These  are
the  terms  of  his  proposition :  and  the  very  introduc-
tion of  such  an  argument  proves  inconiestably,
that  the  fear  Gospel*  had  been  collected  into  a.
,  to  the  exclusion  of


f  every  other ;  that  their
order  in  .the  volume -had  been  adjusted  with  much
eoiisidention^  and  that  this  had  been  done  by
-Chose  who  were  called  anciertla  in  the  time  of  Eu-


.  IntheDiodetian'persecj|tk>n,intheyear3Q3,
the  Scriptures  were  sought  otit  and  burnt :  t
many  soflered  death  rather  than  deliver' them  up ;,
•and  those  who  betrayed  them  to  the  persecutors,
were  accounted  as  J^nee  and  apostate.  On  the
ether  hand,  Conatantfrie,  after  his  conversion,
gave  directions  |br  multiplying  copies  of.  the  Di-
vine-Oracles, and  for  magnificently  adorning  them
at  die  expense  of  the  imperial  treasury.  §  What
the  Christians  of  that  age  so  richly  embellished
in  their  prosperity,  and,  which  is  jnore,  so  iena-
doosly  pieseMod  under  persecution,  was  the  very
volume  of  .the  New  Testament  which  we  now
wad.  '


SECTION  IV.  ,

Oar  press**  Sacred  Writing*  were  soon  distin-
guished fry  appropriate  names  and  title*  of


.  pOLYCinp.  ul  trust  that  yc  are  well  exercised
in  the  Bbly  Scripture*  ,-—**  in  these  Scriptures


it  is  said.  Be  ye  angry  and  fin  not,  and  let  not  the
Sun  go  down  on  'your  wrath."  li  This  passage-  is
extranet/  important*  because  it  proves  that,  in
the  time  of  Folycarp,  who  had  lived  with  the
apostles^  there  were  Christian  writings  distin-
gmshed  by  the  name  of  "  Holy  Scriptures,''  or  Sa-
cred Writings.  Moreover,  the  text  quoted  by
Polrcajpis  a  text  found  in  the  collection  ."at  this
day.  What  also,  the  same  Pdlycarp  hath  else-
where quoted  in  the  same  manner,  may  be  con-
sidered as  proved  (o  belong  to  the  collection ;  and
this  comprehends  Saint  Matthew's,  and,  probably,
Saint  Luke's  Gospel,  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,
ten-  epistles  of  Paul,  the  First  Epistle  of  Peter,
and  the  First  of  .John.1T  In  another  place,  Pol  v-
earp  has  these  words:  " Whoever  perverts  the
'Orates  -qf  the  Lord  to  his  own  lusts,  and  says
there  is  neither  resurrection  nor  judgment,  he  is
the  first-born  of  Satan."**— It  does  not  appear
what  else  Potycarp  could  mean  by  the  "  Oracles
of  the  Lord  "  but  those  same  "  Holy  Scriptures,'*
or  Sacred  Writings,  of  which  he  had  spoken


II.  Justin  Martyr,  whose  apology  was  written*
about  thirty  years-  after  Poly  carp  s  epistle,  ex-.


♦  Laidner,  vol.  iv.  p.  840.  • rib.  voL  viii.  p.  90.
1  lb.  vol  vii.  p.  914,  fee  \  lb.  p.  439.

|IkvoL|.p.5o£  .  ¥Ib.vol.i.p.SW.

**Ib,p.8JB.


307


pressly  cites  some  -of  our  present  histories  under
the  title  of  GoapEL^and"  that  not  as  a  name  by
him  first  ascribed  to.  them,  but  as  me  name  by
which  they  were  generally  known,  in  )ps  time.
.  His  words  are  these :— "  For  the  apostles  in  the
'memoirs  composed  by  them,  tpnick  are  called
Go&peU,  have  ;thua.  delivered  it,  that  Jesus  com-
manded them  to  take  bread,  and  give  thanks.'*  *
There  exists' no  doubt,  but  that,  by  the  -memoirs
.above  mentioned,  Justin  meant  our  present  histo-
rical Scriptures:  for  throughout  his  works,  he
quotes  these,  and  no  others.

III.  Dionysius,  bishop  ot  Corinth,  who  came
thirty  years  after  Justin,  in  a  pannage  preserved  in
EusebHis,Iibr  his  works  are  tost.)  speaks  or "  the
Secures  of  the  Lord."  t  .  '  ^^
'  .  IV.  And  at  the  same  time,  or  very  nearly  so,
by  IrensuB,  bishop  .of  Lyons  .in  France,  t-  they
art  called  "  Divine  Scriptures/W  Divine  Ora-
oles,"-^'  Scriptures  of  the  Lord,"—"  gvangelic
and  Apostolic  Writings."  §  The  quotations  jof  .
Irensus  prove  decidedlyy  that  our  present  Gos-
pels, and  these  alone,  together  with  the  Acts  of
the  Apostles,  were  the  historical  books  compre-
hended by  him  under  these  appellations.  *

V.  Samt  Matthews  Gospel  is  quoted  by  The-
ophilus,  bishop  of  Antioch,  contemporary  with
Irensus,  under  .the  title  of  the  "  Evangelic
Voice ;"  II  and  the  copious  works  of  Clement  of
Alexandria,  published  within  fifteen  years  of  the
same  time,  ascribed  to  the  books  of  the  New  Tes-
tament the  various^  titles  of  "  Sacred  Books," —
"  Divine  Scriptures," — "  Divinely  inspired  Scrip-
tures/,'— " Scriptures  of  the  Lord,"— "the  true
Evangelical  Canon."  IT' .

VL  Tertullian*,  who  Joins  on  with  Clement!
beside  adopting  most  of  the  names  and*  epithets
above  noticed,  calls  the  Gospels  "our  Digestia,"
in  allusion,  as  it  should  seem,  to  some  collection  of
Roman  laws  then  extant.  **

VII.  By  Origen;  who  came  thirty  years  after
Tertullian,  the  same,  and  other  no  less  ,strpng
titles,  are  applied  to  the  Christian  Scriptures':  an  J
in  addition  thereunto,  this  writer  frequently
speaks-of  the  "  Old  and  New  Testament,"—*  the
Ancient  and  New  Scriptures,"— "  the  Ancient
and  New  Oracles."  ft'

VIII.  In  Cyprian,  who  was  not  twenty  years
later,  they  are  "  Books  of  the  Spirit,"—"  Divine.
Fountains, '— "  Fountains  of  the  Divine  Fufc
ness."  ft

,  The  expressions  we  have  thus'  quoted,  are
evidences  of  high  and  peculiar  respect.  They
all  occur  within  two  centuries  from  the  publi-
cation of  the  books.  .  Some  of.  them  commence
with  the  companions  of  the  apostles ;  and  they
increase  in  number  and  variety,  through  a  series
of  writers  touching  one  upon  another,  and  de-
duced from  the  first  age  of  the  religion.


. SECTION  V:

Our  Scripture*  were  publicly  read  and  expound-
ed, in  the  religion*  a**emblie*  o/<  the  early
Christian*.


*  Lardner,  Cred.  vol.  1.  p.  271. -  T  I*>-  P-  **?• *
t  The  reader  will  observe  tbe  remoteness  of  these
two  writer*  in  country  and  situation.  ".

&  Lardner,  vol.  i.  p.  343,  ate.  I  I&.J*  «».

»  lb.  vol.  ii.  p.  515.  •  •  n>.  p.  JOpr _

ft  lb. voL  Ui.  p.  830.  UIb.vol.iv.p.M4.


80S


EVIDENCES  OF  CHRISTIANITY.


Justik  Mabttti,  who  wrote  in  the  year  140,
which  was  seventy  or  eighty  yean  after  some,
and  leas,  probably,  after  others  of  the  Gosrfek
were^rtibhshed,  giving,  in  his  first  apology,  an  ac-
count, to  the'  emperor,  of  t£e  Christian  worship,
faas  this  remarkable  passage :

«|  The  Memoirs^  of  the  Apostles,  or  the  Writ-
ings of.  the  Prophets,  are  read  according  as  the
time*  allows  rand,  when  the  reader  has  ended,  the
president  makes  a  discourse,  exhorting  to  the  imi-
tation of 'so  excellent  things."  ♦

•A  few  short  observations  will  show  the  value
Of  this  testimony. ' '  K

1.  The  '.'  Memoirs  of  .the  Apostles^'  Justin  in
another  place  expressly  tells  us,  are  what  are  call-
ed "  Gospels  :*  and  thai,  they  were  the  Gospels
which  we  now  Vlb%  is  made  certain  by  Justin's
numerous  quotations  of  them,  and  his  silence
about  any  others.

%  Justin  describes  the  general  usage  of  the
Christian  church.

3.  Justin  does  not  speak  of  it  as  recent  or  new-
ly instituted,  but  in  the  terms  in  whichmen  speak
of  established  customs.

-  II.  Teitulhan,  who  followed  Justin  at  tlwr  dis-
tance of  about  filly  years,  in  his  account  of  the
religious  assemblies  of  Christians'  as  they  were
conducted  in  his  time,  says/  "  We  come  together
'  to*  recollect  the  Divine  Scriptures ;  we  nourish
oat  faith:  raise  our  hope,  confirm  our  trust,  by  the*
Sacred  Word."t  *

III.  Eusebius  record?  of  Origen,  and  cites  for*
his  authority  the  letters  of  bishops  contemporary
with  Origan,  that,  when  he  went. into  Palestine
about  the  year  216,  which  was"  onry  sixteen  years
after  the  date  of  Tertullian's  testimony,  he  was;
desired  by  the  bishops  of  that  country  to  discourse,
and  expound  the  Scriptures  publicly  in  the  church,
though  lie  was  not  yet  ordained  a  presbyter,  t
This  anecdote  recognises  the  usage,  not  only  5f
reading,  brtpf  expounding  the  Scriptures;  and
both*as  subsisting  in  full  force.  Origen  also  him-
self bears  witness  to  the  same  practice :  "  This,"
sa^s  he,  "  we  do,  when  the  Scriptures  are  read
in  the  church,  and  when  thcHliscourse  for  expli-
cation is  delivered  to  the  people."  §  And  what  is
a  still  more  ample/testimony,  many  homilies  of  his
topon  the"  Scriptures  of  the  New  Testament,  de-
livered "by  him  in  the  assemblies  of  the  church,  are
«tiU  extant

IV.  Cyprian,  whose  age  was  not  twenty  years
lower  than  that  of  Origen,  gives  his  peopje  an  ac-
sfeunt  of  having  ordained  two  persons,  who  were
before  confessors, .to  be  readers;, and  what  they


glorious  confession  of  the  Lord,  should  read  pub-
licly in  the  church ;  that  he  who  has  shown  1dm-
eelf  willing  to  die  a  martyr,  should  read  the  Gospel
qf  Christy  by  which  martyrs  arc  made."  II
,  V.  Intimations  of  the  same  custom  may  be  traced
in  a  great  >aumber  of  writers  iu  the  beginning
and  throughout  the  whole  of  the  fourth,  century.
Of  these  testimonies  I  will  only  use  one,  as  being,
of  itself,  express'  and  full.  Augustine,  who  ap-
peared near  the  conclusion  of  the  century,  displays
the  benefit  of  the  Christian  religion  on  this  very  ar>

*  Lardner,  Cred.  vol.  L  p.  273.

t  lb.  vol.  ii.  p.  028. ^ |  lb.  vol.  iii.  p.  «a

tlfc.p.attk  I  lb.  voL  iv. p. 842.


count  the  public  reading  of  the  Scriptures  in  the
churches,  "  where/'  says  he,  "is  a  confluence  of
all  sorts  of  people  of  both  sexes ;  and  where*  the*
hear  how  they  ought  to  live  well  in  (his  Work!,
that  they  may  deserve  to  live'  happily  and  eter-
nally in  another."  And  this  custom  he  deckttes
to  be  universal :  "  The  canonical  books  of  Scrip-
ture being  read  every  where,  the  miracles  therein
recorded  are  well  known,  to  all  people. u*

ltdoes  not  appear  that  any  books,  other  than
our  present  Scriptures,  were  thus  publicly  read,
exeept  that- the  epistle  of  Clement  was  read  in  the
church  of  Corinth,  to  which  it  had  been  addressed,
and  in  some  others;  and  that  .-the  Shepherd*  of
Hennas  was  read  in  many  churches/  .-Nor  doee
it  subtract  much  from  the  value  of  the  argument,
that  these  two  writings  partly  come  within  it,
because  we  allow  -  them  to  be  the  genuine  writ-
ings of  apostolical  men.  There  is  not  the  least,
evidence,  that  any  other  Gospel,  than  the  four  •
which  we  receive,  waft  ever  admitted  to  this  disv
tinrtinn. -


SECTION  VL

Commentaries  were  anciently  written  upon  ike
Scriptures'  {  harmonies  formed  out  qf  them  i
different  copies  carefully  collated  ;  and  versions
made  of  them  into  different  languages.

No  greater  proof  can  be  given  of  the  esteem  in
which  these  books  were  holden  by  the  ancient'
Christians,  or  of  the  sense  then  cntertamed  pf  their
value  and  importance,  than  the  industry  bestowed
upon  them.  And  it  ought  to  be  observed,  that
the  value  and  importance  of  these  books  consisted
entirely  in  their  genuineness  and  truth.  There
was  nothing  in  them,  a*  works  df  taste,  or  as.com-
positions,  which  could  have  induced  any  one  to
have  written  a  note  upon  them.  Moreover  it
shows  .that  they  were  even  then  '"considered  as
ancient  books.  Men  do  not  write  comments
upon  publications  of  their  own  tunes:  therefore
the'  testimonies  cited  under  this  head,  afford  an
evidence  which  carries  up  the  evangelic  writings
much  beyond  the  age  of  the  testimonies  them-
selves, and  to  that  of.  their  reputed  authors.

I.  Tatian,  a  follower  of  Justin.  Martyr,  and
who  flourished  about  the  year.  170.  composed  a
harmony,  or  collation  of  the  Gospels,  which,  he
called  IHatessaron;  Of  the  four.t  The  title,  as
well  as  the  work,  is-  remarkable ;  because  it  shows
that  then,  as  now,  there  were  four,  and  only  four,
Gospels  in  general  use  with  Christians.  And  this
was  little  more  than  a  hundred  years  after  the
publication  of  some  of  them.

II.  Pantsnus,  of  the  Alexandrian 'school,  a  man
of  great  reputation  and  learning,  who' came  twen-
ty years  after  Tatian,  wrote  many  commentaries
npon  the  Holy  Scriptures,  which,  as  Jerome  testi-
fies,- were  extant  in.  his  timet

HI.  Clement  of  Alexandria  wrote  short  exr
plications  of  many  books  of  the  Old;  and  New
Testament.!

IV.  Tertullian  appeals. from  the  authority  of  A
later  version,  then  in  use,  to  the  authentic  Crreek.ll

Y.  An  anonymous  author,  quoted  by  Eusebius,.


*  Lardner,  Cred.  vol.  x.  p.  278,  sts**.-

t  lb.  vol.  i.  pJXn.  1  lb.  p.  455.

$Ib.vol.n.p.4€2.  j  lb.  p.  638.


EVIDENCES  OF  CHRISTIANITY.


en)  who  appeal?  to  have  written  about  the'  year
812,  appeals  to  the  ancient  copies,  of  the  Scrip-
-  tores,  w  refutation  of  some  corrupt  readings  ai-
.  leafed byj theJbllowers'Qf  Artemon.*

.  VL  The  same  Eusebius,' mentioning  by  name
several  writers  of  the  church*  who  lived  at  this
time,  and  concerning  whom  lie  says,. "  There  still.
remain  divers  monnments.of  tire  laudable  industry
of  those,  ancient  and  ecclesiastical  men"  («.  e.  of
-Christian  Writer^  who  Were  considered  jui  ancient
in  the  year  300, ) -adds,"*'  There  are;  .besides,  trea-f,
tises  of  many  others,  whose  -names  we  have  not
been  able  to  learn,  orthodox  and.  ecclesiastical
men,  as  the  interpretations  of  the  .Divine  Strip-
tores  given,  by  each  of  them  show."t

V|L  The  /last  five  testimonies  may  be  referred
'  to  the  year  200 ;  immediately  after  which,  a  period
of  thirty  years  gives  us.  .

Julius  Afrkanus/who  wrote  an  epistle  upon
•the  apparent  difference  in  the  genealogies  in  Mat-
thew and  Luke,  which  he  -endeavours  tcrreconcile
by. the  distinction  of  natural  and  legal  descent,
and  conducts,  his"  hypothesis  with  "great  industry
through  the  whole  series  of  generations.*
.  ArnmoninSj  a  learned  Alexandrian,  who  com-
posed, as  Tatnn  had  done,  a  harmony*of  the/our
Gospde;  which  proves. as Tatian's tjrork did,that
there  were  four  Gospels /and  no  more,  at  this  time
in  use  in  the  church,  a  affords  also  an  instance
of  the  zeal  bf  Christians  for  those  writings,  and-  of
their  solicitude  about  them.1  .-

*  Aridf  above  both'  these,  Origen,  who  wrote  com-
mentaries, or  homilies,  upon  most  of  the  books
included  in  the  New  Testament,  and  upon -no
other  books  but  these.  .In  particular,  he  wrote
upon  Saint  John's  Gospel,  very  largely  upon  Saint
Matthew's,  and  commentaries,  or  homilies,  upon
th0ActsoftheApostles.il

VTII.  In  addition  to  these,  the  third  century
likewise  contains ' '

Dionytius  of  Alexandria,  a  very  learned  .man,
who  compared,  with  petit  accuracy,  the  accounts
in  thfi  four  Gospels  of  the  time  of  Christ's  resuir-
•  rection,  adding  a  reflection  which  showed  his
opinion  of- their  authority :  "  Let  us  not  think -that
the  evangelists  disagree,  or  contradict  each  other,
although  there  be  some  small  difference ;  but  let
us  honestly  and  faithfully  endeavour  to  reconcile
what  we  read."*

Yictorin,  bishop  of  Pettaw,  in  Germany,  who
wrote  eojnmenfcl  upon  Saint  Matthew's  Gos-
pel-**

Lucien,  a  presbyter  of  Antioch^  and  Hesy*
ehrus/an  Egyptian  bishop,  who  put  forth  editions
of  the  New  Testament.

IX,  The  fourthxentury  supplies  a  cataloguett
of  fourteen  writers,  who  expended  their  labours
upon  the  books  of  the  New,  Testament,  and  whose
works  or  names  are  come  down  to  our  times;
amongst  which  number  it  may  be  sufficient,  for
the  purpose  of  showing  the«entunents  and  studies


•Larmier.  Cred.  vol.  iii.  p.  4&
J  lb.  vol.  Hi.  p.  170.
Kb.  vol.  iii.  p.  352. 193. 903.  246.
V  Is.  vol.  iv.  p.  166.

KEuebios,  A.  D.  -  315
ivencas,  Spain,  •  • '  <WL
Theodore,  liiraeo*  •  33*
Hilary,  Poietiers,  -  354
FortmuUfla,  • 340

ApoUioarias  of  Lac*


t  Jb.  vol.  i'i.  p.  551..
§  lb.  vol.  iii.  p.  123.


366


**  lb.  p.  195.

Gregory,  Nyssea,  -
Didimus  of  AJex,  •
Ambrose  Of  Milan,
Diodore  of  Tarsus, .'
Gaudent  of  Brescia,
TheodDreofCiUcia
Jerome,  •  .  *  -
Gbrxsostoiti)  *•


809


of  learned;  Christians  of  that  age,  to  notice  the
following :  -  *

Eusebius,  in  the.  very  begmning-of  the  centuryv
wrote  expressly  upon  the  discrepancies  observable
in  the  Gospels,  .and  likewise  a  treatise,  in  which
he  pointed  out  -what  things  are  related  by  four;
what  by  three,  what  by  two,  and  What  by  one
evangelist*  This  author^ako  testifies,  what  is
certainly  a  material  piece  of  evidence,  "that  the'
writings  of  the  apostles  ,iiad  obtained  such  an  es-
teem, as.  to  be  translated  into  every  language  both
of  Greeks  ana1  Barbarians,,  and  to  be  diligently
studied  by  all  nations."t This  testimony  was

S'ven  about  the  year  300;  bow  long 'before  that
ite  these  translations  were  made,  does  not  appear.

Damasus,  bishop  of  Rome,  corresponded  with
Saint  Jerome  .  upon  the  exposition  of  difficult
texts  of  Scripture ;  and,  in  a  letter  still  remaining^
desires  Jerome  to  give  him  aclear  explanation  of
the  word  Hosanna,  found  in  the  New  Testament4;
"  he  (Damasus)  having  met  with  very  different
interpretations  of  it  in  the  Greek  and  Latin  com-
mentaries of  Catholic  writers  "which  he  had  read."*
This  last  clause  shews  the  number  and  variety  of  v
commentaries  then  extant

Gregory  of  Nysson,  at  one  timej  appeals  to  the
most  exact  copies -of  Saint.  Mark's  Gospel;  at
another  time,  compares  together,' and  proposes  to
reconcile,  the  several  accounts  of  the  resurrection
given  bythefimi^EvangelisU;  which  limitation
proves,  thaf  there  were  no  otfier  historieaof  Christ
deemed  authentic  beside  these,  or,  included  in  the
same  character -with  these.  This  writer  observes,
acutely  enough,  that  the  disposition  of  the  clothes
in  the  sepulchre,  the  napkin  that  was  about  our
Saviour's  head,  not  lying  with  the  linen  clothes*
but-wrapped  together  in  a  place  by  itself,  did  not
bespeak  the  terror  and  hurrj  of  thieves,  and  there-
fore refutes  the  story  oLthe  body  being  stolen.*

Ambrose,  bishop  of  Milan;  remarked  various
readings  in  the  Latin  copies  of  the  New  Testa-
ment, and  appeals  to  the  original  Greek ;

And  Jerome,  towards  the  conclusion  of  this
century,  put  forth  an  .edition  ofjthe  New  Testa-
ment in  Latin,  corrected,  at  least  a&to  the  Goapels,
by  Greek  copies,  (t  and  those  (he  says)  ancient.'1.

Lastly,  Cnrysostomj.it  is  well  known,,  deliver-
ed and  published  a  great  many-homilies,  or  ser-
mons, upon*  the  Gospels  and  the  Acta.of  the
Apostles.  %  . "  »

It  i^needless  to  bring  down  this  article  lower;
but  it  is  of  importance  to  add,  that  there  is  rW  ex-
ample of  Christian  writers  of  the  firs/  three  centu-
ries composing  comments  upon  any  other  books
than  those  which  are  found  in  the  J^ew  Testa-
ment, except  the  single  one  of  Clement  of  Alex-
andria^commenting  upon  a  book  called  the  Reve-
lation of  Peter.  *

Of  the  ancienfversion*  of  the  New  Testament,
one  of  the  -most-  valuable  is  the  Syriac.  Syria©
was  the  language  of  Palestine  when  Christianity
was  there  first  established.  And  although  tbe
books.of  Scripture  were  written  in  Greek,  Tor  the
purpose  of  a  more  extended  circulation  than^withuV
the  precincts  of  Judea,  yet  it  is  probable  that  they
would  soon  be  translated  into  the  vulgar  language
of  the  country  where  the  religion  first  prevailed-
Accordingly,  a  Syriac  translation  is  now  extant,'
(II  along,  so  far  as  it  appears,  used  by  the  inhabi-
tants of  Syria,  bearing  many  internal  marks  of

*  Lardner,  Cred.  voL  viii.  p.  46.
J  lb.  vol.  ix.  p.  108.


t  lb.  p.  901.
{lb.  p.  163


310


EVIDENCE8  OP"CHRtsnAWITY.


hi^fa  antiquity,  avjyporteo*  Suite  pretensions  by  the
umibjm  traditions  of  the  East,  and  confirmed  try
the  diauoway  of  many  Very  ancient  manuscripts
in  the  fifaranea,  oTfinjone.  It  ia  about  200  yean
since  a  bishop  of  AnUoch  ^ent  a  copy  of  this
rnmaiarion  into  Europe,  to  he  printed;  and*  this
seem*  to  be  the  first  time  that  the  translation  be-
came generally  known  to  thescparta  of  the  world.
The  bishop  of  Antiocb's  Testament  was  found
tocontaiii-allour  books,  except  the  second  epistle'
of  Peter,  the  second  and  third  of  John,  and  the
Revelation;'  which  booka^  however,  have  since
been,  discovered -in  that  language  in  some  ancient
naniiaoripta  of  Europe.  But  in  tins  collection,  no*
other  book;  beside  what  ia  in  ours^appears  ever  to
have  had  a  place.  And,  which  is  very  worthy
of  observation,  the  text,  though  preserved  in  a  re-
mote country,  end  without  'communication  with
ours,  differs  from  burs  very  little,  and  in-  nothing
that  ia  important.*


SECTION  Vlfc

Chtr  Scripture*  toere  received  by  ancient  Chris-
tian* qf  different  sects  and  '  rter suasions ,  by
many  Uerctics  as  veil  a*  Catholics^  and  were
usually  appealed  to  by  both-  side*  m  the  con-
troversies which  arose  in  those  days..

The  three  most  "ancient  topics  of  controversy
amongst  Christians,  were*  the  authority  ot  the
Jewish  constitutions  the  origin  of  evil,  and  the
nature  of  Christ.  Upon  the  first  of  these  we  find,
In  very  early  times,  one  class  of  heretics  rejecting'
the  Old  Testament  entirely;  another  contending
for  the  obligation  of  its  law,  in  all  its  parts,
throughout  its  whole  extent,  and  over  every  orie
who  sought  acceptance Trtth  God.  Upon  the  two
latter  subjects,  a  nafuml,  perhaps,  and  venial,  but
a  fruitless,  eager,  and  impatient  curiosity,  prompt-
ed by  the. philosophy  and  by  the  scholastic  habits.
'  of  the  age,  which  carried  men  much  into  bold  hy-
potheses and  conjectural  solutions,  raised,  amongst
some  who  professed  Christianity,  very  wild  and
unfounded  opinions.  I  think  there  is  no  reason
lo  believe  that  the  number  of  these  bore  an  v  consi-
derable proportion  to  the  body  of  the  Christian
church;  and  amidst  the  disputes  which. euch
opinions  necessarily  occasioned,  it  is  a  great  satis-
faction to  perceive,  what,  in  a  vast -plurality  of  in-
stances, we  do  perceive,  all  aides  recurring  to  the
emme  Scriptures.

1 1.  Baaihdes  lived  near  the  age  of  the  apodUes,
about  the  year  190,  or,  perhaps,  sooner.t  He  re-
jected the  Jewish  institution,  not  as  spurious,  but
ma  proceeding  from  a  bring  inferior  to  the  true
God  -T  and  in  other  respects  advanced  a  scheme- of
theology  widely  different  from  the  general  doctrine
of  the iChriatian  church,  and  which,  as  it  gained
over  some  disciples,  was. warmly  opposed  by
Christian  writers  of  the  secoiid'andUbird'centUTy.
In  these  writings,  there*  is  positive  evidence  that
fiasindee  received  the  Gospel  of  Mhjtthew;  and
there  ia  Me  sufficient  proof  that  he  rejected  any  of


contrary,  it  appears  that
upon  the  Gospel,  so  oo*


'  *Ioaes  on-  the  Canon,  vol.  i.  c  14.

tTae  material*  ef  the  former  part  of  thissectioa  are
taken  from  Dr.  Lardaer's  History  of  the  Heretics  of  the
two  first  Centuries,  published  since  his  death,  wjth  ad-
ditions, by  the  ReV.  Mr.  Hogg,  of  Exeter,  and  inserted
Into  the  ninth  volume  of  his  works,  of  the  edition  of
1719.  t  Lardner,  voLtx.  ed.  1788,*  371.


the  other  three:  on  the

he  wrote  a  commentary  va  _  _ .

pjous  a*  to  be  divided  ipto  twenty-four  books  *

II.  The  VaJentiniana  appeared  about  the  sama
time.t.  Their  heresy  consisted  in  certain  notions
concenmjr  angelic  natures,  which  can  hardly  be  .
rendered  intelligible  to  a  .modern  reader.  They
seem,  however,  to  have  acquired  as  much  import-
ance as  any  of  the  separatists  of  that  early  age.
Of  this  sect,  Irenaus,  who  .wrote,  A.  D.  178,  ex-
pressly records  that  they  endeavoured  to  feteh  ar-
guments- tor  their  opinions  from  the  evangelic  and
ajJostolic  writings,  t  Heracleon,  one  of  the  moat
celebrated  of  the  sect,  and  who  lived  probably  so
early  da  the  yea*  125,  wrote  commentaries  upon
Luke  and  John.*  •  Some  observationaulao  of  his
upon  Matthew  are  preserved-by  OrigenJ  Nor  isj
there  any  reason  to  doubt  that  he  received,  the
whole  New  Testament,

III.  The  CoTpocraiians  were  also  an  eariv  he-
resy, Uttle,  if  at  all,1ater  than'  the  two  precedinfl.1T
Some  of  their  opinions  resembled  what  we  at  this
day  mean  by  Socinianism.  With  respect  to  the
Scriptures,  they  are  specifically-  charged,  by  Ire-
toiBue  and  by  f&pphaniua,  with  endeavouring  to
pervert  a  passage  .in  Matthew{  which  amounts  to
a  positive  proof  that  they  received  that  Goajfel.**
Negatively,  they  are  not  accused,  by  their  adver-
saries, of.rejectmg  any  part  of  the  New  Testa-
ment •  •  *  *  •  . ■  -

JV.  The  Sethlana,  A.  D.  150  ;tf  the  Monte-
hists,  A.  D.  156 ;» the  Marcoaiana,  A.  B.  I60;H
Hermoefcnea,  A.  D.  180  ;W1  Pnuriae,  A.  D.  196  jf*
Artemon,  A.  D.  900}***  Theodotua,  A.  D.  300;
all  included  under  the  denomination  of  heretics,
and  all  engaged  in  controversies  with  Catholic
Christiana,  received  tip.  Scriptures  of  the  New
Testament:

V.  Tatian,  who  lived  in  the  year  179,  went .
into  many  extravagant  opinions,  was"  the  founder
of  a  sect  -called-  Encratires,  and  waa  deeply  in-
volved in  disputes,  with  the  Christians  of  that  age  *
yet  Tatian  so  received  the  four  Gospels,  as  to
compose  a  harmony  from  them.  >

.  VI.  From  a  writer,  quoted  by  Eusebius,  of
about  the  yea*  3d0,lt  is  apparent  that  they  who  at
that  time  contended  for  the  mere  humanity  of
Christ,  argued  from  the  Scriptures;  for  they  aro
accused  bv  this  writer,  of  making  alterations  m
their  copiee,  in  order  to  favour  then*  opinions.fft

VH.  (>i^'8  aentimento  excited  great  contro-
versies,— the  bishops  of  Rome  and  Alexandria,
and  many  others,  condemning,  the  biahej*  of  the
East  espousing  them ;  yet  there  is  not  the  smallest
question,  but  that  both  the  advocates  and  adversa-
ry* of  these  opinions  acknowledged  .the  same  au-
thority of  Scripture.  In  his  time,  which  the  reader
will  remember  waa  about  one  hundred  and  fifty
years  after  the  Scriptures  were  published,  many
dissensions  subsisted  amongst-  Christians,  with
which  they  were  reproached,  by  Celaus ;  yet  Or\-
gen,  who  has  recorded  this  accusation  without
contradicting  it,  nevertheless  testifies,  that  the  four
Qospels  were  received  vnthoxit  dispute,  by  (he
whole  church  of  God  under  heaven.***

*  Lardner,  vol.  ta.  ed.  lteft  p.  385,906.
tie.  p.  350^351.  Jlb-voti.

jib.  vol  '
. TO.


EVIDENCES  OF  CHRISTIANITY.


311


VIII.  Paul  of  Samosata,  about  thirty  yean  after
Origen,  so  djstmguiahed.  himself  in  die  controver-
sy concerning  the  "natpre  ef  rOhrist;  as  to  be-  the
subject  «f  two  councils  or  synods,  assembled  at
Antiioch  upon  hifr  opinions.  Jxebhe^s  not  charged
by  his  adversaries  with  rejecting  any  book  of  the
New  Testament.  On  the  contrary,,  £piphanius,
who  wrote  a  history  of  heretics  a  hundred  years
alto/ward,  says,  that  Paul  endeavoured  to  support
his  ftoctrine  by  texts  of  Scripture.  And  Vihcen-
tiua  Lirinensis,  A.  D.  434;  speaking  of  Paul  and

v  other  heretics  of  the.  same  rfge,  has  these  words  :
"  xlercr,  perhaps,  some  one  may  ask,  whether  he-

~retk»  also  urge  the  testimony  ojf  Scripture.  They
urge'  it  indeed,  explicitly  and-  vehemently ;  for  you
may  see  them  flying  through  every  book  of  the
aacredl*w.,,• ;  ' *

IX.  A  controversy  at  the  same  time  existed
-  witfi  the  Noetians  or  Sabellians,  who  seem  to

have  gone  into  the  opposite  extreme  from  that  of
Pant  of  Samoaata  and  his  followers.  Yet,  accord-
'  ing  to  the  express  testimony  of  Epiphaniug,  Sa-
beBius  received  all  the '  Scriptures.  And  with
,  both  sects  Catholic  writers  constantly  allege  the
Scriptures,  and 'reply  to  the  arguments  which
their  opponents  drew  from  particular  texts.

We  nave  here,  therefore,  a  proof;  that  parties,
who  were  the  most  opposite  and  irreconcilable  to
/me  another,  acknowledged,  the  authority  of  Scrip-
ture with  equal  deference.

X.  And  as  a  general  testimony  to  the  same
point,  may  be  produced"  what  was  said  by  one  of
the  bishops  of  the.  council  brX?ahhage/which  was
holden  a  little  before  this  thne^— "  I  am  of  opinion'
that  the  blasphemous  and  wicked  heretics,  who
pervert  Che  sacred  and  adorable  words'  qf  the
Scriptures,  should  ba  execrated.?  Undoubtedly.
What  they  perverted  they  received.

'  X-l.  l^eMiUenmun\,Novatianisra,  the  baptism
of  heretics,  ihe^keepingof  Easter,  engaged  also
the  attention  and  divided  the  opinions  of.  Chris-
tians, af  and  before  that  time  (and,  by  the  way,  it
may  be  observed,  that  such  disputes,  though  on
some  accounts  to  be  blamed,  showed  how  much
men  were  in  earnest  upon. the  subject);  yet  every
onet  appealed  for  the  grounds  of  his  opinion  to
Scripture  -authority.  Didnysius  of  Alexandria,
w^o  flourished  A.  D.  247,  describing  a  conference
er  public  disputation'  with  the  MiHennarians  of
n  it,  confesses  of  them,  though  trieif  adversary,
it  they  embrace  whatever  could  be  made  out
,  good  arguments  from  the  Holy  Scriptures."*
bvtttus,  A.  D.  2g>l,  distinguished  by  some. rigid
sentiments  concerning"  the  reception  of  those  vjhd
had  lapsed,  and  the  founder  of  a  numerous  sect,
in  his.  few  remaining  works  quotes  the  Gospel
with  the  same  respect  as*  other  Christians  did;,
fend  concerning  his  follower*,  the  testimony  of
Socrates,  who  wrote  about  the  year  440,  is  posi-
tivtV  xdx.  "  That  in  the  disputes  between  the  Ca-
thoEjes  and*  them, -each  side  endeavoured  to  sup-
port itself  by  the  authority  .of  the  divine  Scrin-

XII.  The  Donatifrts,  who  sprung  up  in. the
▼ear.  328,  used  the  same  Scriptures  as  we  do.
"  Produce  (saith  Augustine)  some  'proof  from  the
8criptares,  whose  authority  is  common  to  us  both. "II

XjH.  It  is  perfectly  notorious  that,  in  the  Arian

•  Lariaer.  vol.  xi.  p.  158. t  lb.  yol.  xl.  a.  830. *
llkw*ol.iv.p.666.  $  lb.  vol.  v.  *  10*.  '


controversy,  whkh  arose  soon  tAerthe  year  900.
both 'sides  appealed  to  the  same  Scriptures,  ana
with  equal  professions  o£  Reference  and  regand,
The  Arians,  in  their  council'  of'Antioch,  A.  D.
341,  pronounce,  that,  "If  any  one,  contrary  to  the
sound  doctrine  of  the  Scriptures,  say,  that  the  Son
is;  a  creature,  as  one  of  the  creatures,  let'  him  60 '
an  anathema.**  They  and  the  Atfaanasians  mu-
tually accuse  each  other  of  using  ;un*c*tpfuraj
phrases ;  which  was  a*  mutual  acknowledgment  of
'  the  conclusive  authority  of  Scripture.  '  •
;  XIV.  The  Erisciilfcnists,  A.  D.  3*18A  the  P*
lagians.  A.  D.  405,*  received  the/ame  Scriptures
as  we*  do.

XV.  The  testimony  of  Chrysosbm,  who  Jived
near  the  year  400,  is  so  positive  in  affirmation  of
the  proposition  Which  we  maintain,  that  it  may
fbrm  a  proper  conclusion  of  the  argument.  "The
general  reception  0/  the  Gospels  is  a  proof  that
their  history  is  true  and'consistent;  for,  since  ^he
writingH  of  the  Gospels,  many  heresies  have  arisen*
holding"  opinions  contrary  to  what  is  contained  in
them,  who  yet -received  the  Gospels  either  entire
or  in  part."}  I  am  not  moved  by  what  may  seen)
a  deduction  from  ChrysostomV  testimony,1  the
words,  "entire  or  in  part;"  for,  if  all.  the  parts,
which  were  ever  questioned  in  our  Gospels,  were
givenup,  it  would  not  affect  the  miraculous-  ori-
gin of  the  religion  m  the  smallest  degree  :  e.g.

Cerinthus  is  said  by  Epiphanius  to  ha«e  re*
eeived  the  Gospel  of  Matthew,  but  not  entire:
What  the  omissions  were,  does  not  appear.  TJs»
common  opinion;  that  .he  rejected  the  first  two
chapters,  seems  to  have  been  a  miatake.ll  It  is"
agreed,  however,  by  all  who  have  riven  any .  ac-
count of  Cerinthus,  that  he  taught  that  the  Holy-
Ghost  (whether  he  meant  by  that  name  a  person
or  a  power)  descended  upon  Jesus  at  his  baptism;
that  Jesus  from  this  time  -performed  many'  mira-»
cles,  and  -that  he  appeared  after  his  death.  He
must  have  retained  therefore  the  essential  .parts
of  the  history.  ."  -

Of  all  the  ancient  heretics,  the  most  extraordi-
nary* was  Marcion.*  One  of  *his  tenets  wa**th*
rejection  of  the  Old  Testament,  as  proceeding
from  an  inferior  and  imperfect  deity*:  and  in  *ur-
suanoe  ofthis  hypothesis  he  erased  from  the  New,
and  that,  as  it  should  seem,  without  entering  into
any  critical  reasons,  every  passage  which  recog-
nised the  Jewish  Scriptures.  He  spared  not  a
text  which  contradicted  his  opinion.  It  is  reason-
able to  believe  that  Marcion  treated  books  as  he
treated  texts ;  yet  this  rash  and  wildcontroversiaV
ist  published  a  recension;  or  chastised  edition,  of
Saint  Luke's  Gospel,  containing  the'  leading  nets,
and  jilt  which  is  necessary  to  authenticate  the  re-
ligion. .  This  example  affords  proof,  that  there
were  always  some  points,  and  those  the  main
points,  which  neither  wUdness  nor  rashness,  pek
ther  the. fury  of  opposition  nor  the  intemperance
of  controversy,  would  venture  to  call  in  question.
There  is  no  reason  to  believe  that  Marcion,  though
ruff  of  resentment  against  the  Catholic  Christians,
ever  charged  them  with  forging  their  books.  ."  The  -
Gospel  of  Saint  Matthew,  the  Epistle  Ur  the  He-
brews/with  those  of  Saint  Peter  and  Saint  James,
as  well  as  the  Old  Testament  in  general^hesaid,)

«  Lardner,  Cred.  vol.  vii.  n.  «77.  .

,  t  lb.  vol.  ix.  |t  325.  I  lb.  vol.  xi.  */»•

A  lb.  vol  x.  p,  316.  i  Ib.vol.ix.ed.  1788,b.3tt.

k  n>.«»et.  ii.  e.  x.  Also  Michael.  voM.  e,  i  sset.  xviii


S19


EVIDENCES  OP  CBRISTIANITT.


were  writing*  not  for  Christians  bat  for  Jews."*
This -declaration  shows  the  ground,  upon  which
Mareion  proceeded  in  bis  mutilation  of  the  Scrip-
tures, viz.  his  dislike  of  the  passages  or  the  tpoW
Marcien  flourished  about  the  Year  130.

Dr.  Lardner,  in  his  general  Review,  stuns  up
this  head  of  evidence  in ' the.foUowing  words:
"  Ntffttus,  Paul  of  Sainosata,  Sabellius,  MarceHus,
Photinus,  theTNfovatians,  Donatists,  Nfanicheana;t
Prificdlhanists,  beside  Artemort,  the  Audians.  the
Arians,  and  divers  others,  all  received  mostor  all  the
same  books  of  tfie'New  Testament' which  the  Ca-
tholics received;  and  agreed  in  a  like  respect  for
them  as  written  by  apostles,  or  their  disciples  and
companions."*  . s -


. SECTION  VIH.

The  four  Gospels,  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  fAt'r-
<teew Epistles  of  Stint  Paul,  the  FiTst  Epis-
tle of  John,  and  the  First  of  Peter,  were  re-
ceived without  doubt  by  those  who  doubted
concerning  the  other  books  which  are  included

*  in  our  present  'canon.

,  I  state  this  proposition,  Because,  if. made  out,
it  shows  that  the  authenticity  of  their  books  was

*  subject  amongst  the  early  Christians  of  consider-
ation and  inquiry;  and  that,  where  there  was
cause  of  doubt»  they  did  doubt;  *  circumstance
which  strengthens  very  much  their  testimony  to
such  books,  as  were  received  by  .them  with,  full
acquiescence.'

I.  Jerome,  in  ijis  account  of  Caiua,  who  was
prdbably  a  presbyter  of  Rome,  and  who  nourished
near  the  year  200,  records  of  him,  that,  reckoning
up  only  thirteen  epistles  of  Paul,  he  saye  the  four-
teenth, which  is  inscribed  to  the  Hebrews,  is  not
his :  and  then  Jerome  adds,  M  With  the  Romans
to  this  day  it  is  not  looked  upon  as  Paul's."*  This
agrees  in  the  main  with  the  account  given  by  Eu-
sebhis  of  the  same  ancient  author  -and  his  work;
txeept  that  Eusabius  delivers  his  own  remark  in
more  guarded  terms  r-"  And  indeed  to  this  very  '
time  by  some  of  the  Romans,  this  epistle  is  not- reasons,
thought  to  be  the  apostle's."*
.II.  Origen,  about  twenty  yean  after  Cains,
quoting  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews,  observes  that
some  might  dispute  the  authority  of  that  epistle-;
and  therefore  proceeds  to  quote  io  the  same  point,
as  undoubted  books  pf  Scripture,  the  Gospel  of


Sunt  Matthew,  the  'Acts  xk  the-  Apostles,  and'
Paul's  First  Epistle  tolhe  Thessalonuns.il  *  And
in  another  place,  this  author  speaks  of  the  Epistle
to  the  Hebrews  thus :— "  The  account  come  down
to  us  is  *arioua;  some  saying  that  Clement,- who
was  bishop  of.  Rome,  wrote  this  epistle ;  others,
that  it  was  Luke,  the  same  who  wrote  the  Gospel
and  the  Acts/*'  Speaking  also^  in  the  same  para-
graph, of  .Peter,  "Peter -(says  he)  has.  left  one
epistle,  acknowledged :  let  it  be  granted  likewise
that  he  wrote  ft  second,  for  it  is  doubted  of."  And


•  I  hive  transcribed  this  sentence  from  Michaelisfp.
38,)  who  has  not,  however,  referred  to  the  authority
upon  which  he  attributes  these  words  to  Marcion.
'  t  This  must  be  with  an  exception,  however,  of  Faust-
ns,  who  lived-so  late  as  the  year  384.

t  Lardner,  vol.  zii.  p.  12,— Dr.  Lardner's  future  in-
quiries supplied  him  with  many  other  instances.

$  lb.  vol.  iii.  p.  240. .  Jj  lb.  p.  34<S.


of  John;  "  He  has  also  left  one  <?pistV,t>f  alfetr
fey  lines;  grant  also  a  second  ana  a  third,  for  an
do  not  aljow  them  to  be  genuine."  Now  let  it, be
noted,  that  Origen,  who  thus  discriminates,  ao4
thus  confesses  his  own  jjoubts,.  and  the  doubts
which  subsisted  ju  his  time^expressly  witnesses
concerning  the  four  Gospels,  "•  that  they  alone  are
'received  without,  dispute  by  the  whole  church  of
God  under  heaven/*  *  *

III.  Dionysius  of  Alexandria,  in  the  year  247,
doubts  concerning  the  book  of  Revelation,  whe-
ther it  was  written  by  .Saint  John;  states  the
grounds  pf  his  doubt,  represents  the  diversity  of
opinion  concerning  it,  in  his  own  time,  and- before
his  time.t  1  Yet  the  same  Dionyfiaus  uses- and  col-
lates the  four  Gospels  in  a  manner  which  'shows,
that  he  entertained  not  the  smallest  suspicion  of
their  authority,  andinan1annet>also  which  shows
that  theft  and  they  alone,  were  received  as  au>
thehtic  histories  of  Christ.*

IV.  But  this  section  may  be  said  to  have  been
framed  on  purpose  to  introduce  -to  the  reader  two
remarkable  passages  extant  in  Eusehius's  Ecclex
siastical  History.  The  first  passage  opens  with
these  words:— "Let-  us  observe  the  writings  of
the  apostle  John, which  are  uncontradicted  j  and
first  of  all  must  be  mentioned,  as  Acknowledged
of  all,  the  Gospel  according,  to  him,  well  known,  to
all  the'  churches  ..under  heaven."  The'  author
then  proceeds  to  relate  the  occasions  of  writing
the  Gospcfs,  and  the  reasons  for  placing  Saint
John's  the  last,  manifestly  speaking  of  all  the  four
as  parallel  in  their  authority,  and  in  the  certainty
of  their  original^  The  second  passage  is  taken
from  a 'chapter,  the  title  of  .which  it,  "pf  thei
Scriptures  universally  acknowledged,  and  of  those
that  are  not  .such."  Eusebius-  begins  his  enume-
ration'in  the-  following  manner: — "  In-  the  first
place-,  are  to  be  ranked  the  sacred  fout* Gospels;
tjien  the  book  of  the-' Acts  of  the  'Apostles  ;  after
that  are  to  be  reckoned  the,  Epistles  of  Paul.  In
the  next  place,  that  called  the  First  Epistle  of
John,  and  the  Bpistle  of  Peter,  are  to.  be  esteemed
authentic.  'Allen  this  is  to  be  placed,  if  it  be
thought  fit,  the  Revelation  of  John,  about  which
we  shaljl  observe  the  different  opinions  at. proper

Of  the  controverted,  but  yet  Well  koown


or  approved  by  the  most,  are,  that  called  the  Epis-
tle of  James,  and  that  of  Jude,  and  the  Second  of


Peter,  and  the  Second  and  Tlnrd  of  John,  whe-
ther they  are  written  by  the  evangelist,  or  another
of  the  same  namc"ll  He  then  proceeds  to  reckon
up  £Ve  others,,  not  in  -our  canon,  which  he  caJJs  in
one  place  spurious,  in  fLnothe+tohtrovertcd^  mean-
ing', as.  appears,  to  me;  nearly  the  same-  thing- by
these  two  wards.1T  -'  •  «

It  is  manifest  from  this*  passage,  that  the  four
Gospels,  and  the  ActsDf.the  Apostles  (the  parts;
of  Scripture  with  which  our  concern  principally  ■
lies.),  were  acknowledged  without  dispute,  even
by  those  tv|io  raised ,  objections,  or  entertained
doubts,  about  some  other  parts  of  the  same  collec-
tion. But  the  passage  proves  something  more
than  this.v The  author  was  extremely  conversant

*  Lardner,  vol.  iii.  p.  234.  f  *&•  voUiv.  p.  OTA
t  IB.  661.  r  ^"Ib.vol.  viii.  p  90.  -  gib.  p.  9.  •
1  1T  That  Ejisebfus  con  Id  not  intend,  by  the  wont  ren-
dered, M  spurious.,"  what  we  at  present  mean  by  it.  is
evident  fronj  a  clause  in  this  verySchaptfer,  where,  speak-
ing of  the  Gospels  of  Peter,  and-Thomas,  and  Matttria*.
and  some  others,  he  says,  "  Thfcy  are.  not  so  roach  est©
be  reckoned  among  the  apurfoiu.  but  are  to  be  rejected
as  altogether  absurd  and  impious;'— Vol.  viii.  p.  90.


EVIDENCES  jOF  CHRISTIANITY.


818


in  the  writings  o£  Christians,  which  had  hern
published  from  the  commencement  of  the  institu-
tion to  ma  own  time  :.an|l  it  was  from  these  writ-
ings that  he  drew  his  knowledge-uf  the  character
and  reception  of  the  books  in  question.  That
'Eusebius  recurred  to  this  medium  of  information,
and  that  he  had  examined  with  attention  this
species  of  proof,  is  -shown,  'first,  by  a  passage  in

-  the  very  chapter  we  are  quoting,  in  which,  speak-
ing of  the  books  which  he  calls  spurious,  "  None
(says  he)  of  the  ecclesiastical- writers;  in  the  suc-
cession of  the  apostles,  have  vouchsafed  to  make
any  mention  or  them  in  thejr  writings;"  and,
secondly,  by  another  passage  of  the  same  work,
wherein  speaking  of  the  first  Epistle  of  Peter,
"  This  (says  he)  the  presbyters  of  ancient  times
have  quoted  in  their  writings  as  undoubtedly
genuine;"*  and  then,  speaking  of- some  other
writings  bearing  the  name  or  Peter,  "  We  know
(he  says)  that  they  have  not  been  delivered  down,
to  us  in  the  number  of  Catholic  writings,  foras-
much as  no  ecclesiastical  writer  of  the  ancients,
or  of  our  times,  has  made  use  of  testimonies  out
of  them."  *.'  But  in  the  progress  ef ,  this  -history,"
the  author  proceeds,  "  we  shall  make  it  our  busi-
ness to-  show,  .together  with  the  successions  from  t
the  apostlefl,  what  ecclesiastical  writers,  in  every
age,  have  used  such  writings"  as  these  which  are
contradicted,  arid  what  they  have  said  with  regard
to  the  Scriptures  received  mine  New  Testament,
and  acknowledged  by  all,  and  with  regard  to
those  which  are  not  such/'t

After  this  it  is*reasonabIe  to  believe,  that  when
Eueebius  states  the  four  Gospels,  and  the  Acts  of
the  Apostles,  as  uncontradicted,  uncontested,  and
acknowledged  by  all ;  and  when,  he  places  them
In  oppesition/notonly  to  those  which  were  spuri-
ous, in  our  sense  of  that  term,  but  to  those  which
were  controverted^and  even  to  those  which  were
well  known  and  approved  by  many,  yet  doubted
of  by  some ;  he  represents  -not  only  the  sense  of
his  own  age,  but  the  result  of  the  evidence  which

-  the  writings  of  prior  ages,  from  the  apostles'  time
to  his  own,  had  furnished  to  his  inquiries.  The
opinion  of  Euse^rus  and  his  contemporaries  ap-
pears to  have  been  founded  upon  the  testimony  o£
writers  whom  they  then  called  ancient*:  and  we
may  observe,  that  such  of  the  works  of  these  writ-
ers as  have  come'  down  to  our  times,  entirely
confirm  the,  judgment,  and  support  the  distinction
which  Eusebhis  proposes.  The  books  which  he
eaUa  M  books  universally  acknowledged,"  are  in
tact  used  and  quoted  in  the  remaining  works  of
Christian  writers,  during  the  two  hundred  and
fifty  vears  between  the  apostles'  time  and  that  of
Eosebius,  much  more  frequently  than,  and  in  a
Afferent  manner  from,  those,  the  authority  of
which,  be  tells  us,  was  disputed.


SECTION  IX.

Our  historical  Scriptures  were  attacked  by  the
early  adversaries  of  Christianity  fas  confain-
ing  the  accounts  upon  which  the  religion  was
founded.

Near  the  middle  of  the  second  century,  Celsus,
a  heathen  philosopher,  wrote  a  professed  treatise


•&mtasrvvoLvUi.p.90.
2R


t  Is.  p.  111.


against  Christianity. Tq  this  treatise, _

who  came  about  fifty  years  after  him,  pub_

an  answer,  .in  which  he  frequentiyjreeites.  his
adversary's  words  andlirguments.  Toe  woft  of
Celsus  is  lost;  but  that' of  Origen  remains,
Origen  appears,  to  have  given  us  the  words  of
Celsus,  wnerejie  professes  to  give  them  very  faith-
fully ;  and,  amongst  ether  reasons  for  thinking,
so,  this  is  one,  that  the  objection,  as  stated  by  him
from  Ceteris,  is  sometimes  stronger  than  his  own
answer.  I  think  it  also  probable,  that  Origen,  in
his  answer;  has  retailed  a  large  portion  of  the
work  ot  Celsus :  "  That  it  may  net  be  suspected
(he  saya)  that  we  pass  by- any  chapters,  because
we  have'  no-  answers  at  hand,  I  haSre  thought  it
best,  according  to  my  ability,  to  confute  every
thing  proposed  by  him,  not  so  much  observing  the
natural  order  of  things  as  the  order  which  he  has
taken  himself."*

Celsus  wrote  about  one  hundred  years  after  the
Gospels  were  published ;  and  therefore  any  notices
of  these  books  from  him  .are  extremely  important
for  thieir  antiquity.  They  are,  however,  rendered
more  so  by  the  character  of  the  author ;  for,  the
reception,  credit,  and  notoriety,  of  these,  books
must  have  been  well  established  amongst  Chris-
tians, to  have  made  them  subjects  of  animadver-
sion and  opposition  by  strangers  and  by 'enemies.
It  evinces  the  truth  of  what  Uhrysostom,  two  cen-
turies afterward,  observed,  that  "  the  Gospels,
when  written,  were  not  hidden  in  a  corner,  or
buried  jn  obscurity,  but  they  were  made  known
to  all  the  world,  before  enemies  as  weH  as  others,
evqn  as  they  are  now."t

1.  Qelsus,  or  the  Jew  whom  he  personates,
Uses  these  words: — "I  could  say  many- things
concerning  the  affairs  of  Jesus,  and  those,'  top,
different  from  those  written  by  the  disciples  of
Jesus;  but  I  pufpoaely  omit  them."*  Upon  this
passage,  it  has  been  rightly  observed,  that  it  is  not
easy  to  believe,  that  ifCelsus  could  have  contra-
dicted- the  disciples  upon  good  evidence 'in  any
material  point,  be  would  Jiave  omitted  to  do'  so,
and  that  the  assertion  is,  what  Origen  calls  it,  a
mere  oratorical  flourish.

^  It  is  sufficient  however,  to  prove,  that,^jn  the
time  of  Celsus,  there  were  books  well  known,  and
allowed  to  be  written  by  the  disciples  of  Jesus,
which  books  contained  a  history  of  him.  "By  the
term  disciple*,  Celsus  does  not  mean  the  followers
of  Jesus  in  general ;  for  themhe'ealls  Christians,
or  believers,  or  the  like j  but  those  who^had  been
taught  by  Jesus  himself  i.  e.  his  apostles  and
companions.

2.  In  another  passage,*-  Oelsus  accuses  tho
Christians  of  altering  the  Gospel.i  The  accusa-
tion refers  to  some  variations  in  the  readings  of
particular  passages ;  for  Celsus  goes  on.  to  object,
that  when  they  are  pressed  hard,  and  one  reading
has  been -confuted,  they  disown -that,  and  fly  to

;  another.  We  cannot  perceive  from  Origen,  .that
Celsus  specified  any  particular  instances,  and
without  such  specification'  the  charge  is  of  no,
value.  But  the  true  conclusion  to  be  drawn  from
it  is,  that  there  Were  in  the  hands  of  the  Christians,
histories,  which  were  eyen  then  of  some  standing :
for  various  readings  and  corruptions  do  not  (aEe
place  in  recent  productions.


*  Oris,  cont:  Cols.  1.  i.  sect.  ill.

t  In  Matt.  Horn.  I.  7.

i  Lardner,  Jewish  and  Heathen  Test.  vol.  ii.  p.  874.

$  lb.  p.  975.

27


314


EVIDENCES  OP  CHRISTIANITY.


The  former  quotation,  the  Header  will  remem-
ber, prove*  that  these  books  ware  composed  by
the  disciples  of  Jesus  strictly  so  called-;  the  pre-
sent quotation  shows,  that,  though  objections
were  taken  by  the  adversaries  of  the  .religion  to
the  integrity  of  these  books,  none  were  made  to
their  genuineness.

3.^18  third  passage,  toe  Jew,  whom  Celsus
introduces,  shuts  up,  an  argument  in  this  man-
ner : — "  These  things  then  we  have  alleged  to  you
out  of  your  own  writings,  not  needing  any  other
weapons."*  It  is  manifest  that  this  boast  pro-
ceeds upon  the  supposition  that  the  books,  over
which  the  writer  affects  to  triumph^  possessed  an
authority  by  which  Christians  confessed  them-  _
selves  to  be  bound/

4.  That  the  books  to  which  Celsus  refers  were
•no  other  than  our  present  Gospels,  is  made  out  by
bis  allusions  to  various  passages  still  found  in
these  Gospels.  Celsus  takes  notice  of  the  genea-
logic*)  which  fixes  two  of  these  Gospels;  of  the
precepts,  Resist  not  him  that  injures  you,'  and,  If
a  mah  strike  thee  on  the  one  cheek,  offer  to  him
the  otner  also  ;t  of  the  woes  denouncedliy  Christ ;
of  .his  predictions ;  of  his  saying,  that  it, is  impos-
sible to  serve-two  masters  ;t  of  the  purple  robe,  the
crown  of  thorns,  and  the  reed  in  his  hand ;  or  the
blood  that  flowed  from  the  body  of  Jesus  upon  the
cross,*  which  circumstance  is  recorded  by  John
alone :  and  (what  is  intiar  omnium  for  the  pur-
pose tor  which  we  produee'it)  of  the  difference  in
the  accounts  given  of  the  resurrection  by  the  evan-
gelists, some  mentioning  two  angels  at  the  sepul-
chre, others  only  one.D  '  *

It  is  extremely  material  to  remark,  that  Celsus
hot  only  perpetually  referred  to  the,  accounts  of
Christ  contained  in  the  four  Gospels,?  but  that  he
referred  to  no  other  accounts;  that  he  founded,
none  of  his  objections  to.  Christianity  upon  any
thing  delivered  in  spurious  Gospels.  .  ^

II.  What  Celsus  was  in  the  second  century,
Porphyry- became  in  the  third.  His  work,  which
was  a  large  and  formal  treatise  against  the  Chris-
tian religion,  is  not  extant  We. must  be  content
therefore  to  gather  his  objections  from  Christian
writers,  who  have  noticed  in  order  to  answer  them  ;
and  enough  remains  of  this  species  of  information,
to  prove  completely,  that  Porphyry's  animadver-
sions were  directed  against  the  contents  of  our
present  Gospels,  and  of  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles;
Porphyry  considering  that. to  overthrow  them  was
to  overthrow  the  religion.  Thus  he  objects  to  the
repetition  of  a  generation  in  Saint  Matthew's  ge-.
neaology ;  to  Matthew's  call j  to  the  quotation  of  a
text  from  Isaiah,  which  is  found  in  a  psajm  as-
cribed to  Asaph:  to.  the  calling  of  the*  lake  of  Ti-
berias a  sea;  to  the  expression  in  Saint  Matthew,
"  the  abomination  of  desolation  ;ft  to  the  variation
in  Matthew  and  Mark  upon  the  text,  "  The  voice
of  one  crying  in  the  wilderness,"  Matthew  citing
it  from  Isaias,  Mark  from  the  Prophets ;  to  John?
application  eft  the  term  v"Word;"  to  Christ's
-  change  of  intentionjibout  going -up  to  the  feast  of
tabernacles,' (John  yii.  8 ;)  to  the  judgment  de-
nounced by  Saint  Peter  upon  Ananias  and  Sap-
phira^  which  he  calls  an  imprecation  of  death.**


•  Lardueri  Jewish  and  Heathen  Test.  vol.  li.  p.  278.

*  Ibid.  1  lb.  p.  377.
lb.  p.  880, 88L  |Jb.  p.  283.
'  The  particular*,  of  which  the  above  are  only  a  few,


are  well  collected  by 3fr.  Bryant,  p.  140.
♦•  Jewish  and  Heathen  Test.  voL  in.  p,  106,  i


The  instances  here  alleged,  serve,  in
measure,  to  show  the  nature  of  Pprphyry's  ob-
jections, and  prove  that  Porphvry  had  read  the
Gospels  with  that  sort  of  attention  whklra  writer
would  employ, who  regarded  them  as  the  deposi-
taries of  the  religion  which  he  attacked.  Beside
these  specifications,  there  exists,  in  the  writings
of  ancient  Christians,  general  evidence,  that  the
places  of  Scripture  upon  wjiicE  Porphyry  had  re-
marked were  very  numerous..

In  some  of  the  above-cited  examples,  Porphyry,
speaking  of  Saint  Matthew,  calls  him  your  evan-
gelist ;  lie  also  uses  the  term  evangelists  in  the
plural  number.  What  was  said'of  Celsus,  is  true
likewise  of  Porphyry,  that  it  does  not  appear  that
he  considered  any  history  of  Christ,  except  these,
as  having: authority  with  Christians. .  *

III.  A  thin}  great  writer  against  Ihe  Christian
religion  was  the  emperor  Julian, -whose  work  Was
composed  about  a  century  after  that  of  Porphyry.

In  various  long  extracts,  transcribed  from'  this
work1>y  Cyril  and  Jerome,  it  appears,*  that  Julian
noticed  by  name  Matthew  and  Luke,  in  the  dif-
ference between  their  genealogies  of  Christ;  that
he  objected  to  Matthew's  application  of  the  pro-
phecy, "  Out  of  Egypt  have  I  called  /ny  son,  (ii
15,)  and  to  that  of  ''A  virgin -shall  conceive ;''
(i.  23;)  that  he  recited  sayings  of  Christ,  and  van-  •
ous  passages  of  his  history^  the  very  words  of
the  evangelists ;  in  particular,  that  Jesus  healed
lame-  and  blind  people,  and  exorcised  demoniacs  in
the  villages  of  bethsaida  and  Bethany;  that  he
alleged,  that  none  of  Christ's  disciples  ascribed  to
him.  the  creation  of  the  world,  except  John';  that
neither  Paul,  nor  Matthew,  nor  Luke,  nor  Mark,
have  dared  to  call  Jesus,  God ;  that  John  wrote
later  than  the  other  evangelists^  and  at  a  time
when  a  great  number  of  men  in  the  cities  of
Greece  and  Italy  were  converted ;  that  he  alludes
to  the  conversion  of  Cornelius  and  of  Sergiue
Paulus,  to  Peter's  vision,  to.  the  circular  letter
sent  by  the  apostles'  and  elders  at  Jerusalem,
which  are  all  recorded  in  the  Acts  of  the  Apos-
tles :  by  which  quoting  of  the  four  Gospels  and
the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  and  by  quoting  no  other,
Julian  shows  that  these  were  the  historical  books,
and  the  only  historical  books  received  by  Chris-
tians as  of  authority,  and  aVthe  authentic  me-
moirs of  Jesus  Christ,  of  his  apostles,  and  of  the
doctrines  taught  by  them.  But  Julian's  testimony
does  something  more  than  represent  the  judgment
of  the  Christian  church  in  his  time.  It  discovers
also  his  own.  He  •himself  expressly  states  the
early  date  of  these  records;  he  calls  them  by  the
names  wjiich  they  now  bear.  He  all  along  sup-
poses, he  no  where  attempts  to  question,  their  ge-
nuineness.

The  argument  in  favour  of  the  books  of  the
New  Testament,  drawn  from  the  notice  taken  of
their  .contents  by  the  early  writers  against  the  re-
ligion, is  very'  considerable.  It  proves  that  the
accounts,  which  Christians  had  then,  were  the  ac-
counts which  we  have  new;  that  our  present
Scriptures  were  theire.  It  proves,  moreover i  that
neither  Celsus  in  the  second,  Porphyry  in  the
third,  nor  Julian  in  the  fourth  century,  suspected
the  authenticity  of  these  books,  or  even  insinuated
that  Christians  were  mistaken  in  the  authors  to
whom  they  ascribed  them.  Not  one  of  them  ex-
pressed an  opinion  upon  this  subject  different  from
that  which  was  holden  by  Christians.  And  when

. *  Jewish  and  Heathen  Test,  voltv.^.  77,  kcl


EVIDENCES  OP*  CHRISTIANITY.


91ft


we  consider  how  much  it  would  have  availed  them
to  have  cast  a  doubt  upon  thro  point,  if  they could ;
and  how  ready-they  showed  themselves  to  be,  to
take  everv^dvantage  in  their' power;  and  that
they  were  alTmen  of  learning  and  inquiry ;  their
concession,  or  rather  their  suffrage;  upon  the  sub-
ject, "is  extremely  valuable.
v  In  tlw  case  of  Porphyry,  it  is  made  still  stronger,
by  the  consideration  that  he  did  in  tact  support
himself  by  this1  species  of  objection,  when  he  saw
any  room  for  it,  ot  when  his  acuteness  could  sup-
ply any  pretence  for  alleging  it.  The  prophecy
of  Daniel  he  attacked  upon  this  very  ground  of
smriousnesa.  insisting  that  it  "Was  written  after
the  time  of  Antiochus  Epiphanes,  and  maintains
his  charge  of  forgery  by  -some  far-fetched  indeed,
hat  very,  subtle  criticisms.  Concerning  the  writ-
ings of  the  New  Testament,  no  trace  or  this  sus-
picion is  any.  where  to  be  found  in  him.*


SECTION  X. '

Jtyrtnal  catalogues  of  authentic  Scriptures  were
published,  in  ail  which  out  present  sacred  his-
tories were  included.  „■''

This  species  of  evidence,  comes  later  than  the
i  it  was  not  natural  that  catalogues  of  any
' " - ' ' ital


r  daaf  of  books'ahould  be  put  forth  until
Christian  writings  became  numerous:  or  until
some  writings  showed  themselves,  claiming  titles,
which'  did  not  belong  to  them,  and  thereby  ren-
dering it  necessary  to  separate  books  of  authority
from  Trthere.  But,  when  It  does  appear,  it  is  exr
tannery  satisfactory;  the  catalogues,  though,  nu-
merous, and  made  in  countries  at  a  wide  distance
from  one^another,  differing  very  little,  differing  in
nothing  which  is  material,  and  all  containing  the
four  Gospels.  To  this  last  article  there  is  no  ex-
ception.

I.  In  the  writings  of  Origen  which  remain,  and
in  some  extracts  preserved  by  Eusebius,  from
works  of  his  which  are  now  lost,  there  are  .enu-
merations' of  the  books  of  Scripture,  in  which  the
four  Gospels  and  the  Acts  of  the  Abostiee  are
distinctly  and  honourably 'specified,  ana  in  which
no  books'  appear  beside  what  are  now  received.t
The  reader,  by  this  time  v  will  easily  recollect  that
the  date  of  Ongen's  works  is  A.  D.  230.

H.  AthanasSis,  about  a  centuiy  afterward,  de-
hvered  a  catalogue  of  the  books  of  the  New  Tes-
tament in-fotm,  containing  our  Scriptures  and  no
others;  of  which  he  says,  "In  these  alone  the
doctrine  of  religion  is  taught :  let  ho  man  add  to,,
them  or  take. any  thing  from  them."*

III.  About  twenty  years  after  Athanasiusr
Cyril,  bishop,  of  Jerusalem,  set  forth  a  catalogue
of  the  hooks  of  Scripture,  publicly  read  at  that
time  in  the  church  of  Jerusalem,  'exactly  the'same
as  ours,  except  thai  the- "  Revelation"  fe' omitted*

IV.  And  fifteen  years  after  Cyril,  the  council
oT  Laodioea  delivered  an  authoritative  catalogue
of  canonical'  Scripture,  like  Cyril's,  the  same  as
ours,  with  the  omission  of  the  "  Revelation."

V.  "Catalogues  now  became  frequent. Within


thirty- years  a$er  the  last  date,  that  is.  from  the
year  363  to  near  .the  conclusion  of  the  fourth  cen-
tury, we-  have ' catalogues  by  Epiphanius,*  by
Gregory  Nazianzen,t  by  Phitaiter,  bishop  of  Bras*
cia  m  Italy,!  by  Amphitochius-,  bishop  of  ^conium^
all,  as  they  are  sometimes  cajfed,  dean  catalogues
(that  is;  they  admit  no  hooks  into  the  number  be-
side what  we  now  receive),  and  all,  for  every  pur-
pose of  historic  evidence,  thaeame  as  outb.§

VI.  Within  the  same  .period,  Jerome,  the  most
learned  Christian  writer  of  his  age,  delivered  a
catalogue  of  the  bosks  of  the  New  Testament,
recognising  every  book  now  received,  with  the  -
intimation  of  a  doubt  concerning  the  Epistle  to  the
Hebrews  alone,  and  taking  not  the  least-notice  of
any  book  which  is  pot  now  receivedJI

VII.-  Contemporary  with  lexeme,  who  lived  in
Palestine,  was  Baint'Augustine,  in  Africa,  who
published  likewise  a  catalogue,  without  joining  to\
the  Scriptures,  as  books  of  authority  v  any  other
ecclesiastical  writing  whatever,-  and  without  omit-
tingone  which  we  at  this  day  acknowledge.^

"Ylll.  And  with  these  concurs,  another  contem-
porary writer,  Rufen,  presbyter  of  Aquileia,  Whose
catalogue,  like  theirs,  is  perfect  and  unmixed;  and
concludes  with  these  remarkable  words:  "These
are  the  volumes  which  the  fathers  have  included
in  tl>e  canon,  and  out  of  which  they  would^have
us  prove  the  .doctrine  of  om  faith.''**


*  Mtchaelis's  Introduction  to  the  New  Testament,
Vol.  i.  p.  43-  Marsh's  Translatiqir/
f  Lantaer/Cred.  vol,  iii.  p.  234,  *c;  vol.  viii.  p.  196.
|IlKVOl.viii.F8Si • . $  Id.  p.  270.


SECTION  XI.

These  'propositions  cannot  be  predicated,  of  any
' of  those  books  which  are' commonly  catted  (he
.  Apocryphal  Books  of  the  New  Testament.  .  ■

I  no  not  know  that  the  objection  taken  from
the  apocryphal  writings  is  at  present  much  relied
upon  by  scholars.  But  there  are  many,  who,
hearing  that  various  Gospels  existed  in  ancient
times  under  the  names  of  the  apostles,  may  have
taken  up  a  notion,  that  the  selection  of  our  present
Qospels  from  the  rest^  was  rather  an  arbitrary  or
accidental  choice,  than  founded  in  any  clear  and
certain  cause  of"  preference.  To  these  it  may  be
very  useful  to  know  the  truth  of  the  case.  I  ob-
serve, therefore,

I.  That,  beside  our  Gospels  and  the  Acts  of  the
Apostles,  no  Christian  history,  claiming  to.be
written  by  an  apostle  or  apostoncal  man,  irquoted
within  three  hundred  years*  after  the  birth  of
Christ,  by  any  writer  now  extant,  or  known ;  or,
ifouoted,  is  not  quoted  without  marks  of  censure
and  rejection.  • , •

I  have  not  advanced  this  assertion  without  in*
duiryf  and  F  doubt  not,  but  that  the  passages
cited  by  Mr.  Jones  and  Dr.  Lanmer,  under  the
several  titles  which  the  apocryphal  books  bear;  or
a  reference  to  the  places  where  they  are  mentioned
as  collected  in  a  very  accurate  table,  publishedin
the  year  1773,  by  the  Rev.'  J.  Atkinson,  will
make  out  the  truth  of  the  proposition  to  the.  satis*


•  Lardner,  Cred.  Vol.  vifl.  p.  368.  ^

tlb.vol.ix.p.132.  ^I^P\35u^ **wi

k  Bpiphanius  omits  the  Acts  of  the  AposUes.  This
mutt  have  bees  an  accidental  mistake*  either  in  him  or
in  some  copyist  of  his  work ;  for  he  elsewhere  expressly
refers  to  this  book,  and  ascribes  it  to  Luke.
I  Lardner,  Ored.  vol.  x.  p.  77-  IT  lb.  p.  813.

1  '  **  lb.  p.  187. -


*16


EVIDENCES  OF  CHRISTIANITY.


Action  of  everv  frirand  conroeterit  judgment  If
then  be  any  book  which  may  eeem  to  form  an  ex-
ception to  the  observation,  it  is  a  Hebrew  Gospel,
which  was  circulated  under  the  various  titles  of
the  Gospel  according  to  the  Hebrews,  the  Gospel
of  the  Nazarenes,  of  the  Ebionites,  sometimes
called  of  the  Twelve,  by  some  ascribed  to  Saint
Matthew.  This  Gospel  is  onee,  and  only  once,
cited  by  Clemens  Alexandrinus,  who  lived,  the
aeader  will  remember,  in  the  latter  part  of  the  se-
cond century,  and  which  same  Clement  quotes
one  or  other  of-.our  four  Gospels  in  almost  every'
page  of  his  work.  .It  is  twice  mentioned  by  On-.
gen,  A.  D.  4230;  and  both  times  with- marks  of
diminution  and  discredit.  And  this  is  the  ground
upon  which  the  exception  stands.  *  But  what  is
.  still  more  material  to  observe  is,  that  tHis  Gospel,
in  the  main:  agreed  with  our  present  Gospel  of
Saint  Matthew.*

.  Now  if,  wifh  this  account  of  the  apocryphal
T3ospeJs,-we  compare  what  we  have  read  concern-
ing the  canonical  Scrifftures  in  the  preceding  sec-
tions'; or  even  recollect  that  general  but  well-
founded  assertion  of  Dr.  Lardncr,  "  That  m  the
remainingworks  of  I  reuse  us,  Clement  of  Alexan-
dria, and  Tertullian,  who  all  lived  in  the  first  two
centuries,  there-are  more  and  larger  quotations  of
the  small  volume  of  the  New  Testament,  than  of
all  the  works  of  Cicero,  by  writers  of  all  charac-
ters, for  several  ages;"t  and  if  to  this  we  a'dd,
that,  notwithstanding  the  loss  of  many  works  of
the  primitive-  times  of  Christianity,  wc  nave,  with-
in the  above-mentioned  period,  the  remains  of
Christian  writers,  who  lived  in  Palestine,. Syria,
Asia  Minor,  -Egypt,  the  part  of  Africa  that  used
the  Latin,  tongue,  in  Crete,  Greece,  Italy,  .and
Gaul,  in  all  which  remains,  references  are  found
to  our  evangelists ;  I  apprehend,  that  we  shall  per-
ceive a  clear  and  broad  Jine  of  division,  between
those  writings,  and  all  others  pretending  to  simi-
lar authority.  .

H.  But  beside  certain  histories  which  assumed
the  names  of  apostles,,  and  which  were  forgeries
properly  so  called,  there  were  some  other  Christian
writings,  in  the  whole  or  in  part  of  an  historical
nature,,  which,  though  not  forgeries;  are  denomi-
nated apocryphal,  as  being  of  uncertain  or  of  no
authority.

Of  this  second  class  of  writings,  L  have  found
only  two  which  are  noticed  by  any  author  of  the
irst  three  centuries,  without  express  terms  of
condemnation ;  and  these  are,  the  one,  a  book  en-
titled the  Preaching  of  Peter,  quoted'  repeatedly
by  Clemens  Alexandrinus,  A.  D.  196;  the  other,
a  book  entitled  the  Revelation  of  Peter,  upon,
which  the  above-mentioned  Clemens  Alexandri-
nus is  said,  by  Eusebjus,  to  have  written  notes ;
and  which  is  twice  cited  in  a  work  still,  extant,
ascribed  to  the  same  author.  -
<  I  conceive,  therefore,  that  the  proposition  we
have  before  advanced,  even  after  it  had  been  sub-
jected ro  every  exception,  of  every  kind,  that  can
be.  alleged,  separates,  by  a  wide  interval,  our  his-
torical-Scriptures  from  all  other  writings  which
profess  to  give  an  account  i>f  the  same  subject.

We  may  be  permitted  however  to  add,


•  In  applying  to  this  Gospel,  what  Jerome  in  the  lat-
tsrand  of  the  fourth  century  has  mentioned  of  a  Hebrew
Gospel,  I  think  it  probable  that  we  sometimes  confound
11  J^tb  a  Hebrew  copy  of  Saint  Matthew's  Gospel,
w5e»h^  an  •EJkflMl  or  version,  which  was  tbeo  extant.

t  Lardner,  Cred.  vol.  xii.  p.  53.


1.  That  there  is  no  evidence  that  any  snpr&oa
or  apocrypnal  books  whatever  existed,  in  the  first
century  of  the  Christian  era,  in  which  century  all
our  historical  books  are  proved  to  have  been  ex-
tant "  There  are  no  quotations  of  -any  such
books  in  the  apostolical  father*,  by  whom  [.mean
Banmtas,  Clement  of  Home,  Hennas,  Ignatius,
an<l  Polycarp,  whose  writings  reach  from  about
the  year 'of  our  Lord  70,.  to  the  year  106  (and
some  of  whom  have  quoted  each,  and  every  one  of.
our  historical  Scriptures)  j  I  say  this," adds  Dr.
Lardner,  "because  I  think  it  has  been  proved."*
.  2.  These  apocryphal  writings  were  not  read  in
the  churches  of  Christians ;

3.  Were  not  admitted  into  their  volume;

4.  Do  not  appear  in  theii  catalogues  ;*

6.  Wen  not-noticed  by  their  adversaries;

6.  Were  not  .alleged  qy  different  parties  as  of
authority  in  their  controversies;

7.  Were-  not  the  subjects,  amongst  thernj  of
commentaries,  versions,  collations,  expositions.

Finally ;  beside4he  silence  of  three  centuries,  or
evidence,  within  that  time,  of  their  rejection,  they*
were,  with  a  consent  nearly  universal,  reprobated
•by  Christian  writers  ofAsucceeding  ages.

Although  if  be  made  out  by  theae^bsefvation*,
that  the  books  in  question  never  obtained  any  de-
gree of  credit  and  notoriety  which  can  place  them
in.  competition,  with  our  Scriptures ;  yet  it  appears,
from  the  writings  of  the  fourth  century,  that  many
such  existed  in  that  century,  and  in  toe  century
preceding  it.  It  may  be  difficult  at'thia  distance
,  o^  time  to  account  for  their  origini  Perhaps  the
most  probable  explication  is,  that  they  were  in
general  composed  with  a  design  of  making  a  profit
by  .the  sale.  "Whatever  treated  of  the.  subject
would  find  purchasers.  It  was  an  advantage  taken*
of  the  pious  curiosity  of  unlearned  Christians.
With  a  view  to  the  same  purpose,  they  wefts
many  of  them  adapted  to  the  particular  orjinions
of  particular  sects,  which  would  naturally  promote
their  circulation  amongst  the  favourers  of  those
opinions.  After-  aft,  they  were  probably  much
more  obscure  than  we  imagine.  Except  the  Go*;
pel  according  to  thei  Hebrews,  there  ib-  none  of
which  we  hear  more"  than  the  Gospel  of  the
Egyptians',  yet  there  is  good  reason  to  believe  that
Clement,  a  presbyter  of  Alexandria  in  Egyptj  A.
D.  184,  and  a  man  of  almost  universal  reading,
had  never  seen  it.t  A  Gospel  according  to  Peter,
was  another  of  the  most  ancient  books  ofthis  kind :
yet  Seranion,  bishop  of  Antioch,  Al  D.  900,  had
not  read  it,  when  he  heard  of  such  a  book  franfe
in  the  hands  of  the  Christians  of  Rhonsus  in  Cin-
cia ;  and  -speaks  of  obtaining  a  sight  of  this  Gospel
from  some  sectaries  who  used  it.t  £ven  of  the
Gospel  of  the  Hebrews,  which  confessedly  stands
at  the  head  of  the  catalogue,  Jerome,  at  the  end
of  the  fourth  century,  was  glad  to  procure  a  copy
by  the  favour  of  the  Nazarenes  of  Berea.  No-
thing of  this  sort  ever  happened,  or  could  have
happened  concerning  our  Gospels: '
.  One  thing  is  observable  of  all  the  apocryphal
Christian  writings,  viz.  that  they  proceed. upon
the  same  .fundamental  history  of  Crtrist,  and  his
apostles,  as  that  which  is  disclosed  in  our  Scrip-
tures. The  mission  of  Christ,  his  power  of  work-
ing miracles,  his  communication  of  that  power -to
the  apostles,  his  passion,  death,  and  resurrection,

*  Lardner,  Cred.  vol.  xii'  p.  158.

t  Jones,  vet.  kp.  313. i  Lardner,  Cred.  vol.  ii  p.  557.


EVIDENCES  <3F  CHRISTIANITY/


tvt


w or  aasertoj  by.ewnr  one  of  them.

The  names  under  which  some  of  them  came  forth,
are  the  names  of  men  of  eminence  in  our  histories.
What  these  books  give,-  are  not  contradictions,
bat  anauthoriaed  additions.  .The  principal  tacts
are  supposed,  the  principal  agepts  Che  same ; 'which
shows,  that  these  points  were  too  mush  fixed  to
be  altered  or  disputed.  /

If  there"  be  any  book  of  this  description,  which"
appears  to  have  imposed  upon  some  considerable
number  of  learned  Christians,  it  is  the  Sibylline
Oracles;* but,  when  we  reflect  upon  the. circum-
stances which  facilitated  that  imposture,  we  shall
cease  to  wonder  either  at  the  attempt  or  its  success.
It  was  at  that  time  universally. understood,  that
such  a  -prophetic  writing  existed  Its  "contents
were  kept  secret  This  situation  afforded  to  some.
one  a  hint;  as  well  as  an  opportunity  to  give  out
a  writing  under  this-  name,  mvourable  to  the  al-
ready established  persuasion  of  Christians,  and
which  writing,  by' the  aid  and  recommendation  of
these  circumstances,  would  in  soma  degree,  it  is
probable,  be  received.  Of  the  ancient  forgery  we
know  but  little :  what  is  now  produced,  could  not,
in  my  opinion,  have  imposed  upon  any  one.  It
ia  nothing  else  than  the  Gospel  history,  woven
Into  vqpe;  perhaps  was  at  first  rather  a  fiction
than  a  forgeryj  an  -exercise  oLingenuity,  mora
thajr  an  attempt  to  deceive;  •'  -*


CHAPTER  X. '
Recapitulation.

Tarn  reader  will  -now  be  pleased  to  recollect,
that  the  two  points  which  form  the  subject  of  our
present  dismwaqn,  are  first,  that  the  founder  of
Christianity,  his  associates,  andimmediate  follow-
er*} passed  their  lives  in  labours,  dangers,  and  suf-
ferings; secondly,  that  they  did  so,  in  attestation
of  the.  miraculous  history  recorded  in  our  Scrip-
tures, and  solely  in  consequence  of  their  belief  of
the  truth  of  that  history.

.The  argument,  by  which  these  two  propositions
have  been  maintained  by  us|  stands  thus:  •

No  historical  met,  I  apprehend,  is  more  certain,
than  that  the  original  propagators  of  Christianity
wjfantarUy  subjected  themselves  to  lives  of  fatigue;
r,  and  suffering,  in.  the  prosecution  of  weir
The  nature  or  the  undertaking;

.  '  of  the  persons  employed  in  it;  the

opposition  of  their  tenets  to  the  nxed  opinions  and
expectations  of  the  country  in  which  they  first  ad-
vanced them;-  their  undissetnbled  condemnation
cf  the  religion  of  ell  other  countries ;  their  total.
want  of  power,  authority,  or  force;  render  it  in
the  highest  degree  probable  that  this  must  have
been  the  case,  The  probability  is  increased,  by
what  we  know  of  the  fate  of  the  Founder  of  the
institution,  who  was  nut  to  death  for  his  attempt;
and  by  what  we  also  know  of  the  eruel  treatment
of  the  converts  to  the  institution,  within  thirty"
years  afWitoconunencement;  both  which  points
are  attested  by  heathen  writers,  and,  being  once
admitted,  leave  it  very  incredible  that  the  primi-
tive emissaries  of  the  religion,  who  exercised  their
ministry,  first,  amongst- the  people  who  had  de-
stroyed their  Master,  and,  afterward,  amongst
those  who  persecuted  their  converts,  should  them-


selves escape  with  impunity,  or  pome  their  pur-
pose, in  ease  and  safety.  This  probability,  thus
sustained  by  foseign  testimony,  is  advanced,. I
think,  to  historical  certainty,  by  the  evidence  of
our  own  books ;  by  the  accounts  of  a  writer  who
was  the  companion"  of  the  persons-  whose  sunerr
kigs  he  relates:  by  the  letters  of  the^persons-thenv
selves ;  by  predictions  of  persecutions  ascribed  to
the  Founder. of  the  religion,  which  predictions
would  not  have  been  inserted  in  this  history,
much  -less  hare  been -studiously  ^vrelt  upont  u.
they  had  not  accorded  with  the  event*  and  which,
even  if  falsely  ascribed  to  him,  could  only,  have
been  so  ascribed,  because  the  event  suggested
them ;  lastly,  by  incessant  exhortations  to  forti-
tude and  patience,  and  by  an  earnestness,  repeti-
tion, and  urgency,  upon  the  subject,  which  went
unlikely  to  Save  appeared,  if  there  had  not  been,
at  the  time,  some  extraordinary  call  for  (he  exes*
case  of  these  virtues.

It  is  made  out  also,  I  think,  with  sufficient  evi*
dence,  that  .both  the  teachers  and  converts  of  the
religion,  in  consequence  .of  their  new  profession,
took  up  a  new  course  of  Hfe  and  behaviour.
.  The  next  great  question  is,  what  they  did  this
for.  That  it  was/or  aTjftraculous  story  of  some
kind  or  other;  is  to  my  apprehension  extremely
manifest',  because,  as  to  the  fundamental  article*
the  designation  of  the  person,  viz.  that  this  parti-
cular person,  Jesus  of  Najareth,  ought  to  be  n>
eeived  *as  the  Messiah,  or  as  a  messenger  from
God,  they  neither  had;  nor  could  have,  any  thing
but  miracles  to  stand  upon..  -That  the  exertions
and  sufferings  of  the  apostles  were  fat  the.  story
which  we  have  now,  is  proved  by  the  oonaidera-
tion  that  this  story  is  transmitted  to  us  by  two  of
their  own  number,  and  by  two  others  personally
connected  with  them ;'  that  the  particularity  of  the
narrative  proves,  that  the  writers  claimed  to  ^pos-
sess .drcumstantisj  mformagbn,  that  from  their
situation  they  hadfuH  opportunity  of  acquiring
such  information,  that  they  certainly,  at  least,
knew  what  their  colleagues,  their  companions,
their  masters;  taught %,  that  each  of  these' books
contains  enough  to  prove  -the  truth  of  the  religion;
that,  ff  any  one  of  them  therefore  be  genuine,  it  is
sufficient ;  that  the  genuineness,  however,  of  all
of  diem  is  made  out,  as  well  by  the.  general  argu-
ments which  evince  the  genuineness  of.  the  most
undisputed  remains  of  antiquity,  as  also  by  pecu-
liar and  specific  proofs,  viz.  by  ^citations  from  them
in  writings  belonging  to  a  period  immediately  con-
tiguous  to  that  in  which  they  were-puhushed(  tar
the  distinguished  regard  paid  \n  eariy^Christians
to  the  authority  of  these  books,  (which  regard  was
manifested  by  their  collecting  of  them  into  a- vo-
lume, appropriating  to  that  volume  titles  of  pecu-
liar respect,  translating  them  into  various  lan-
guages, digesting  them  into  harmonies,  writing
commentaries  upon4hem,  tfnd,  etffl  more  conspicv-
oualy,  by  the  reading  of  them  in  their  public  as-
semblies in  all  parts  of  the  world ;)  by  a  universal
agreement  with  respect  to  these  books,  whilst
doubts  were  entertained  concerning  some  others;
by  contending  sects  appealing  to  them ;  by  the
early  adversaries  of  the  religion  not  disputing
their  genuineness,  but,  on  the  contrary,  treating
them  as  the  depositarieanf  the  history  upon  which
the  religion  was  founded;  by  many  formal  cata-
logues of  these,  as  of  certain  and  authoritative
writings,  published  in  different  and  distant  parts
of  the  Christian  world;  lastly,  by  the  absence  or
27*


310


EVIDENCES  OP  CHRISTIANITY.


defect  of  the  above-cited  topes  of  evidence,  when
applied  to  any  other  histories  of  the  same  subject
These  ate  strong  arguments  to  prove,  that  the
books  actually  proceeded  from  the  authors  whose
names  they,  bear,  (and  have  always  borne,  lor
there  is  not  a  particle  of -evidence  to  show  that
they.ever  went  under  any  other ;)  but  the  strict '
genuineness  of  the  hooks  is  perhaps- more  than  is
necessary  to  the  support  of  our  proposition.  For
even  supposing  that,  by  reason  of  the  silence  of
antiquity,  or  the  loss  of  records,  we  know  not  who
were  the  writers  of  the- four  Gospels,  yet  the  act,
that  they  were  received  as  authentic  accounts  of
the  transaction  upon  which  the  religion  rested,
and  were  received  as  such  by  Christians,  at  or
near"  the  age  of  the  apostles,  by  those,  whom  the

rtlea  had  taught,  and  by  societies  Which  apos-
had  founded ;  t^tis  fecial  say,  connected  with
the  consideration,  that  they  are  corroborative  of
each  .other's  testimony,  and  that  they  are  farther
corroborated  by  another  contemporary  history,
taking  up  the  story  where  they  had  left  it,  and,  in
a  narrative  built  upon  that  story,  accounting  for
the  rise  and  production  of  changes  in  the  world,
the  effects  of  which  subsist  at  this  day ;  connected,
moreover,  with  the  -confirmation  which  they  re-
ceive from' letters  written  by  the  apostles  them-
selves, which  both  assume  the  same  general  story,
and,  as  often  as  occasions  lead  them  to. do  so,  al-
lude to  particular  parts  of  it;  and  connected  also
with  the  refiectiori,  tlpt  if  the  apostles  delivered
any  different  story  ^it  is  lost,  ()he  oresent  and  no
other  being  referred  to  by  a  series  of  Christian
_  writers,  down  from  their  age  to  our  own;  being
likewise  recognised  in  a  variety  of  institutions,
which  prevailed  early  and  universally  amongst  the
disciples  of  the  religion ;)  and  that  so  neat  a
change,  as  the  oblivion  of  one-story  and  the  sub-
stitution ef  another,  under  such  circumstances,
eonftd  not  have  taken  place;  this  evidence  would
be  deemed,  I  apprehend,  sufficient  to  prove  con-
eetning  these  books,  that,  whoever  were  the  au-
thors of  them,  they,  exhibit  the  story  which  the
apostles  tolti,  and  for  which,  consequently,  they
acted,  and  they  suffered.

If  it  be  so,  the  religion  must  be  true.  These
men  could  not  be  deceiyers.r— By  only  not  bearing
testimony,  they,  might  have  avoided  all  these  suf-
ferings, and  have  fived  quietly.  '  Would  men  in
such  circumstances  pretend  to  have  seen  what
.they  never  saw ;  assert  facts  which  they  had  no
knowledge  of;  go  about  lying  to- teach  virtue;
-a^dj  though  not  only  convinced  of  Christ's  being
an  impostor,  but'having  seen  the  success  of  his
imposture  in -his  crucifixion,  yet  persist  in  carry-
ing it  on;  and  so*  persist,  as  to  bring  upon  them-
selves, for  nothing,  and  with  a  full  Knowledge  of
the  consequence,  enmity  and  hatred,  danger  and


■OF  *HE~  DtREQT  HISTORICAL  EVIDENCE  OF
' CHRISTIANITY.


PSOP081TION II.

CHAPTER  I. ' . r

Our  first  proposition  was,  "  That  there  is  satisfac-
tory evidence  that  many,  pretending  to  be  origi-
nal witnesses  of  the  Christian  miracles,  passed


their  lives  in  labours,  dangers,  and  suferfng*,
voluntarily  undertaken  and  undergone,  in  at'
testation  of  the  accounts  which  they  delivered,
and  solely  in  consequence  of  their  belief  of  the
truth  of  those  accounts;  and  that  they  also-
submitted,  from  the  same  motives^  to  new
rules  of conrtuct"

Our  second  proposition,  and  which  how  remains
to  be  treated  of,  is,  «*  That  there  is  not  satisfac-
tory evidence,  that  persons  pretending  to  Jbe
original  witnesses  of  any  other  similar  mira-
cles*have  acted  in  the  same  manner,  in  attest-
ation of  the '  accounts  which  they  delivered,
and  solely  in  consequence  of  their  belief  of  the
truth  of  those  accounts"

I  enter  upon  tins  part  of  my  argument,  by
declaring  how  far  my  belief  in  miraculous  accounts^
goes.  If  the  reformers  in  the  time  of  Wickliffe.
or  of  Luther:  or  those  of  England,  in  the  time  or
Henry'  the  Eighth,-  or  of  queen  Mary ;  or  the
founders  of  our  religious  sects  since,  such  as  were
Mr.  Whitfield  and  Mr.  Wesley  in  our  own  times:
had  undergone  the  fife  of  tod  and  exertion,  of
danger  ana  sufferings,  which  we  know  Chat  many
of  them  did  undergo, /or  a  miraculous  story ;  that
-is  to  say,  if  they  had  Jounced  their  public  ministry
upon  this  allegation  of  miracles  'wrought  within
their  own  knowledge,  and  uoon  narratives  which
could  not  be  resolved  into  delusion  or  mistake;
and -if  it  had  appeared,  that  their  conduct  really
had  its  origin  in  these  accounts,  J  should  have
believed  them.  Or,  to  borrow  an  instance  which
will  be  familial  to  every  one  of  my  readers,  if  the
late  Mr.  Howard  had  undertaken  his  labours  and
journeys  in  attestation,  and  in  consequence  of  a
clear  and  sensible  miracle,  I  should  have  believed
him  also.  Or,  to  represent  the  same  thing  under
a  thini  supposition ;  if  Socrates  .had  professed  to
perform  public  miracles  at  Athena ;  if  the  friends
of  Socrates,  Phado,  Cebes,  Crito,  and  SmimiaS,
together  with  Plato,  and'  many  of  his  followers,
relying  upon  the  attestations  which  these  mira-
cles afforded  to  his  pretensions,  haif^at  the  nasard
of  their  fives,  and  the  certain  expense  of  their,  ease
and  tranquillity,  gone  about  •Greece,'  after  his
death,  to  publish  and  propagate  bis  doctrines:
and  if  these,  things  had  come  to  our  knowledge,
in  the  same  way  as  that  in  which  the  life  or
Socrates  is  now  transmitted  to  us,  through  the
hands  of  his  comnanions  and  disciples,  that  k,. by
'writmgs'receivea  without  -doubt,  as  theirs,  from
the  age- in  which  they  were  published  ro-the  pre-
sent! should  hare  believed  this  likewise.'  And
my  belief  would,  in  each  case,  be  much  strength-
ened, if  the  subject  of  the  mission  were  of  import-
ance to  the  conduct  and  happiness  of  human  life:
if  it  testified  any  thing  which  it  behoved  mankind
to  know  from  such  authority ;  if  the  nature  of
what  it  delivered,  required  the  sort  of  proof  which
ft  alleged;  if  the  occasion  was  adequate  to  the
interposition,  the  end  worthy  of  the  mearia.  In
the  last  case,  my  faith  would  be"  much  confirmed,
if  the -effects  of  the  transaction  remained  ;  more
especially,  if  a  change  had  been  wrought,  at  the
time,  in  tbeopiraon  and  conduct  of  such  numbers,
as  to  lay  the  foundation  of  an  institution,  and  of  a

system  of  do  "  ' L"*-  c  J* J

the  greatest  1

have  believed,  i  <mj «  «*»  wmuiwuj  *u  ukm?  i,-«w  ,
yet  none  of  them  ao  more  than  come  up  to  the
apostolic  history.


system  of  doctrines,  which  had  since*  overspread

jreatest  part  c "
have  believed,  I  aay .  the  testimony  in  these  <


t  of  the  civilized  world. I  should


EVIDENCES  OP  CHRISTIANKTY.


819


If  anyone  choose  to  caft  assent  to  its  evidence
-credulity,  it  Lr  at.  least  incumbent  upon  him  .to
.produce  examples  in. which  the  same  evidence
bath  turned  out  to  Be  fallacious.  -And  this  con-
tains the  precise  question  which  we  are  now  to
agitate.

In  stating  tfce  comparison  between  out  evidence,
and  what  our  adversaries  may  bring  into  compe-
tition with  ours,  we  will  divide  the  distinctions
which  "we  wish  to  propose  into  two  kinds, — those
which  relate  to  the  proof,  and  (hose  which  relate-
to  the  miracles.  __  Under  the  former,  head  wo  may
lay  out  the  case^

I.  Such  accounts  of  supernatural  events  as  arc
found  only  in  histories  by  some  ages  posterior  to
the  transaction,  and  of  which'  it  is  evident  that  the
historian  could  know  little  more  than  his  reader.
Ours  is  contemporary  history.  This  difference
alone*  removes  out  of  our  way,  the  miraculous  his-
tory of  Pythagoras,  who  lived  five  hundred  years
before  the  Christian  era,  written  by  Porphyry
and  Jamblicusj  who  lived  three  hundred  years
after  that  era;  the  prodigies  of  Livy's* history;
the  fables,  of  the  heroic  ages ;  the  whole  of  the
Greek  and  Roman,  .as  well,  as  of  the  Gothic
mythology;  m  great  part  of  the  legendary  history
of  Popisu  saints,  LheHery  best  attested  or  which  is
extracted  from  the  certificates  that. are  exhibited
daring  the  process  of  their  canonization,  a  cere-
mony which  seldom  takes  place  till  a  century  after
their  deaths.  It  applies  also  with  considerable
force  to.  the  miracles  of  Apollonius  Tyaneus,
which  are  contained  in  a  solitary  history,  of  his
-Jife,  published  by  f>hilostr*tus,  above  a  hundred
years  after  his  death;  and  in  which,  whether
PbjWratus  had  any  prior  account  to  guide  him,
depends  upon'  his  single  .unsupported  assertion.
Also  to  some  of  the  miracles  of  toe  third  century,
especially  to  one  extraordinary  instance,  the  ac-
count of  Gregory,  bishop  of  "Neocesarea,  called
Thaumaturgus,  delivered  in  the  writings  of  Gre-
gory oCNyssen,  who  lived  one  hundred  and  thirty
yeta  after  the  subject  of  his  panegyric,
.  The  value  of  this  circumstance  is  shown  to  have
been  accurately  exemplified  in  the  history  of  Igna-
tius Loyola,  founder  of  the  order  of  Jesuits,*  His
life,  written  by  a  companion  of  his,  and  by  one.o£
fhB  order,  was  published  about  fifteen  yean  after.
his  death.  In  which  life,  the  author,  sfefar  from
ascribing  any  miracles  to  Ignatius,  industriously
stales  the  reasons  why  he  was  not  invested  with
anj  each  power.  The  life  was  republished  fifteen
years,  afterward,  with  the  addition  of  many  cir-
cumstances which  were  the  trait,  the  author  says,'
of  farther  inquiry,  and  of  diligent  examination;
bat  stillwith  a  total  sUence  about  miracles.  When
Ignatius  had  been  dead  nearly  sixty  y**rs,  the
Jesuits,  conceiving  a  wish  to  have  the  founder  of
their  order  placed  m  the  Roman  calendar,  began,
as  it  should  seem,  for  the  first  timej  to  attribute  to
htm  a  catalogue  of  miracles,  which  could  not  then
be  distinctly  disproved ;  and  which  there  was,  in
those  who  governed  the  church,  a  strong  disposi-
tion to  admit  upon  the  slenderest  proofs.
^  IK  We  may  lay  out  of  the  case,  accounts  pub-
fished  in  one  country,  of  what  passed  tn  a  distant
country, .  without  any  proof  that  such,  accounts
jweje  known  or  received  at  home.  In  the  case  of
Christianity,  Judea,  which  was  the  scene  of  the
as  the  centre  of  the  mission. The


story  was  published  in  the  place  in  which  it  was
acted.  The  church  of  Christ  was  first  planted  at
Jerusalem  itself.  With  that  church,  others  cor-
responded. From  thence  the- p/imitive  teachers
of  the  institution  went  .forth;  thither  they  assem-
bled. The  church  of  Jerusalem,  and  the  several
churches  of  Judea,  subsisted  from  the  beginning,
and  for  many  ages;*  received  also  the  same  books
and  the  same  accounts,  as  other  churches  did.

Xhis  distinction  disposes,  amongst  others,  of
the  above-mentigncd  parades  of  Apollonius  Tya-
neus, >  most  of  which  are.  related  to  have  been
performed  in  India;  no  evidence  remaining  that
.either  the  miracles  ascribed  to  .him,  or  the  history
of  those  miracles,  were  .ever  heard  of  in  India.
Those  of  Francis  Xavier,  .the  Indian  missionary,
with  many  others  of  the  Rqntfsh  breviary)  are  lia-
ble to  the.same  objection,  viz.  that  the  Recounts
of  them  were  published  at  a  vast  distance  from  the
supposed  scene  of  the  wonders,  t

III.  We  lay  out  of  the  casq  transient  rumours.
Upon  the- first  publication  of  an  extraordinary  ac-
count, or  even  of  an  article  of  ordinary  intelligence,  :
no  one,  who  is  not  personally  acquainted  with  the  *
transaction,  can  know  whether  it  be  true  or  fatso,
because  any  man  may  publish  any  story.  It  is  in
the  ruturd.  confirmation,*  q*  contradiction,,  of*  Che
account ;  in  its  permanency,  or  .its  disappearance;
its  dying  away  into  silence,  or  its  increasing  in
notoriety*;  its  being  followed^ -up  hy  subsequent  -
accounts,  and  being  repeated  in  dinerent  and  in-  -
dependent  accounts ;  that  solid  truth  is  distinguish-
ed from  fugitive  lies.  This  distinction  is  altogether
on  the  side  of  Christianity"  vfhe  story  did  not
drop.  On  the  contrary,  i{  was  succeeded  by  a
train  of  action  and  events  dependent  upon  it.
The  accounts,  which  we  have  in  our  hands,  were
composed  after  the  first  reports  must  have  sub-
sided. They  were  followed  by  a  train  of  writings
.upon  the  subject.  The  historical  testimonies  of
the  transaction  were  many  and  various,  and  con-
nected with  letters,  discourses,  controversies,  apo-
logies, successiveiy^produced  by  the  same  transao*
tiop.

IV.  We  may  lay  out  of  the  case*  what  I  call
naked  history.  It  has  been  said,  that  if  the  pro-
digies of  the  Jewish  history  had  been  found  only,
in  fragments  of  Manetho,  or  Berosus,  we  should
have  paid  no  regard  to  them:  and  1  am  willing  to
admit  this.  ■  If  we.  knew.,  nothing  of  the  feci,  hut
from  the  fragment ;  if  we  .possessed  no  proof  that
these  accounts  had  been  credited  and  acted  upon,
from  times,  probably,  as  ancient  as  the  accounts
themselves ;  if  we  had  no  visible  effects  connected
with  the  history,  no.  subsequent  or  collateral  test!-  -
monr  to  confirm  it ;  under  these  circumstances,  I
think  that  it  would  be  undeserving  of  Credit  But
this  certainly  is  not  our  case*.  In  appreciating
the  evidence  of  Christianity  ?  the  books  are  to  be
combined  with  the  institution;  witl>the.prova-
lency  of  the  religion  at  this  day ;  .with'  the  time
and  place  of  its  origin;  which  are  acknowledged
points ;  with  the  circumstances  of  its  rise  and  pro-
gress, as  collected'  from  external  history ;  with  the
fact  of  our  present  books  being  received  by  the
votaries  of  the  institution  from-  the  beginning.:
with  that  of  other  books  coming  after  these,  filled


•  Bougjas's  Criterion  of  Miracles,  p.  74.


*  The  succession  of  many  eminent  bishops  of  Jerusa-
lem in  the  flrgi  three  centuries,  is  distinctly  preserved;
as  Alexander,  A.D.  212,  who  succeeded  Narcissus,  then
1HJ  years  old.

J  Douglas's  Crit.  p.  BL


s»


EVIDENCES  OP  CHRISTIANITY.


with  account*  of  effects  an<}  consequences  resutt-
ing  from  the  transaction,  or  referring  to  the  trans-
action, or  built  upon  it;  lastly, .with  the  consider-
ation of  the  number  and  variety  of  the  books

'  themselves,  the  different  writers  from  which  they
proceed,  the  different  views  with  <  which  they  were
written,. so  disagreeing  as  to  repel  the  suspicion  of-

.confederacy,  so;  agreeing  as  to  show  that  thejrwere
founded  in  a  common  original,  t.  e.  in  a*  story  sub-
stantially the'same.  Whether  thia'proofhe  satis-
factory or  not,  it  is  properly  a  cumulation  of  evi-
dence, by  no  means  a  naked  or  solitary  record.

V.  A  rilark  of  historical  truth,  although  only
in  k  certain  way,  and  to  a  certain  degree,  is  jmt-
ticularity,  in  .names,  dates,,  places,  circumstances,
and  in  the  order  of  everits  preceding  or  following
the  transaction :  of  which  kind,  for  instance,  is
file  particularity  in  the-description  of  Saint  Paul's
voyage  and  shipwreck,  in  the  27th  chapter  of  the
Acts,  which  no  man,  L  think,  can  read  without
being  convinced  that  the  writer  was  there ;  and
also  m  the  account  of  the  cure  and  examination
of  the  blind  man,  in  the  ninth  chapter  of  Saint
John's  Gospel,  which  >ears  every  mark  of  per-
sonal knowledge*  on  the  part' of  the  historian  *  I
do.not  deny  that  fiction  has  often  the  particularity
of  truth  f  but  then  it  is  of  studied  and  elaborate
fiction,  or  of  a  formal  attempt  to  deceive,  that  we
observe  this.,- Since,  however, .experience -proves
that  particularity  is  not  confinodto  truth,  I  have
stated  that  it  is  a  proof  of  truth  only  to  a  •certain
extent,  %  e.  it  reduce)  the  question  to  this,  whe-
ther we  can- depend  or  not  upon  the. probity  of  the
relator!  which  is  a  considerable  advance  in  our
present  argument;  tor  an  express  attempt  to  de-
ceive, in  which  case  alone  particularity  can  ap-
pear without  truth,  is  charged  upon  the  evange-
lists by  few.  If  the  historian  acknowledge  himself
to  have  received  his  intelligence  from  others,  the
particularity  of  the  narrative  shows,  prima  facu,
the  accuracy  of  his  inquiries,  and  the  fulness  of
his  information.  This  remark  belongs  to  Saint
Luke's  history*,  Of  the  particularity  which  we
allege,  many  examples  may  .be  found  in  all  the
Gospels.  And  it  is  very  difficult  to  conceive,  that
■ueh  numerous  particularities,  as  are  almost  every
where  to  be  met  with  in  the  Scriptures;  should!*
raised  out  of  nothing,  or  brspun  out  of  the  imagi-
nation without  any  (act  to  goNupon.t

It  is  to  be  remarked,  however,  that  this  particu-
larity is  only  to  be  looked  for  in  direct  history.  It
is  riot  natural  in  references  or,  allusions,  which  yet,
in  other  198006182  often-  afford,  as  far  as  they  go,
the  most  unsuspiciousevidence.

VI.  We  lay  out  of  the  case  such  stories  of  su-
pernatural events,  as  require,  on  the  part  of  the
nearer,  nothing  more  than  an,  otiose  assent ;  stories
Upon  which  nothing  depends,  in  which  no  into-.

*Both  these  chapters  ought  to  be  read  for  the  sake
Of  this  very  observation.  \

vt  "  There  is  always  spsae  truth  where  there  are  con--
siderahle  particularities  related;  and  they  always  seem
toTjear  some  proportion  to  one  another.  Thus  there  is
.  a  great  want  of  the  particulars  of  time,  place,  and  per-
sobs,  in  Manetho's  account  of  tbo  Egyptian  By  nasties,
Ctesias's  of  the  Assyrian  Kingsr  ana  those  which  the
technical  chronologers  have  given  of  the  ancient  king-
torn* .of  Greece:  and  agreeably  thereto,  the  accounts
have  much  fiction  and  falsehood,  with  some  truth :
whereas,  Thucydidet's  History  of  the  Peloponnesian
War,  and  Cesar's  of  the  War  in  Gaul, -in  both  which
the  particulars  of  time,  place,  and  persons,  are  mention-
ed, are  universally  esteemed  true  to  a  great  degree  of
exsctaess."-Hartley,  vol.  ii.  p.  H».


rest  Is  involved,  nothing  is  to  be  done  or  changed
m  consequence  of  believing  them.  Such  stones
are  credited,  if  the  careless  assent  that  is  given  to
them  deserve  that  name,  more  by  the  indolence  of
the  hearer,  than  by  his  judgment :  or,  though  not
friuch  credited,  are  passed  from  one  to  another
without  inquiry  or  resistance.  ^o'this«case,  and
to  this  case  alone,  belongs  what  is  called  the  bee
of  the  marvellous.  I  have  never  known  it  carry
men  farther.  "Men  do'  not  suffer  persecution  from
the  love  of  the  marvellous,  Of  the  indifferent  na-
ture we  are  speaking  of,  are  most  vulgar  errors
and  popular  superstitions:  most,  for  instance,  of
the  current  reports  of  apparitions.  Nothing  de-
pends upon  their  being  true  or  false.  But  not:
surely,  of  tins  kind  were  the  alleged*  miracles  of
Christ  and  his  apostles.  They  decided,  if  true,
the  most  important  question  upon-  whioh  the  hu-
man mind  can  fix  Re  anxiety.  They  claimed' to
regulate  the  opinions  of  mankind,  upon  subjects
in  which  they  are  not  .only  deeply  concerned^  but
usually  refractory  and  obstinate.  Men  could,  not
be  utterly  careless  in  such  a  case  as  this.  If  a
Jew  took  up- the  story,  he  found  his  darting  nar-
tiality  to  his  own  nation  and  law  wounded;  if  a
Gentile,  he  found  his  idolatry  and  polytheism  re-
probated and  condemned.  Whoever  entertained
the  account,  whether  Jew  or  Gentile,  could  not
avoid  the  following  reflection : — "  If  these  things
be  true,  I  must  give  up  the  opinions  and  princi-
ples in  which  I  have  been  brought  up,  the  religion
in  which  my  fathers  Iked  and  died/'  It  is  not
conceivable  that  a  man  should  do  this  upon  airy
idle  report  or  frivolous  account,  or  indeed,  without
being  fully  satisfied  and  convinced  of  the  tmth
and  credibility  of  the  narrative  to  which  he  trust-
ed. But  it  did  not-etop  at  opinions.  They  who,
believed  Christianity,  acted  upon  it  Many  made
it  the  express 'business  of  their  lives  to  publish  the
intelligence.  It  was  requited  of  those  who  aoV
mitted  that  intelligence,  to  change  forthwith  their
conduct'and  their  principles,  to  take  up~a  differ-
ent course  of  life,  to  .part  with  then  habits  and
gratifications,  and  begin  a.  new  set  of  rales,  and
system  of  behaviour.  The  apostles,  at  least,  Were
interested  not  to  sacrifice  their  ease,  their  fortunes,
and  their  lives,  for  an  idle  tale ;  multitudes  besides
them  were  induced,  by  the  name  tale,  to  encoun-
ter opposition,  danger,  and  Bufferings, „

If  it  be  said,  that  the  mere  promise  of  a  rotors
state  would  do  all  this ;  I  answer,  that  .the  mere
promise  of  a  future*  state,  without  any  evidence
to  give  credit  or  assurance  to  it.  would  Jo  nothing.
A  few  wandering  fishermen  talking  of  a  resurrec-
tion of  the  dead,  could  produce  no  effect  If*  it  be
farther,  said,. that  men  easily. believe  what  they
anxiously  desire;  I  again  answer  that,  in  my
opinion,  the  very  contrary  of  this  is  nearer-Co  the
truth.  Anxiety  of  desire,  earnestness4  of  expecta-
tion, the'vastness  of  an  event,  rather  cause  loan
to  disbelieve,  to  doubt,  to  dreoil  a- fallacy,  fo  dis-
trust, and  to  examine.  When  oor  Lord's  resur-
rection was  first  reported  to  the-aposdes,  they  did
not  believe;  we  are  told,  for  joy.  This  was  natu-
ral,' and  is  agreeable  to  experience.

VII.  We  have  laid  out  of  the  case*  those  ap,
counts  which  require  no  more  than  a- simple  as-
sent \_  and  we  new  also  lay  out  of  the  case  those
which  came  merely  in  Affirmance  of  opinions
already  formed.  This  last  circumstance  is  of  the
utmost  importance  to  notice  well.  It  has  long
been  observed,  that  Popish  miracles  happen  in


EVIDENCES  OF  CHRISTIANITY.


321


Popish  countries';  that  they  make  no  xxniverts:
which  proves  that  stories  are  accepted,  when  they
fall  in  with  principles  already  fixed,  with  the  pub-
lic sentiments,  or  with  the  sentiments  of  a  party
already  engaged  on  the  side  the  miracle  supports,
which  would  not  be  attempted  to  be  produced  in
the  face  of  enemies,  in  opposition  to  reigning
tenets  or  favourite  prejudices,  or  when,  if  they  be
believed,'  the  belief  must  draw  men  away  from'
their  preconceived  and  habitual' opinions,  from
their  modes  of  life  and  rules-  of  action.  In  the
former  case,  men  may  not  only  receive  a  miracu-
lous account,  but  may  both  act  and  suffer  on  the
side  and  in  the  cause,  which  the  miracle  supports,
yet  not  act  or  suffer  for  the  miracle,  but  in  pur-
suance of  a  prior  persuasion.  The  miracle,  like
any  other  argument  which  only  confirms  what
was  before  believed,  is  admitted  with  little  ex-
amination. In  the  moral  as  in  the  natural  world,
it  is  change  which  requires  a  cause.  Men  are
easily  fortified  in  their,  old  opinions,  driven  from
them  with  great  difficulty.  Now  how  does  this
apply  to  the  Christian  history  1  The  miracles,
there  recorded,  were  wrought  jn  the  midst  of  ene-
mies, under  a  government,  a  priesthood,  and  a
magBtracY,  decidedly  and  vehemently  adverse  to
them,  and  to  the  pretensions  which  they  support-
ed. They  were  Protestant  miracles  in  a  FoDish
country ;  they  were  Popish  miracles  in  the  midst
of  Protestants..  They  produced  a  change j  they
established  a  society  upon  the  spot,  adhering  to
the  faefief  of  them ;  they  made,  converts ;  and  those
who  were  converted  gave  up  to  the  testimony
their  most  fixed  opinions  and  most  favourite  pre-
judices. They  who  acted  and  suffered  in*  the
cause,  acted  and  suffered  for  the  miracles :  for
there  was  no  anterior  persuasion  to  induce  them,
no  prior  reverence,  prejudice,  or  partiality,  to  take
hold  of.  Jesus  hair  not  one  follower  when  he  set
up  his  claim.  His  miracles  gave  birth  to  his  sect.
No  part  of  this  description  belongs  to  the  ordinary
evidence  of  Heathen  or  Popish  miracles.  Even
moat  of  the  miracles  alleged  to  have  been  perform-
ed by  Christians,  in  the  second  and  third  century
of  its  era,  want  this  confirmation.  It  constitutes
indeed  a  line  of  partition  between  the  origin  and
the  pro0res*-of  Christianity.  Frauds  and  falla-
cies might  mix  themselves  with  the  progress,
which  could  not  possibly  take  place  in  the  com-
mencement of  the  religion ;  at  feast,  according  to
any  laws  of  human  conduct  that  we  are  acquaint-
ed with?  What  should  suggest  to  the  first  propa-
gators of  Christianity,  especially  to  fishermen,
tax-gatherers,  and  husbandmen,  such'  a  thought
aa  that  of  changing  the  religion  of  the  world ;
what  eould  bear  them  through  the  difficulties  in
which  the  attempt  engaged  them;  what  could
procure  any  degree  of  success  to  the  attempt ;  are
questions  winch  apply,  with  great  force,  to  the
setting  out  of  the  institution,  with  less,  to  every
future  stage  ofit.

To  hear  some  men  talk,  one  would  suppose  the
setting  up  of  a  religion  by  miracles  to  be  a  thing
ef  every  day's  experience ;  whereas  the  whole  cur-
rent ot  history  is  against  it.  Hath  any  founder
of  a  new  sect  amongst  Christians  pretended  to
nmucuktuspowers,  and  succeeded  by  his  preten-
sions 1  "Were  these  powers  claimed  or  exercised
by  the  founders  of.  the  sects  of  the  Waldenses
and  AlMgenses  1  Did  Wickliffe  in  England  pre-
tend to  iti  Did  Huts  or  Jerome  in  Bohemia'?
Did  Luther  in  Germany,  Zuinguus  in  Switaer-

as


land,  Calvin  in  France,or  any  of  the  reformers',
advance  this  plea  Tr*  The  French,  prophets,  in
the  beginning  of  the  present  century,  t  ventured
to  allege .  miraculous  evidence,  and  immediately
ruined  their  cause  by  their  temerity.  "  Concern-
ing the  religion  of  ancient  "Rome,  of  Turkey,
of  Siam,  of  China,  a  single  miracle  cannot  be
named,  that  was  ever  offered  as  a  test  of  any  of
those  religions  before  their  establishment"  t

We  may  add  to  what  has  been  observed  of  the
distinction  which  we  are  considering,  that,  where
miracles  are  alleged  merely  in  affirmance  of  a
prior  opinion,  they  who  believe  the  doctrine  may
sometimes  propagate  a  belief  of  the  miracles  which
they  do  not  themselves  entertain.  This  is  the
case  of  what  art  called  pious  frauds ;  but  it  is  a
case,  I  apprehend,  which  takes  place  solely  in
support  or  a  persuasion  already  established.  At
least  it  does  not  hold  of  the  apostolical  history.  If
the  apostles  did  not  believe  the  miracles,  they  did
not  believe  the  religion ;  and,  without  this  belief,
where  was  the  piety,  what  place  was  there  for  any
thing  which  could  bear  the  name  or  colour  of
piety,  in  publishing  and  attesting  miracles  in  its
behalf  1  If  it  be  said  that  any  promote  the  belief
of  revelation,  and  of  any  accounts  which  favour
that  belief,  because  they  think  them,  whether  well '
or  ill  founded,  of  public  and  political  utility;  I
answer,  that  if  a  character  exist,  which  can  with
less  justice  than  another  be  ascribed  ty  the  foun-
ders of  the  Christian  religion;it  is  that  of  politicians,
of  of  men  capable  of  entertaining  political  views.
The  truth  is,  that  there  is  no  assignable  character
which  will  account  for  the  conduct  of  the  apostles,
supposing  their  story  to  be  false.  If  "bad  men,
what  could  have  induced  them  to'  take  such  pains
to  promote  virtue  ?  If  good  men.  they  would  not
have  gone  about  the  country  witn  a  string  of  lies
in  their  mouths*  -

-In  appreciating  the  credit  of  any  miraculous  -
story,  these  are  distinctions  which  relate  to  the
evidence.  There  are  other  distinctions,  of  great
moment  in  the  question,  which  relate  to  the  mint*
cles  themselves.  Of  which  latter  kind  the  foh
lowing  ought  carefully  to  be  retained.

I.  It  is  not  necessary  to  admit  -as  a  miracle,
what  can  be  resolved  into  a  false  perception.  Of
this  nature  was  the  demon  of  Socrates ;  the  visions
of  Saint  Anthony,  and  of  many  others ;  the  vision
which  Lord  Herbert  of  Cherbury  describes  him-
self to  have  seen ;  Colonel  Gardner's  vision,  as  re-
lated in  his  life,  written  by  Dr.  Doddridge.  All
these  may  be  -accounted  for  by  a  momentary
insanity ;  tor  the  characteristic  symptom  of  human
madness  is  the  rising  up  in  the  mind  of  images
not  distinguishable  by  the  patient  from  impres-
sions upon  the  senses.§  The  cases,  however,  in
which  the. possibility  of  this  delusion  exists,  are
divided  from  the  cases  in  which  it  does  not  exist,
by  many,  and  those  not  obscure  marks.  They
are,  for  the  most  part;  cases  of  visions  or  voices.
The  object  is  hardly  ever  touched.  The  vision
submits  not  to  be  handled*.  One-  sense  does  not
confirm  another.  They  are  likewise  almost  al-
ways ^  cases  of  a  solitary  witness.  It  is  in  the
highest  degree  improbable,  and  I  know  not,  indeed,
whether  it  hath  ever  been  the  fact,  that  the  same
derangement  of  the  mental  organs  should  aciie


*  Campbell  on  Miracles,  p.  190.  ed.  1766.
t  Tbe  eighteenth.  \  Adams  on  Mir.  p*  75.

§  Batty  on  Lunacy.


9»


EVIDENCES  OF  CHRISTIANITY.


different  penon  at  the  nine  time;  a  derangement,
I  mean,  ao  much  the  mum,  aa  to  represent  to
their  imagination  the  aame  object*.  Lastly,  these
are  alwaya  caaea  of  momentary  miraclea;  by
which  term  I  mean  to  denote  miraclea,  of  which
the  whole  existence  ia  of  ehort  duration,  in  con-
tradistinction to  miraclea  which  are  attended  with
permanent  effect*.  The  appearance  of  a  spectre,
the  hearing  of  a  supernatural  sound,  ia  a  moment-
ary miracle.  The  sensible  proof  is  gone,  when
the  apparition  or  sound  ia  over.  But  if  a  person
born  Wind  be  restored  to  eight,  a  notorious  cripple
to  the  use  of  his  limbs,  or  a  dead  man  to  Kfe,  Lire
ia  a  permanent  effect  produced  by  supernatural
means.  '  The  change  indeed  waa  instantaneous,
bat  the  proof  continues.  The  subject  of  the  mira-
cle remains.  The  man  cured  or  restored  is  there :
his  former  condition  waa  known,  and  his  present
condition  may  be  examined.  This  can  by  no
possibility  be  resolved  into  fake  perception :  and
of  this  kind  are  by  far  the  greater  part  of  (he  m>
nicies  recorded  in  the  New  Testament.  When
Lazarus  was  raised  from  the  dead,  he  did  not
merely  move,  and  speak,  and  die  again ;  or  come
out  of  the  grave,  and  vanish  away.  He  returned
to  his  home  and  family,  and  there  continued ;  for
we  find  him,  some  tune  afterward  in  the  aame
town,  sitting  at  table-  with  Jesus  and  his  sisters ;
visited  by  great  multitudes  of  the  Jews,  aa  a  sub-
ject of  curiosity ;  giving  by  his  presence  so  much
uneasiness  to  the  Jewish  rulers,  aa  to  beget  in
(hem  a  design  of  destroying  him.  *  No  delusion
can  account  for  this.  The  French  prophets  in
England,  some  time  since,  gave  out  that  one  of
their  teachers,  would  come  to  life  again ;  but  their
enthusiasm  never  made  them  believe  that  they
actually  saw  him  alive.  The  blind  man,  whose
restoration  to  sight  at  Jerusalem  is  recorded  in  the
ninth  chapter  of  St.  John's  Gospel,  did  not  quit
the,  place  or  conceal  himself  from  inquiry.  On
$he  contrary,  he  was  forthcoming,  to  answer  the
call,  to  satisfy  the  scrutiny,  and  to  sustain  the
brow-beating  of  Christ's  angry  and  powerful
enemies.  When  the  cripple  at  the  gate  of  the
temple  waa  suddenly  cured  by  Peter,  t  he  did  not
immediately  relapse  into  his  former  lameness,  or
disappear  out  of  the  city ;  but  boldly  and  honestly
produced  himself  along  with  the  apostles,  when
they  were  brought  the  next  day  before  the  Jewish
council.?  Here,  though  the  miracle. waa  sudden,
the  proof  waa  permanent  The  lameness  had
been  notorious,  the  cure  continued.  This  there-
fore, could  not  be  the  effect  of  any  momentary  de-
lirium, either  in  the  subject  or  in  the  witnesses  of
the  transaction.  It  is  the  same  with  the  greatest
number  of  the  Scripture  miracles.  There  are
other  cases  of  a  mixed  nature,  in  which,  although
the  principal  miracle  be  momentary,  some  circum-
stance combined  with  it  ia  permanent.  Of  this
kind  is  the  history  of  St  Paul's  conversion.  §
The  sudden  light  and  sound,  the  vision  and  the
voice,  upon  the  road  to  Damascus,  were  moment-'
ary :  but  Paul's  blindness  for  three  days  in  conse-
quence of  what  had  happened ;  the  communica-
tion made  to  Ananias  in  another  placc^  and  by  a
vision  independent  of  the  former ;  Ananias  finding
out  Pau)  in  consequence  of  intelligence  so  receiv-
ed, and  finding  him  in  the  condition  described,
and  Paul's  recovery  of  his  sight  upon  Ananias's


iffr^***


t  Aets  Ui.  a
|1e.ix.


hying  his  hands  upon  him;  are


take  the  transaction,  and  the],
miracle  as  included  in  it,  entirely  out  of  the  ease
of  momentary  miraclea,  or  of  such  as  may  be  ac-
counted for  by  false  perceptions.  Exactly  the
same  thing  may  be  observed  of  Peterfs  vision  pre-
paratory to  the  call  of  Cornelius,  and  of  its  con-
nexion with  what  was  imparted  in  a  distant  place
to  Cornelius  himself,  ana  with  the  message  dis-
patched by  Comehua  to  Peter.  The  vision  might
be  a  dream;  the  message  could  not.  Either  com-
munication, taken  separately,  might  be  a  delusion ;
the  concurrence  of  the  two  waa  impossible  to  hap-
pen without  a  supernatural  cause.

Beside  the  risk  of  delusion  which  attaches  upon
momentary  miracles,  there  is  also  much  mora
roam  for  imposture.  The  account  cannot  be
examined  at  the  moment ;  and,  when  that  is  also
a  moment  of  hurry  and  confusion,  it  may  not  be
difficult  for  men  of  influence  to  gain  credit  to  any
story  which  they  may  wish  to  have  believed.  This
is  precisely  the  case  of  one  of  the  beat  attested  of
the  miracles  of  Old  Rome,  the  appearance  of  Cas-
tor and  Pollux  in  the  battle  fought  by  Posthumius
with  the  Latins  at  the  lake  Regillua.  There  is
no  doubt  but  that  Posthumius  after  the  battle,
spread  the  report  of  such  an  appearance.  No
person  could  deny  it  whilst  it  was  said  to  last  No
person,  perhaps,  had  any  inclination  to  dispute  it
afterward ;  or,  if  they  had,  could  aajr  with  poai-
tjvenees,  what  was  or  what  was  not  seen,  by  some
or  other  of  the  army,  in  the  dismay  and  amidst
the  tumult  of  a  battle.

In  assigning  false  perceptions  as  the  origin,  to
which  some  miraculous  accounts  may  be  referred,
I  have  not  mentioned  claims  to  inspiration,  illu-
minations, secret  notices  or  directions,  internal
sensations,  or  consciousnesses  of  being  acted  upon
by  spiritual  influences,  good  or  bad;  hecansa
these,  appealing  to  no  external  proof  however
convincing  they  may  be  to  the  persons  themselves,
form  no  part  of  what  can  be  accounted  miraculous
evidence.  Their  own  credibility  stands  upon
iheir  alliance  with  other  miraclea.  The  discus-
sion, therefore,  of  all  such  pretensions  may  be
omitted.

IL  It  is  not  necessary  to  bring  into  the.  compa-
rison what  may  be  called  tentative  miraclea ;  tnat
is,  where,  out  of  a  great  number  of  trials,  some
succeeded ;  And  in  the  accounts  of  which,  although
the  narrative  of  the- successful  cases  be  alone  pre-
served, and  that  of  the  unsuccessful  cases  sunk,
yet  enough  ia  stated  to  show  that  die  cases  pro-
duced are  only  a  few  out  of  many  in  which  the
aame  means  have  been  employed.  This  observa-
tion bears,  with  considerable  force,  upon  the
ancient  draciea  and  auguries,  in  which  a  single
coincidence  of  Che  event  witn  the  prediction  ia
talked  of  and  magnified,  whilst  failures  are  for-
gotten, or  suppressed,  or  accounted  foe  It  ia  also
applicable  to  the  cures  wrought  by  relics,  and  at
the  tombs  of  saints.  The  boasted  efficacy  of  the
king's  touch,  upon  which  Mr.  Hume  lays  some
stress,  falls  under  the  same  description.  Nothing
is  alleged  concerning  it,  which  ia  not  alleged  of
various  nostrums,  namely,  out  of  many  thousands
who  have  used  them,  certified  proofs  of  a  few  who
have  recovered  after  them.  No  solution  of  this
sort  is  applicable  to  the  miracles  of  the  GospeL
There  is  nothing  in  the  narrative,  which  can
induce,  or  even  allow  us  to  believe,  that  Christ
attempted  cures  in  many  instances,  andsnoceedud


EVIDENCES  OP  CHRISTIANITY.


OVttlV  c

teach  i


ana  few; « that  he  ewjrrnnde  the  attempt  m  vain
He  did  not  profess  to  heal  every  where  all  that
were  sick;  on  the  contrary,  he  told  the  Jews,
evidently  meaning  to  represent  his  own  case,  that,
"although  many  widowa  were  in  Israel  in  the
days  of  Ettas,  when  the  heaven  was  shut  up  three
yean  and  six  months,  when  great  famine  was
throughout  sll  the  land,  yemnto  none  of  them
was  Ettas  sent,  save  unto  Sarepta,  a -city  of  Sidon,
nnto  a,  woman  that  was  a  widow:"  and  that
"  many  lepers  were  in  Israel  in  the  time  of  Eli-
ssqs  the  prophet,  and  none  of  them  was  cleansed
saving  Naaman  the  Syrian."*  By  which  exam-
ples he  gave  them  to  understand,  that  it  was  not
the  nature  of  a  divine  interposition,  or  necessary
to  its  purpose,  to  be  general ;  still  less  to  answer
r  challenge  that  might  be  made,  which  would
ten  to  put  their  nuth'upon  these  experi-
Christ  never  pronounced  the  word,  but
the  enact  fcUowedf  It  was  not  a  thousand  sick
that  received  hi*  benediction,  and  a  few  that  were
benefited ;  a  single  paralytic  is  let  down  in  his
bed  at  JesWs  feet,  in  the  midst  of  a  surrounding
multitude ;  Jesus  bid  him  walk,  and  he  did  soJi
▲  man  with  a  withered  hand  is  in  the  synagogue ;
Jesus  bid  him  stretch  forth  his  hand,  in  the  pre-
sence of  the  assembly,  and  it  was  "  restored  whole
like  the  other."!  There  was  nothing  tentative  in
these  cures  j.  nothing  that  ca^beexplained.by  the
power  of  accident

We  may  observe  also,  that  many  of  the  cures
which  Christ  wrought,  such  as  that  of  a  person
bond  from  his  birth,  also  many  miracles  beside
cures,  as  raising  the  dead,  walking  upon  the  sea.
feeding  a  great  multitude  with  a  lew  loaves  ana
hahee,  are  of  a  nature  which  does  not  in  any  wise
admit  of  the  supposition  of  a  fortunate  experi-


III.  We  may  dismiss  from  (he  question  all  ac-
counts in  which,  allowing  the  phenomenon  to%e
real,  the  feet  to  be  true,  it  still  remains  doubtful
whether  a  miracle  were  wrought.  This  is  the
case  with  the  ancient  history  of  what  is  called  the
thtmderinff  legion,  of  the  extraordinary  circum-
stances which  obstructed  the  rebuilding  of  the
tesnpte  at  Jerusalem  by  Julian,  the  circling  of  the
names  and  fragrant  smell  at  the  martyrdom  of
Porycarp,  the  sudden  shower  that  extinguished
the  fire  into  which  the  Scriptures  were  thrown  in
the  Diocletian  persecution ;  Constantine's  dream ;
hk  inscribing  in  consequence  of  it  the  cross  upon
hk  standard  and  the  shields  of  his  soldiers;  his
victory,  and  the  escape  of  the  standard-bearer ;
perhaps  also  the  imagined  appearance  of  the  cross
m  the  heavens,  though  this  last  circumstance  is
wry  deficient  in  historical  evidence.  It  is  also
ihe  case  with  the  modern  annua]  exhibition  of  the
i  of  the  blood  of  St.  Januarius  at  Na-


•  Lake  far.  95.

f  One.  and  only  oae,  instance  may  be  produced  in
watch  the  4i*4p<«t  of  Christ  do  seem  to  have  attempted
a  aire,  and  not  to  have  been  able  to  perform  it.  The
story  hi  very  ingenuously  related  tip.  three  of  the  evan-
gelists I  The  patient  was  afterward  healed  by  Christ
aimsnlr;  and  the  whole  transaction  seems  to  have  been
intended,  as  it  was  well  suited,  to  display  the  superiori-
ty of  Christ  above  aU  who  performed  miracles  in  his
name,  a  distinction  which,  during  his  presence  in  the
world.  It  aaigkt  be  necessary  to  inculcate  by  some  such


1  Mark  U.3.  §  Matt  zii.  10.

|lfatt.xvU.U. Mark  ix.  14. Luke  ii.  33.


pies.  .  It  is  a  doubt  likewise,  which  ought  to  be
excluded  by  very  special  circumstances,  from  these
narratives  which  relate  to  the  supernatural jcure
of  hypochondriacal  and  nervous  complaints,  and
of  all  diseases  which  are  much  affected  by  the
imagination.  The  miracles  of  the  second  and
third  century  are,  •usually,  healing  the  aick>  and
casting  out  evil  spirits,  miracles  in  winch  .there  is
room  for  some  error  and  deception.  We  hear
nothing  of  causing  the -blind  to  see,  the  lame  to


walk,  the  deaf  to  heat,  the  lepers  to  be
There  are  also  instances  in  Christian  writers  of
reputed  miracles,  which  were  natural  operations,
though  not  known  to  be  such  at  the  time ;  as  that
of  articulate  speech  after  the  loss  of  a  great  part
of  the  tongue.

IV.  To  the  same  head  of  objection  nearly,  may
also  be  referred  accounts,  in  which  the  variation
of  a  small  circumstance  may  have-  .transformed
some  extraordinary  appearance,  or  seme  critical
coincidence  of  events,  into  a  miracle ;  stories,,  in  a
word,  which  may  be  resolved  into  exaggeration.
The  miracles^  the  Gospel  can  by  no  possibility
be  explained  away  in  this  manner.  Total  fiction
will  account  for  any  thing ;  but  no  stretch  of  ex-
aggeration that  has  any  parallel  in  other  histories,
no  force  of  fancy  upon  real  circumstances,  eoula
produce  the  narratives  which  we  now  have.  The
feeding  of  the  five  thousand  with  a  few  loaves  and
fishes  surpasses  all  bounds  of-exaggeration:  The
raising  of  Lazarus,  of  the  widow's  sen  at  Nam,- as
well  as  many  of  the  cures  which  Christ  wrought,
come  not  within  the  compass  of  misrepresentation.
I  mean,  that  it  is  impossible  to  assign  any  position
of  circumstances  however  peculiar,  any  Accidental
effects  however  extraordinary,  any  natural  singu-
larity, which  could  supply  an  origin  or  foundation
to  these  accounts.

Having  thus  enumerated  several  exceptions,
which  may  justly  be  taken  to  relations  of  miracles,
it  is  necessary  when  we  read  the  Scriptures,  to
bear  in  our  minds  this  general' remark  5  that,  al-
though there  be  miracles  recorded  in  the  New
Testament,  which  fell  within  some  or  other  of
the  exceptions  here  assigned,  yet  that  they  are
united  with  others,  to  which  none  of  the  same  ex-
ceptions extend,  and  that  their  credibility  stands
upon  this  union.  Thus  the  visions  and  revela-
tions which  Saint  Paul  asserts  to  have  been  iai-
parted  to  him,  may  not,- in  their  separate  evidence,
be  distinguishable  from  the  visions  and  revelations
which  many  others  have  alleged.  But  here  is
the  difference.  Saint  Paul's  pretensions  were  at*
tested  by  external  miracles  wrought  by  himself;
and  by  miracles  wrought  in  the  cause  to  which
these  visions  relate ;  or,  to  speak  more  properly,
the  same  historical  authority  which  informs  us  of
one,  informs  us  of  the  other.  This  is  not  ordina-
rily true  of  the  visions  of  enthusiasts,  or  even  of
the  accounts  in  which  they  are  contained.  Again,
some  of  Christ's  own  miracles  were  momentary  ; .
as  the  transfiguration,  the  appearance  and  voice
from  Heaven  at  his  baptism,  a  voice  frem  the
clouds  on  one  occasion  afterward,  (John  xii.  28,)
and  some  others.  It  is  not  denied,  .that  the  dis-
tinction which  we  have  proposed  concerning  mi-
racles of  this  species,  applies,  in  diminution  of  the
force  of  the  evidence,  as  much  to  these  instances
as  to  others.  Butthiais  the  case,  not  with  all  the


'Jortht's


,  vol.  ii.*  p.  51.


WA


EVIDENCES  OF  CHRISTIANITY.


miracles  ascribed  to  Christ,  nor  with  the  greatest
part,  nor  with  many.  Whatever  force  therefose
there  may  be  in  the  objection,  we  have  numerous
miracle*  which  are  free  from  it ;  and  even  these, to
which  it  is  applicable,  are  little  affected  by  it  in
their  credit,  because  there  are  few  who,  admitting
the  rest,  will  reject  them.  If  there  be  miracles  of
the  New  Testament,  which  come  within  any  of
the  other  heads  into  which  we  have  distributed
the  objections,  the  same  remark  must.be  repeated.
And  this  is  one  way,  in  which  the  unexampled
number  and  variety  of  the  miracles  ascribed  to
Christ  strengthens  the  credibility  -of  Chris-
tianity. For  it  precludes  any  solution,  or  con-
jecture About  a  solution,  which  imagination,  or
even^ which  experience,  might  suggest  concern-
ing some  particular  miracles,  if  considered  in-
dependently of  others.  The  miracles  of  Christ
were  of  various  kinds,*  and  performed  in -great'
varieties  of  situation,  form,  and  manner;  at  Jeru-
salem, the  metropolis  of  the  Jewish  nation  and
religion ;  in  different  parts  of  Judea  and  Galilee ;
in  cities  «nd  villages;  in  synagogues,  in  private
houses;  in. the  street,  in  highways;  with  pre-
paration, as  in  the  case  of  Lazarus ;  by  accident,
as  in  the  ease  of  the  widow's  son  of  Nain  r  when
attended  by  multitudes,  and- when  alone  with  the
patient ;  m  the  midst  of  his  disciples,  and  in  the
presence  of  his  enemies;  with  the  common  people
around  him,  and  before  Scribes  and  Pharisees,  and
mien  of  the  synagogues.

1  apprehend  that,  when  we  remove  from  the
comparison,  the  cases  which  are  fairly  disposed
of  by  the  observations  that  have  been  stated,  many
cases  will  not  remain.  To  those  which  do  remain,
we  apply  this  final  distinction ;  "  that  there  is  not
amtbractory  evidence,  that  persons,  pretending  to
be  original  witnesses  of  the  miracles,'  passed  their
lives  in  labours,  dangers,  and  sufferings,  volunta-
rily undertaken  and  undergone  in  attestation  of  the
accounts  .which  they  delivered,  and  properly  in
consequence  of  their  belief  of  the  truth  of  those
accounts."


CHAPTER  II.

But  they,  with  whom  we  argue,  have  undoubt-
edly a  right  to  select  -their  own  examples.  The
instances  with  which  Mr.  Hume  has  chosen  to
confront  the  miracles  of  the  New  Testament,  and
which,  therefore,  we  are  entitled  -to  regard  as  the
strongest  which  the  history  of.  the  world  could
supply  to  the  inquiries  of  a  very  acute  and  learned
adversary,  are  the  three  following :

I.  The  cure  of  a  blind  and  of  a  lame  man  of
Alexandria,  by  the  emperor  Vespasian,  as  related
by  Tacitus ;

II.  The  restoration  of  the  limb  of  an  attendant
in  a  Spanish  church,  as  told  by  cardinal  de  Retz ;
and,  *


*  Not  only  healing  every  specie*  of  disease,  but  turn-
lag  water  into  wine  (John  iifc  feeding  multitudes  with
a  few  loaves  and  fishes  (Matt.  xiv.  15:  Mark  vi.  35;
*  Luke  ix.  12 ;  John  vi.  5^;  walking  on  the  aea  (Matt.
xiv.  35);  calming  a  norm  (Matt.  viii.  25 ;  Luke  viii.  24);
a  celestial  voice  at  bis  baptism,  and  miraculous  appear-
ance (Matt.  iii.  16 ;  afterward  John  xii.  28);  his  trans-
figuration (Matt.  xvii.  1—8;  Mark  ix.  2;  Luke  ix.  28;
VFefer  i.  16, 17);  raising  the  dead  in  three  distinct  in-
stances (Matt.  ix.  18;  Mark  v.  22;  Luke  viii.  41;  Luke
vii.  14;  John  xi.)  '


III.  The  cures  said  to  be  performed  si  the  tomb
of  the  abbe  Paris,  in  the  early  part  of  the  present
century.'

I.  The  narrative  of  Tacitus  is  delivered  in  these
terms :  "  One  of  the  common  people  of  Alexandria,
known  to  be  disesJed  in  his  eyes,  by  the 'admoni-
tion of  the  god  Serapis,  whom  that  superstitious
nation  worship  above  all  other  gods/  prostrated
himself  before  the  emperor,  earnestly  imploring
from  him  a  remedy  for  his  blindness,  and  entreat-
ing that  he  would' deign  to -anoint  with  his  spittle
bis  cheeks  and  the  balls  of  his  eyes.  Another,
diseased  in  his  hand,  requeued,  by  the  admonition
of  the  same  god,  that  he  might  be  touched  by  the
foot  of  the  emperor.  Vespasian  at  first  derided
and  despised  their  application;  afterward,  when
they  continued  to  urge  their  petitions,  he  somcv
times  appeared  to  dread  the  imputation  of  vanity  f
at  other  times,  by  the  earnest  supplication  of  the
patients,  and  the  persuasion  of  his  flatterers,  to  be
induced  to  hope  tor  success.  At  length  he  com-
manded an  inquiry  to  be  made  by  the  physicians,
whether  such  a  blindness  and  debility  were  vin-
cible by  human  aid.  The  report  of  the  physician*
contained  various  points ;  that  in  the  one  the
power  of  vision  was  not  destroyed,  but  would  re-
turn if  the  obstacles  were  removed;  that  in  the
other,  the  diseased  joints  might  be  restored  if  a
healing  power  were  applied ;  that  it  was,  perhaps,
agreeable  to  the  gods  to  do  this ;  that  the  emperor
was  elected  by  £  vine  assistance;  lastly,  that  the
credit  of  the  success  would  be  the  emperor's,  the
ridicule  of  the  disappointment  would  mil  upon  the
patients.  Vespasian,  -believing  that  every  thing
was  in  the  power  of  his  fortune,  and  that  nothing
was  any  longer  incredible,  whilst  the  multitude,
which  stood  by,  eagerly  expected  the  event,  with
a  countenance  expressive  of  joy,  executed  what
he  was  desired  to  do.  Immediately  the  hand  was
restored  to  i{s  use,  and  tight  returned  to  the  blind
man.  *  They  who  were  present  "relate  both  these
cures,  even  at  this  time,  when  there  is  nothing- to
be  gained  by  lying."*

Now,  though  Tacitus  wrote  this  account  twen-
ty-seven years  afte?  the  miracle  is  said  to  have
been  performed,  and  wrote  at  Rome  of  what  pass-
ed at  Alexandria,  and  wrote  also  from  report :  and
although  it  does  not  appear  that  he  had  examined
the  story,  or  that  he  believed  it  (but  rather  the
contrary,)  yet  I  think  his  testimony  sufficient  tr>

rrove  that  such  a  transaction  took  place:  by  which
mean,  that  the  two  men  in  question  did  apply  to
Vespasian ;  that  Vespasian  did  touch  the  diseased
in  the  manner  related :  and  that  a  cure  was  re-
ported to  have  followed  the,  operation.  But  the
aflair  labours  under  a -strong  and  just  suspicion,
that  the  whole  of  it  was  a  concerted  imposture
brought  about  by  collusion  between  the  patients,
the  physician,  and  the  emperor.  This  solution  is
probable,  because-there  was  every  thing  to  suggest,
and  every  thing  to  facilitate,  such  a  schemed  The
miracle  was  calculated  to  confer  honour  upon  the
emperor,  and  upon  the  god  Serapis.  It  was
achieved  in  the  midst  of  the  emperor's  flatterers
and  followers;  in  a  city,  and  amongst  a  populace,
beforehand  devoted  to  his  interest,  and  to  the  wor-
ship of  the  god ;  where  it  would  have  been  treason
and  blasphemy  together,  to  have  contradicted  the
fame  of  the  cure,  or  evejn  to  have  questioned  iU
And  what  is  very  observable  in  the  account  is,  that


•  Tacit  Hist  lib.  iv.  *


EVIDENCES  OP  cmuSTIANlTY.


the  report  of  the  physician*  h  just  such  a  report
as  would  have  been  made  of  a  case,  in  which  no
external  marks  of  the  disease  existed,  and  which,
consequently,  was  capable  of  being  easily  coun-
terfeited, viz.  that  in  the  first  of  the  patients  the
organs  of  vision,  were  not  destroyed,  that  the
weakness  of  the  second  was  in  his  joints.  The
.strongest  circumstance  in  Tacitus's  narration  is,
that  the  first  patient  was  "  notus  tabe  oculorum,"
remarked  or  notorious  for  the  disease  in  his  eyes.
But  this  was  a  circumstance  which  ought  have
frond,  its  way  into  the  story  in  its  progress  from
a  distant  country,  and  during  an  interval  of  thirty
years;  or  it  might  be  true  that  the  malady  of  the
•yea  was  notorious^  yet  that  the  nature  and  degree
A  the  disease  had  never  been  ascertained ;  a  case
by  no  means  uncommon*  The  emperor's  reserve
was  easily  affected ;  or  it  is  possible  he  might  not
be  in  the  secret  There  does  not  seem  to  be  much
weight  in  the  observation  of  Tacitus,  that  they
who  were  present,  continued  even  then  to  relate
the  story  when  there  was  nothing  to  be  gained  by
the  he.  It  only  proves  mat  those  who  had  told
the  story  for  many  yean  persisted  in  it'  The  state
of  mind  of  the  witnesses  and  spectators  at  the
Mats,  is  the  point  to  be  attended  to.  Still  less  is
there  of  pertinency  in  Mr.  Hume's  eulogium  on
the  cautious  and  penetrating  genius  of  the  histo-
rian; for  it  does  not  appear  that  the  historian  be-
hoved it  The  terms  in  which;  he  speaks  of
Serapis,  the  deity  to  whose  interposition  the  mi-
racle was  attributed,  scarcely  suffer  ns  to  suppose
that  Tacitus  thought  the  miracle  to  be  real:  "by
the  admonition  of  the  jrod  Serapis,  whom  that
superstitious  nation  (dedsta  superstitioiiibus  gens)
worship  above  aD  other  gods."  To  have  brought
this  supposed  mirade  within  the  limits  of  compa-
rison with  the  miracles  of  Christ,  it  ought  to  have
appeared,  thai  a  Demon  of  a  low'  and  private  sta-
tion, in  the  midst  of  enemies,  with  the  whole
power  of  the  country  opposing,  him,  with  every
on*  around  him  prejudiced  or  interested  against
his  claims  and  character,  pretended  to.  perform
these  cures,  and  required  the  spectators,  upon  the
stsength  of  what  they  saw.  to  give  up  their  firm-
est hopes  and  opinions,  and  follow  him  through  a
life  of  trial  and  danger;  that  many  were  so  moved
as  to  obey  his  call,  at  the  expense  both  of  every
notion  in  which  they  had  been  brought  up,  and
ef their  ease,  safety,  and  reputation ;  and  that  by
these  beginnings,  a  change  was  produced  in  the
world,  the  effects  of  which  remain  to  this  day :  a
case,  both  mite  dreumstances  and  consequences,
iwy  unlike  any  thing  we  find  in  Tacitus's  rela-
tion. ^

II.  The  story  taken  from  the  ^iemoirs  of  Car-
dinal do  Retx;  which  is  the  second  example  al-
leged by  Mr.  Hume,  is  this:  "  In  the  church  of
Saragassa  in  Spain, the  canons  showed  mea  man
whose  business  it  wasio  light  the  lamps;  telling
me  that  he  had  been  several  years  at  the  gate  with
one  leg  only. Tsaw  him  with  two."*

It  is  stated  by  Mr.  Hume,  that  the  cardinal,
who  relates  this  story,  did  not  believe  it:  and  it  no
where  appears,  that  he  either  examined  the  limb,
or  asked  the  patient,  or  indeed  any  one.  a  single
question  about  the  matter.  An  artificial  leg,
wrought  with  art,  would  be  sufficient,  in  a  place
where  no  such  contrivance  had  ever  before  Deen
laiaid  of,  to  give  origin  and  currency  to  the  report


•Liv.iv.A.D.lttt


The  ecclesiastics  of  the  place  would,  it  is  probable,
favour  the  story,  Inasmuch  as  it  advanced  the
honour  of  their  image  and  church.  And  if  they
patronised  it,  no  other  person  at  Sangossa.  in  the
middle  of  the  last  century,  would  care  to  dispute
it  The  story  likewise  coincided,  not  less  with
the  wishes  and -preconceptions  of  the  people v  than
with  the  interests  of  t^eir  ecclesiastical  rulers:  so
that  there  was  prejudice-backed  by  authority,  and
both  operating  upon  extreme  ignorance,  to  account
for  the  success  of  the  imposture.  If,  as  I  have
suggested,  the  contrivance  of  an  artificial  limb  was
then  new,  it  would  not  occur  to  the  cardinal  him-
self to  suspect  it  ^especially  under  the  carelessness
of  mind  with  which  he  heard  the  tale,  and  the
little  inclination  he  -felt  to  scrutinize  or  expose  its
fallacy.  ' •  - .

III.  The  miracles  related  to  have  been  wrought
at  the  tomb  of  the  abbe  Paris,  admit  in  generafof
this  solution.  The  patients  who  frequented  the
tomb  were  so  affected  by  their  devotion,  their  ex-
pectation, the  place,  the  solemnity,  and,  .above  all,
by  the  sympathy. of  the  surrounding  multitude,
that  many  of  them  were  thrown  into  violent  con-
vulsion* which  convulsions,  in  certain  instances,
produced  a  removal  of  disorders  depending  upon
obstruction,  We  shall,  at  this  day,  have  the  .less
difficulty  in  admitting  the  above  account,  because
it  is  the  very  same-thing  aa  hath  lately  been  ex-
perienced in  the  operations  of  animal  magnetism;
and  the  report  of  the  French  physicians  upon  that
mysterious  remedy  is  very  applicable  to  the  pre-
sent consideration,  vix.  that  the  pretenders  to  the
art,  by  working  upon  the  imaginations  of  their
patients,  were  frequently  able  to  produce  convul-
tis;  thatc


convulsions  so  produced,  are  amongst
the  most  powerful,  but,  at  the  same  time,  most
uncertain  and 'unmanageable  application*  to  the
human  frame  which  can  be  employed.

Circumstances,  which  indicate  this  explication
in  the  case  of  the  Parisian  miracles,  are  the  &l»


1.  They  were  tentative.  Out  of  many  thou-
sand sick,  infirm,  and  diseased  persons,  who  re-
sorted to  the  tomb,  the  professed  history  of  the
mirades  contains  only  nine  cures.

2.  The  convulsions  at  the  tomb  are  admitted. ,

3.  The  diseases  were,  for  the  most  part,  of  that
sort  which  depends  upon  inaction  and  obstruction,
as  dropsies,  palsies,  and  some  tumours.

4.  The  cures  were  gradual ;  some  patients  at-
tending many  days,  some  several  weeks,  and  some
severaTmontns.  '

5.  The  cures  were  many  of  them  incomplete.

6.  Others  were  temporary.*

So  that  all  the  wonder  we  are  called  upon  to
account  for,  is,  that,  out  of  an  almost  innumerable
multitude  which  resorted  to  the  tomb  for  the  cure
of  theircomplaints,  and  many  of  whom  were  there
agitated  by  strong  convulsions,  a  very  small  pro-
portion experienced  a  beneficial  change  in  their
constitution,  especially  in  the  action  of  the  nerves
and  glands.

Some  of  the  cases  alleged,  do  not  require  that
we  should  have-recourse  to  this  sdutipn.  The  first
case  in  the  catalogue  is  scarcely  distinguishable
from  the  progress  of  a  natural  recovery.  It  was
that  of  a  young  man,  who  laboured  under  an  in-
flammation of  one  eye,  and  had  lost  the  sight  of  the


•  The  reader  will  find  these  particular!  verified  in  the
detail,  by  the  accurate  inquiries  of  the  present  bishop
of  Baram,  in  bis  Criterion  of  Miracles,  p.  IB,  Jtc


98


EVIDENCES  OF  CHRISTIANITY.


other.  The  inflamed  eye  was  reneved,  but  Che
blindness  of  the  other  remained.  The  inflamma-
tion had  before  been  abated  by  medicine';  and  the
young  man,  at  the  time  of  his  attendance  at  the
Comb)  was  using  a  lotion  of  laudanum  And,
what  is  a  etBl  more  material  part  of  the  case,  the
ioflammation,  after  aome  interval  returned.  An-
other case  was  that  of  a  young  man  who  had  lost
his  sight  by  the  puncture  of  ato-awi,  and  the  dis-
charge of  the  anueous  humour  through  the  wound.
The  sight,  which  had  been  gradually  returning,
was  much  improved  during  his  visit  to  the  tomb,
that  is,  probably,  in  the  same  degree  in  which  the
discharged  humour  was  replaced  by  fresh  secre-
tions. And  it  is  observably  that  these  two  are
the  only  eases  which,  from  their  nature,  should
seem  unlikely  to  fee  affected  by  convulsions.

In  one  material  respect  I  allow  that  the  Parisian
miracles  were  different  from  those  related  by  Ta-
citus, and  from  the  Spanish  miracle  of  the  cardi-
nal de  Rets.  They  had  not,  like  them,  all-  the
power  and  all  the  prejudice  of  the  country  on  their
side  to  begin  with.  They  were  alleged  by  one
'  party  against  another,  by  the  JansemW  against
the' Jesuits.  These  were  of  course  opposed  and
examined  by  their  adversaries.  The  consequence
of  which  examination  was,  that  many  falsehoods
were  detected,  that  with  something  really  extra-
ordinary much  fraud  appeared  to  be  mixed.  And
if  some  of  the  cases  upon  which  designed  misre-
presentation could  not  be  charged,  were  not  at  the
time  satisfactorily  accounted  for,  it  was  because
the  efficacy  of  strong  spasmodic  affections  was  not
then  sufficiently  known.  Finally,  the  cause  of
Jansenism,  did  not  rise  by  the  miracles,  but  sunk,
although  tne  miracles  had  the  anterior  persuasion
of  all  the  numerous  adherents  of  that  cause  to  set
out  with.

These,  let  us  remember,  are  the  strongest  ex-
amples, which  the  history  of  ages  supplies.  In
none  ef  them  was  the  miracle  unequivocal ;  by
none  of  them,  were  established  prejudices  and
persuasions  overthrown ;  of  none  of  them,  .did  the
credit  make  its  way,  in  opposition  to  authority
and  power;  by  none  of  them,  were  many  induced
to  commit  themselves,  and  that  in  contradiction  to
prior  opinions,  to  a  hfe  of  mortinemtipn,  danger,
and  sufferings ;  none  were  called  upon  to  attest
them,  at  the  expense  of  their  fortunes  and  safety.*


•  lit  may  be  thought  that  the  historian  of  the  Parisian
miracles,  M.  Montgeron,  forms  an  exception  to  this  last
assertion.  He  presented  his  book  (with  a  suspicion,  as
it  shooiitseem.  of  the  danger  of  what  he  was  doing)  to
the  king';  and  was  shortly  afterward  committed  to


the  king;  ai
prison,  from
eles  been  un


_  i  which  he  never  csme  out.  Had  the  mica-
unequivocal,  and  had  M.  Montgeron  been
originally  convinced  by  them,  I  should  have  allowed
this  exception.  'It  would  have  stood,  I  think,  ajone,  in
the  argument  of  our  adversaries.  But  beside  what  has
been  observed  of  the  dutrious  nature  of  the  miracles,  the
account  which  M.  Montgeron  has  himself  leA  of  his
conversion,  shows  both  the  state  of  his  mind,  and  that
Am  portuaobon  wos-  not  built  upon  oxtomal  miracles.  —
*'  Scarcely  had  tie  entered  the  churchyard,  when  be  was
struck  (he  tells  us)  with  awe  and  reverence,  having
never  before  heard  prayers  pronounced  with  so  much


i  transport  as  he  observed  amongst  the  suppli
cants  at  the  tomb.  Upon  this,  throwing  himself  on  his
knees,  resting  bis  elbows  on  the  tombstone,  and  cover-
ing bis  face  with'  his  hands,  he  spake  the  following
prayer :— O  thou,  *f  waste  imtereosoton  so  msny  miraeloo
«r*  omit  to  boporformo*\  if  it  bo  tmo  that «  port  oftkoo
ourvivoth  the  gruoo,  ond  that  thou  hut  infuenes  with  tho
JUmdghtf,  hoaopitw  on  tho  dmrkmooo  of  »y  undertUni-
4*#,  mi  through  Ms  more*  ostein  tho  romovul  of  it."
Having  pray**  thus,  «fmany  thoughts  (aa  he  saitbj


PABT1L


CHAPTER  I.


Isaiah  til  13  hii.  «  Behold,  my  Servant  shall
deal  prudently;  he  shall  be  exalted  and  extolled,
and  be  very  high.  As  many  were  astonished  at
thee  (his  visage  was  so  marred  more  than  any
man,  and  his  form  more  than  the  sons  of  men);
so  shall  he  sprinkle  many  nations;  tbe^kmgs  shall
shut  their  mouths  at  him:  for  that  which  Bad  not
been  told  them,  shall  they  see;  and  that  which
they  had  not  beard,  shall  they  consider.-- Who
halh  behoved  our  report  1  and  to  whom  is  the  arpi
of  the  Lord  revealed'?  For  he  shall  grow  .op  be-
fore him  as  a  tender  plant,  and  as  a  root  out  of  a
dry  ground :  he  hath  no  form  nor-  comeliness;
and  when  we  shall  see  htm,  there  is  raheauty
that  we  should  desire  him.  He  is  despised  and
rejected  of  men,  a  man  of  sorrows  and  acquainted
with  grief:  and  we  bid,  as  it  were,  our  faces  from
him;  ne  was i  despised,  and  we  esteemed  him  not
Surely  he  hath  borne  our  griefs,  and  carried  our
sorrows:  yet  we  did  esteem  him  stricken, smitten
of  God  and  afflicted.  But  he  was  wounded  for
our  transgressions,  he  was  bruised  for  our  iniqui-
ties :  the  chastisement  of  our  peace  was  upon
him;  and  with  his  stripes  we  are  healed.  All  wo
tike  sheep  have  gone  astray;


every  one"  to  his  own  way ;  and  tho  Lord  hath
laid  on  him  the  iniquity  of  us  all  He  was  op-
pressed,  and  he  was  afflicted,  yet  he  opened  not  hit
mouth:  he  is  brought  aa o lamb  to  the  slaughter,
and  aa  a  sheep  before  her  shearers  is  dumb,  so  ho
opened  not  his  mouth.'  He  was  taken  from  prison
and  from  judgment ;  and  who  shall  declare  has
generation  1  for  he  was  cut  off  out  of  tho  land  of
the  firing;  for  the  tranagreasion  of  my  people  wan
he  stricken.  And  he  made  his  grave  with  the
wicked,  and  with  the  rich  in  Ins  death';  because
he  had  done  no  violence,  neither  was  any  deceit
in  Ins  mouth.  Yet  it  pleased  the  Lord  to  bruise
him;  he  hath  put  him  to  grief  W>en  thoushoJt
make  his  soul  an  offering  for  sin,  he  shall  see  hie
seed,  be  shall  prolong  his  days,  and  the  pleasure
of  the  Lord  shall  prosper  in  his  hand.  He  shall
seeoft^etravauofhksoul,sJidshaJlbeBatianed:
by  his  knowledge  shall  my  righteous  servant  jus-
tify many;  for  he  shall  bear  their  iniquities.
Therefore  will  I  divide  him  a  portion  wkh  the
great,  and  he  shall  divide  the  spoil  with  the  strong;
because  he  hath  poured  out  bis  soul  unto  death :
and  he  was  numbered  with  the  transgressors,  and
he  bare  the  sin  of  many,  and  made  mtercessien
for  tho  transgressors."


began  to  open  themselves  to  biamind ;  and  so  profound
was  his  attention,  that  he  continued  on  his  knees  four
hours,  not  in  the  least  disturbed  by  the  vast  crowd  of
surrounding  supplicants.  During  this  time,  all  the
arguments  which  be  ever  heard  or  read  in  favour  of
Christianity,  occurred  to  him  with  so.  much  force,  and
seemed  so  strong  and  convincing,  thai  he  went  borne
fully  satisfied  with  the  truth  of  religion  in  general,  and


of  the  holiness  and  power  of  that  person,  who,
supposed)  had  engaged  the  Divine  Goodness  to  ei
en  his  iinderstandiag  so  suesenly."— Douglas'sC


Mir.  p.  S14.


enligfct.
'sCrif.  oaf


EVIDENCES  OP  CHRISTIANITY.


an


tody  oi
fctber

Withim


Them  words  are  extant  In  a  book,  purporting
to  contain  the  pradknona  of  a  writer  who  lived
•even  centuries  before  the-Chrietian  era.

That  material  part  of  every  argument  from
prophecy,  namely,  that  the  words  alleged  were
actually  spoken  or  written  before  the  &ct  to  which
they  are  applied  took  place,  or  could  by  any.  natu-
ral mean*  be  foreseen  is*  in  the  present  instance,
incontestable.  The  record  conies  oat  of  the  cus-
tody of  adversaries.  The  Jews,  as  an  ancient
well  observed,  are  our  librarians. The

Mage  is  in  their  copies,  as  well  as  in  ours.

ith  many  attempts  to  explain  it  away,  none  has
ever  been  made  by  them  to  discredit  its  authenti-
city.

And,  what  adds  to  the'  force  of  the  quotation  is,
that  it  is  taken  from  a  writing  declaredly  pro-,
phetic;  a  writing,  professing  to  describe  such
future  transactions  and  changes  in  the  world,  as
were  connected  with  the  fete  and  interests  of  the
Jewish  nation.  It  is  not  a  passage  in  an  histori-
cal or  devotional  composition,  which,  because  it
turn?  out  to  be  applicable  to  some  future  -events,
or  to  some  future  situation  of  affairs,  is  presumed
to  have  been  oracular.  The  words  of  Isaiah  were
delivered  by  him-  in  a  prophetic  character^  wkh
the  solemnity  belonging  to  that  character:  and
wnat  he  so  delivered,  waa  all  along  understood  by
the  Jewish  reader  to  refer  to  something  that  was
to  take  place  after  the  time  of  the  author.  The
public  sentiments  of  the  Jews  concerning  the  de-

yi  of  Isaiah's  writings,  are  set  forth  in  the  book
Eccfesiasticus:*  "He  saw  by  an  excellent
spirit, -what  should  come  to  pass  at  the  last,  and
he  comforted  them  that  mourned  in  Sion.  He
showed  what  should  come  to  pass  for  ever,  and
secret  things  or  ever  they  came/'

It  is  also  an  advantage  which  this  prophecy
puuueusui,  that  it  is  intermixed  with  no  other  sub-
ject. It  is  entire,  separate,  and  uninterruptedly
affected  to  one  scene  of  things.

The  application  of  the  prophecy  to  the  evan-
gelic history  is  plain  and  appropriate.  Here  is  no
double  sense;  noncurative  language,  but  what  is
sufficiency  intelligible  to  every  reader  of  every
country. The  obscurities  (by  which. I  mean  the
expressions  that  require  a  knowledge  of  local  dic-
tion, and  of  local  allusion)  are  few,  and  not  of
great  importance. Nor  have  I  found  that  varie-
ties of  reading,  or  a  different  construing  of  the
original,  produce  any  material  alteration  in  the
sense  of  the  prophecy. Compare  the  common
translation  with  that  of  bishop  Lowth,  and  the
difference  is  not  eoimdeiabie. So  far  as  they  do
differ,  bishop  X*owth'a  corrections,  which  are  the
mithfol  result  of  an  accurate  examination,  bring
the  description  nearer  to  the  New  Testament
history  than  it  was  before. In  the  fourth  verse
of  the*  fifty-third  chapter,  what  our  Bible  renders
u stricken," he  translates  "judicially. stricken:"
and  in  the  eighth  verse,  the  clause, "  ne  was  taken
from  prison  and  from  judgment."  the  bishop  gives,
"  by  an  oppressive  judgment  he  was  taken  off."
The  next  words  to  these,  "  who  shall  declare  his
generation  1"  are  much  cleared  up  in  their  mean-
ww  by  the  bishop's  version ;  "his  manner  of  life
who  would  declare  1"  i  e.  who  would  stand  forth
hi  has  defence  1 The  former  part  of  the  ninth
vers*  "end  he  made  his  grave  with  the  wicked,
and  with  the  rich  in  his  death,"  which  inverts  the


•Chap.xlvlii.vw.i4.


circumstances  o/  Christ's  passion,  the  bishop
bringB  out  in.  an  order  perfectly  agreeable  to  the
event,  "and  his  gnwe  was  appointed  with  the
wicked,  but  with  the  rich  man  was  his  tomb."
The  words  in  the  eleventh  verse, ' "  by  his  know-
ledge shall  my  righteous  servant  justify  many,"
are,  in  the  bishop's  version,  "  by  the  knowledge
of  him  shall  my  righteous  servant  justify  many."
It  is  natural  to  inquire  what  turn  the  Jews
themselves  give  to  this  prophecy.  *  There  is  good
proof  that  the  ancient  Rabbins  explained  it  of
their  expected  Messiah  -}  t  but  their  modern  ex-
positors concur,  1  think,  in  representing  it  as  atle-
scription  of  the  calamitous  state  and  intended  res-
toration of  the  Jewish  people,  who  are  here,  as
they  say,  exhibited  under  the. character  of  a
single  person.  I  have  not  discovered  that  their
exposition  rests  upon  any  critical  arguments,  or
upon  these  in  any  other  than  a  very,  minute  .de-
gree. The  clause  in  the  -ninth  verse,  which  we
render  "  for  the  transgression  of  my  people  was
he  stricken  "  and  in  the  margin,  "  was  the  stroke
upon;  him,  the  Jews  read,  "for  the  transgression
or  my  people  Waa  the  stroke  upon  them.  And
what  they  allege  in  supoort  of  the  alteration
amounta  only  to  this,  that  the  Hebrew  pronoun  is
capable  of  a  plural  as  weU  as  of  a  singular  signifi-
cation; that  is  to  say,  is  capable  of  their  Construc-
tion as  well  as  ours,  t  And  this  is  all  the  varia-
tion contended  for ;  the  rest  of  the  prophecy  they


*-"  Vaticinium  hoc  Esaiv  est  carniocina  Rabbfno-
nun,  de  que  aliqui  Juussi  mini  confess!  sunt,  Rabbinos
suos  ex  propheticis  scripturis  facile  se  extricate  potu-
ine,  modo  Etnas  tociiisMt."— Huise,  TheoL  Jud.  p.  318.
quoted  .by  Poole,  in  loc
t  Hulse,  Theol.  Jud. -p.  430.  ^

I  Bishop  Lowth  adopts  in  this  place  the  reading  of
.the  Seventy,  which  gives  smitten  to  death,  M  for  U»
transgression  of  my  people  was  he  smitten  to  deata."
The  addition  of  the  words  "  to  death,"  makes  an  end
of  the  Jewish  interpretation  of  the  clause. And  the


authority  upon  which  this  reading  (though  notAven  by
the  present  Hebrew  text)  is  adopted.  Dr.  KennTcot  has
set  forth  by  an  argument  not  only  so  cogent/but  so  clear
and  popular,  that  I  beg  leave  to  transcribe  the  sub-


stance of  it  into  this  note :— "  Origen,  after  having  quo-
ted at  large  this  prophecy  concerning  the  Messiah,  tells
us,  that,  having  once  made  use  of  this  passage,  in  a  dis-
pute against  some  that  were  accounted  wise  among  the
Jews,  one  of  them  replied  that  thejwords  did  not  mean
one  man,  but  one  people,  the  Jews,  who  were  smitten
of  God,  and  dispersed  among  the  Gentiles  for  their  con-
version ;■  that  ne  then  urged  many  pans  of  this  prophecy,
to  show  the  absurdity  of  this  interpretation,  and  that
he  seemed  to  press  them  the  hardest  by  this  sentence,
— '  for  the  transgression  of  my  people'was  he  smitten
to  death.*  Now,  as  Origen,  the  author  of  the  Hexapla,
must  have  understood  Hebrew,  we  cannot  suppose  that
he  would  have  urged  thfs  last  text  as  sa  decisive,  if  the
Greek  version  had  not  agreed  here  with  the  Hebrew
text ;  nor  that  these  wise  Jews  would  have  -been  at  all
distressed  by  this  quotation,  unless  the  Hebrew  text  had
read  agreeably  to  the  word*  '  to  death;  on  which  the
argument  principally  depended ;  for.  by  quoting  it  im-
mediately, they  would  have  -triumphed  ever  him,  and
reprobated  his  t3reek  version.  This,  whenever  they
could  do  it,  was  their  conslantjirectice  in  their  disputes
with  the  Christians.  Origen  himself,  who  laboriously
compared  the  Hebrew  text  with  the  Septuagint,  lias  re-
corded the  necessity  of  arguing  with  the  Jews,  from  such
Sissages  only  a*  wcrein  the  Septuagint  agreeable  to  the
ebrew.  Wherefore,  as  Origen  bad  carefully  compared
Che  Greek  version  of  the  Septuagint  with  the  Hebrew
text ;  and  ss  he  pooled,  and  confounded  the  learned
Jews,  by  urging  upon  them  the  reading  *  to  death,*-  In
this  place ;  ft  seems  almost  impossible  not  to  conclude,
bpth  from  Origan's  argument,  aad  the'  silence  pf  sis
Jewish  adversaries,  that  the  Hebrew  text  at  that  time
actually  had  the  word  agreeably  to  the  version  ef  the
Beventy.'V-Lowth's  Isaiah,  p.  WL


BVIDfeNCES  OF  CHRISTIANITY.


read  as  we  do.  The  probability,  therefore,  of
their  exposition,  is  a  subject  which  we  rfre  as  ca-
pable of  judging  as  themselves.  This  judgment
is  open  indeed  to  the  good  sense  of  every  attentive
reader.  The  application  which  the  Jews  contend
for,  appears  to  me  to  labour  under  insuperable
difficulties ;  in  particular  it  may  be  demanded  of
them  to  explain,  in  whose  name  or  person,  if  the
Jewish  people  be  the  sufferer,  does  the  prophet
•peak,  when  he  says*  "  He  hath  borne  our  griefs,
and  carried,  our  sorrows,  yet  we  did  esteem  him
stricken,  smitten  of  God,  and  afflicted ;  but  he
was  wounded  for  our  transgressions,  he  was
bruised  for  our  iniquities,  the  chastisement  of  our
peace  was  upon  him,  and  with  his  stripes  tee  are
healed."  Again,  the  description  in  the  seventh
Terse,  "he  was  oppressed  and  he  was  afflicted,
yet  he  opened  not  his  mouth ;  he  js  brought  as  a.
lamb  to  the  slaughter,  and  as  a  sheep  before  her
shearers  is  dumb,  so  he"  opened  not  his  mouth,"
quadrates  with  no  part  of  the  Jewish  history  with
which  we  are  acquainted.  The  mention  of  the
"grave,"  and  the  "tomb,"  in  the  ninth  verse,  is
not  very  Applicable  to  the  fortunes  of  a  nation ;
and  still  less  so  is  the  conclusion  of  the  prophecy
in  the  twelfth  verse,  which  expressly  represents
the  sufferings  as  voluntary,  and  the  sufferer  as
interceding  for  the  offenders:  "because  he  hath
poured  out  his  soul  unto  deafh,  and  he  was  num-
bered with  the  transgressors,  and  he  bare  the  sin
ofjnanyj  an*  made  intercession  for  the  trane-


There  an  other  prophecies  of  the  Old  Testa-
ment, interpreted  by  Christians  to  relate  to  the
Gospel  history,  which  are  deserving  both  of  great
regard,  and  of  a  very  attentive  consideration :  but
I  content  myself  with  staling  the  above,  as  well
because  I  think  it  the  clearest  and  the  strongest
of  all,  as  because  most  of  the  rest,  in  order  mat
their  value  might.be  represented  with  any  tolera-
ble degree  of  fidelity,  require  a  discussion  unsuit-
able to  the  limits  and  nature  of  this  work.  The
reader  will  find  them  disposed  in  order,  and  dis-
tinctly explained,  in  bishop  Chandler's  treatise  on
the  subject :  and  he  will  bear  in  mind,  what  has
been  often,  and>  I  think^  truly,  urged  by  the  ad-
vocates of  Christianity,  that  there  is  no  other
eminent  person,  to  the,  history  of  whose  life  so
many  circumstances  can  be  made  to  apply.  They
who  object  that  much  has  keen  done  by  the  power
of  chance,  the  ingenuity  of  accommodation,  and
the  industry  of  research,  ought  to  try  whether  the
same,  or  any  thing  like  it,  could  be  done,  if  Ma-
homet, or  any  other  person,  were  proposed  as  the
subject  of  Jewish,  prophecy.

ft.  A  second  head  of  argument  from  prophecy,
is  founded  upon  our  Lord's  predictions  concerning
the  destruction  of  Jerusalem,  recorded  by  three
oat  of  .the  four  evangelists.

Luke  xxi.  5—25.  "  And  as  some  spake  of  the
temple,  how  it  was  adorned  with  goodly  stones
end  gifts,  he  said;  As  for  these  things  which  ye
behold,  the  days  will  come,nn  which  there  shall
not  be  left  one  stone  upon  another,  that  shall  not
be  thrown  down.  And  they  asked  him,  saying,
.Master,  but  when  shall  these  things  be?  and
what  sign  will  there  be  when  these  things  shall
come  to  pass  ?  And  he  said,  Take  heed  that  ye
be  not  deceived,  for  many  shall  come  in  my  name,
saying,  I  am  Christ;  and  the  time  dtaweth  near :
re  not  therefore  after  them.  But  when  ye
1  hear  of  wars  aiid  commotions,  be  not  terrified:


for  these  things  must  first  come  to  nass ;  but  the
end  is  not  bv-arid-by.  Then  said  ne  unto  them,
Nation  shall  rise  against  nation,  and  kingdom


Shaihc


against  kingdom;  and  great  earthquakes  shall  be
in  divers  places,  and 'famines  and  pestilences;  and
fearful  sights,  and  great  signs  shall  there  be  from
heaven.  But  before  sH  these,  they  shall  lay  their
hands  on  you,  and  persecute  you,  delivering  you
up  to  the  synagogues,  and  into  prisons,  being
brought  before  kings  and  rulers  for  my  name's
sate.  And  it  shall  turn  to  you  for  a  testimony.
Settle  it  therefore  in  your  hearts,  not  to  meditate
before,  what  ye  shall  answer:  for  I  <will  give  you
a  mouth  and  wisdom,  which  a|l  your  adversaries
shall  not  be  able  to  gainsay  nor  resist  And  ye
shall  be  betrayed  both  by  parents,  and  brethren,
and  kinsfolk,  and  friends ;  and  some  of  you  shal
they  cause  to  be  put  to  death.  And  ye  shall  be
hated  of  all.  men  lor  my  name's  sake.  But  them
shall  not  a  hair  of  your  head  perish.  In  your
patience  possess'  ye  your  souls.  And  when  ye
shall  see  Jerusalem  compassed  with  armies,  then
know  that  the  desolation  thereof  is  nigh.  Then
let  them  which  are  in  Jodea  flee  to  the  mountains ;
and  let  them  which  are  in  the  midst  of  it  depart
out :  and  let  not  them  that  are  in  the  countries
enter  thereinto.  For  these  be  the  days  of  ven-
geance "that  all  things  which  are  written  may  be
fulfilled.  But  woe  unto  them  that  are  with  child,
and  to  them  that  give  suck,  in  those  days :  for
there  shall  be  great  distress  in  the  land,  and  wrath
upon  this  people.  And  they  shall  fall  by  the  edge
or  the  sword,  and  shall  be  led  away  captive  into
all  nations :  and  Jerusalem  *  shall  be  trodden  down
of  the  Gentiles  until  the  times  of  the  Gentiles  be
fulfilled."

In  terms  nearly  similar,  this  discourse  b  related
in  the  twenty-fourth  chapter  of  Matthew,  and  the
thirteenth  of  Mark.  The  prospect  of  the  same
evils  drew  from  our  Saviour,  on  another  occasion,
the  following  affecting  expressions  of  concern,
which  are  preserved  by  St  Luke>(xix.  41^-44.)
V  And  when  he  war  come  near,  he  beheld  the
city,  and  wept  over  it,  saying,  If  thou  hadst  known,
even  thou,  at  least  in  this  thy  day,  the  things
which  belong  unto  thy  peace!  but  now  they
are  hid  from  thine-  eyes.  For  the  days  shall  come
upon  thee,  that  thine  enemies  shall  cast  a  trench
about  thee,  and  compass  thee  round,  and  keep  thee
in  on.  every  side,  and  shall  lay  thee  even  with  the
ground,  and  thy  children  within  thee;  and  they
shall  not  leave  in  thee  one  stone  upon  another;
because  thou  kn^west  not  the  time  -of  thy  visita-
tion."—These  passages  are  direct  and  explicit
predictions.  References  to  the  same  event,  some
plain,  some  parabolical,  or  otherwise  figurative,
are  found  in  divers  other  discourses  of  our  Lord.*

The  general  agreement  of  the  description  with
the  event,  viz.  with  the  ruin  of  Che  Jewish  nation,
and  the  capture  of  Jerusalem  under  Vespasian,
thirty-six  years  after  Christ's  death,  is  most
evident ;  and  the  accordancy  in  various  articles  of
detail  and  circumstances  has  been  shown  by  many
learned  writers.  II  is  also  an  advantage  to  the
inquiry,  and  to  the'  argument  built  upon  it,  that
we  have  received  a  copious  account  of  the  trans-
action from  Josephus,  a  Jewish  and  contemporary
historian.  Thistoart  of  the  case  is  perfectly  free  from
doubt. The  only  question  which,  in  my  opinion,


•  Matt  xxi.  33-48 ;  xxit.  1—7.  Mark  xil.  1— 1*.  Lata
xiil;  1-0 ;  xx.  9-40 ;  xxi.  5-4*


EVIDENCES  OP  CHRISTIANITY.


can'  be  raised  upon  the  subject,  is  whether  the
prophecy  wae  really  delivered  before  the  event  *,  I
•hell  apply,  therefore,  my  observations  to  this
point  solely.

1 .  The  j  udgment  of  antiquity,  though  varying  in
the  precise  year  of  the  publication  of  the  three
Gospels,  concurs  in  assigning  them  a  date  prior  to
the  destruction  of  Jerusalem.*

3.  This  judgment  is  confirmed  by  a  strong  pro-
bability arising  from  the  course  of  hsman  life.


The  destruction  of  Jerusalem  took  place  in  the
seventieth  year  after  the  birth  of  Christ.  The
three  evangelists,  one  of  whom  was  his  immediate
companion,  and  the  other  two  associated  with  his
companions,  were,  it  is  probable,  not  much  young-
er than  he  was.  They  must,  consequently,  have
been  far  advanced  in  life  when  Jerusalem  was
taken  -  and  no  reason'  has  been  given  why  they
should  deter  writing  their  histories  so  long.

3.  t  If  the  evangelists,  at  the  time  of  writing
the  Gospels,  had  known  of  the  destruction  of  Je-
rusalem, by  which  catastrophe  the  prophecies  were
plainly  fulfilled,  it  is  most  probable,  that,  in  re-
cording the  predictions,  they  would  have  dropped
come  word  or  other  about  the  completion ;  in  uke
manner  as  Luke,  after  relating  the  denunciation
of  a  dearth  by  Agabus,  adds,  "  which  came  to  pass
in  the  days  of  Claudius  Caesar:"*  whereas  the
prophecies  are  given  distinctly  in  one  chapter  of
each  of  the  'first  three  Gospels,  and  referred  to  in
several  different  passages  of  each,  and,  in  none  of
aH  these  places,  does  there  appear  the  smallest  in-
tHnation  that  the  things  spoken  of  had  come  to
pass. I  do  admit,  that  it  would  have  been  the
part  of  an  impostor,  who  wished  his  readers  to  be-
lieve that  his  book  was  written  before  the  event,
when  in  truth  it  was  written  after  it,  to  have  sup-
pressed any  such  intimation  carefully. But  this
was  not  the  character  of  the  authors  of  the  Gos-
pel. Chinning  was  no  quality  of  theirs. Of  all
writers-in  the  world,  they  thought  the  least  of
providing  against  objections. Moreover,  there  is
no  clause  in  any  one  of  them,  that  makes  a  pro-
feoekm  of  their  having  written  prior  to  the  Jewish
war*,  which  a  fraudulent  purpose  would  have  led
them  to  pretend. They  nave  done  neither  one
thong  nor  the  ether :  they  have  neither  inserted
any  words  which  might  signify  to  the  rea'der  that
their  accounts  were  written  before  the  destruction
of  Jerusalem,  which  a  sophist  would  have  done ;
nor  .have  they  dropped  a  hint  of  the  completion  of
the  prophecies  recorded  by  them,  which  an  wide-
signing  writer,  writing  after  the  event,  could
hardly,  on  some  of  other  of  the  many  occasions
that  presented  themselves,  have  missed  of  doing.

4.  The  admomtidna  I  which  Christ  is  repre-
sented to  have  given  to  his  followers  to  save  them-
selves by  flight,  are  not  easily  accounted  for,  on
the  supposition  of  the  prophecy  being  fabricated


•  Lardo**,  ▼*>!• **ii.

JLe  Clere,  Diss.  JIL-de  Qnai.  Evaag.  nam.  vii.  p.  54L
"  Wben  ye  shall  see  Jerusalem  compassed  with  ar-
se then  know  that  the  desolation  thereof  in  nigh;
then  let  them  which  are  In  Judeaflee  to  the  mountains ;
then  let  them  which  are  in  toe  midst  of  it  depart  out,
and  let  not  them  that  are  in  the  countries  enter  there-
into - Luke  xxi.  80,  %\.

"When  ye  shall  see  Jerusalem  compassed  with  ar-
mies, then  let  them  which  be  in  Judea  flee  unto  the
moantains  ;  let  b*m  which  is  on  the  house-top  not  coma
5^1  to  take  any  thing  out  of  hie  house ;  neither  let  him
2wh  *  in  the  field  return  back  to  take  Ms  clothes,"-


which  is  in  the
Matt.  sir.  1&


3T


after  the  event. ,  Either  the  Christians,  when  the
siege  approached,  did  make  their  escape  from  Je-
rusalem, or  they  did  not :  if  they  did,  they  must
have  had  the  prophecy  amongst  them :  if  they  did
not  know  of  any  such  prediction  at  the  time  of
the  siege,  if  they  did  not  take  notice  of  any  such
warning,  it  was  an  improbable  fiction,  in  a*  writer
publishing  his  work  near  to  that  time  (which,  on
any  even  the  lowest  and  most  disadvantageous
supposition,  was  the  case  with  the  Gospels  now  in
our  hands,)  and  addressing  his  work  to  Jews  and
to  Jewish  converts  f  whicb/Matthew  certainly  did,)
to  state  that  the  followers  of  Christ  had  received
admonition  of  which  they  made  no  use  when  the
occasion  arrived,  and  of  which  experience  then  re-
cent proved,  that  those,  who  were  most  concerned
to  know  and  regard  them,  were  ignorant  or  ne-
gligent. Even  if  the  prophecies  came  to  the  hands
of  the  evangelists  through  no  better  vehicle  than
tradition,  it  most  have  been  by  a  tradition  which
subsisted  prior  to  the  event. '  And  to  suppose  that,
without  any  authority  whatever,  without  so  much
as  even  any  tradition  to  guide  them,  they  had
forged  these  passages,  is  to  impute  to  them  a  de-
gree of  fraud  and  imposture,  from  every  appear-
ance of  which  their  compositions  are'  as  far  re-
moved as  possible.

5.  I  think  that,  if  the  prophecies  had  been  com-
posed alter  the  event,  there  would  have  been  more
specification.  The  names  or  descriptions  of  the
enemy,  the  generaLthe  emperor,  would  have  been
found  in  them.  The  designation  of  the  time
would  have  been  more  determinate.  And  I  am
fortified  in  this  opinion  by  observing,  that  the
counterfeited  prophecies  of  the  Sibylline  oracles,
of  the  twelve  patriarchs,  and  I  am  inclined  to  be-
lieve, most  others  of  the  kind,  are.  mere  trans-
scripts  of  the  history,  moulded  into  a  prophetic
form.

It  is  objected,  that  the  prophecy  of  the  destruc-
tion of  Jerusalem  is  mixed,  or  connected,  with
expressions  which  relate  to  the  final  judgment  of
the  world;  and  so  connected,  as  to  lead  an  ordina-
ry reader  to  expect,  that  these  two  events  would
not  be  far  distant  from  each  other.  To  which  I
answer,  that  the  objection  does  not  concern  our
present  argument.  If  our  Saviour  actually  fore-
told the  destruction  of  Jerusalem,  it  is  sufficient;
even  although  we  should  allow,  that  the  narration
of  the  prophecy  had  combined  what  had  been  said
by  him  on  kindred  subjects,  without  accurately
preserving  the  order,  or  always  noticing  the  transi-
tion of  the  discourse.


CHAPTER  II.
The  Morality  of  Hie  Gospel.

In  stating  the  morality  of  the  Gospel  as  an  ar-
gument of  its  truth.  I  am  willing  to  admit  two
points ;  first,  that  the  teaching  of  morality  was
not  the  primary  design  of  the  mission ;  secondly,
that  morality,  neither  in  the  Gospel,  nor  in  any
other  book,  can  be  a  subject,  properly  speaking,
of  discovery.

If  I  were  to  describe  in  a  very  few  words  the
scope  of  Christianity,  as  a  revelation*  I  should


*  Great  and  inestimably  beneficial  effects  may  accrue
from  the  mission  of  Christ,  and  especially  from  his
death,  which  do  not  belong  to  Christianity  u  a  rsvsto


330


EVIDENCES  OP  CHRISTIANITY.


my,  that  it  was  to  influence  the  conduct  ofhuman
lire,  by  establishing  the  proof  of  a  future  state  of
reward  and  punishment, — "  to  bring  life  and  im-
mortality to  light"  The  direct  object  therefore,
of  the  design  is,  to  supply  motives,  ana  not  rules ;
sanctions,  and  not  precepts.  And  these  were
what  mankind  stood  most  in  need  of.  The  mem-
bers of  civilized  society  can.  in  all  ordinary  cases,
judge  tolerably  well  how  they  ought  to  act :  but
without  a  future  state,  or,  which  is  the  same
thing,  without  credited  evidence  of  that  state,  they
want  a  motive  to  their  duty ;  they  want  at  least
strength  of  motive,  sufficient  to  bear  up  against
the  force  of  passion,  and  the  temptation  of  present
advantage.  Their  rules  want  authority.  The
most  important  service  that  can  be  rendered  to
human  fife,  and  that  consequently,  which,  one
might  expect  beforehand,  would  be  the  great  end
and  office  of  a  revelation  from  God,  is  to  convey
to  the  world  authorised  assurances  of  the  reality
of  a  future  existence.  And  although  in  doing
this,  or  by  the  ministry  of  the  same  person  by
whom  this  is  done,  moral  precepts  or  examples,
or  illustrations  of  moral  precepts,  may  be  occasion-
ally given,  and  be  highly  valuable,  yet  still  they
do  not  form  the  original  purpose  of  the  mission.

Secondly;  morality,  neither  in  the  Gospel,  nor
in,  any  other  book,  can  be  a  subject  of  discovery,
properly  so  called.  By  which  proposition,  I  mean
that  there  cannot,  in  morality,  tie  any  thing  simi-
lar to  what  are  called  discoveries  in  natural  philo-
sophy, in  the  arts  of  life,  and  in  some  sciences;
as  the  system  of  the.  Universe,  the  circulation  of
the  blood,  the  polarity  of  the  magnet,  the  laws  of
gravitation,  alphabetical  writing,  decimal  arithme-
tic, and  some  other  things  of  the  same  sort ;  facts,
or  Drools,  or  contrivances,  before  totally  unknown
ana  unthought  of.  Whoever,  therefore,  expects,
in  reading  the  New  Testament,  to  be  struck  with
discoveries  in  morals  in  the  manner  in  which  his
mind  was  affected  when  he  first  came  to  the
knowledge  of  the  discoveries  above-mentioned;  or
lather  in  the  manner  in  which  the  world  was  af-
fected by  them,  when  they  were  first  published ;
expects  what,  as  I  apprehend,  the  nature  of  the
aubiect  renders  it  impossible  that  he  should  meet
with.  And  the  foundation  of  my  opinion  is  this,
that  the  qualities  of  actions  depend  entirely  upon
their  effects,  which  effects  must  all  along  have
been  the  subject  of  human  experience.

When  it  is  once  settled,  no  matter  upon  what
principle,  that  to  do  good  is  virtue,  the  rest  is  cal-
culation. But  since  the  calculation  cannot  be  in-
stituted concerning  each  particular  action,  we  es-
tablish intermediate  rules  j  by  which  proceeding,
the  business  of  morality  is  much  fiicilitated,  for
then  it  is  concerning  our  rules  alone  that  we  need
inquire,  whether  in  their  tendency  they  be  bene-


tion ;  that  is,  they  might  have  existed,  and  they  might
have  been  accomplished,  though  we  had  never,  in  this
life,  been  made  acquainted  with  them.  These  effects
may  be  very  extensive :  they  may  be  interesting  even
to  other  orders  of  intelligent  beings. I  think  it  is  a

Sneral  opinion,  and  one  to  which  I  have  long  come,
st  the  beneficial  effects  of  Christ's  death  extend  to  the
whole  human  species.  It  was  the  redemption  of  the
world.  "  He  is  the  propitiation  for  our  tins/and  not  for
oars  only,  but  for  the  whole  world ;"  1  John  ii.  3.
Probably  the  future  happiness,  perhaps  the  future  exist-
ence of  the  species,  and  more  gracious  terms  of  accept-
ance extended  to  all,  might  depend  upon  it,  or  be  pro-
eared  by  it.  Now  these  effects,  whatever  they  be,  do
not  belong  to  Christianity  as  a  rovlation ;  because  they
exist  with  respect  to  those  to  whom  it  is  not  rwssfctf.


ficial;  concerning  our  actions,  we  have  only  to
ask,,  whether  they  be  agreeable  to  the  rules.  We
refer  actions  to  rules,  and  rules  to  public  happinesa.
Now  in  the  formation  of  these  rules  there  is  no
place  for  discovery,  properly  so  called,  but  then
is  ample  room  for  the  exercise  of  wisdom)  judg-
ment, and  prudence.

As  I  wish  to  deliver  argument  rather  than
panegyric,  I  shall  treat  of  the  morality  of  the  Gos-
pel, in  subjection  to  these  observations.  And
after  all.  I  tnink  it  such  a  morality,  as  considering
from  whom  it  came,  is  most  extraordinary;  ana
such  as,  without  allowing  some  degree  of  reality
to  the  character  and  pretensions  of  the  religion,
it  is  difficult  to  account  for :  or,  to  place  the  argu-
ment a  little  lower  in  the  scale,  it  is  such  a  mo-
rality as  completely  repels  the  supposition  of  ita
being  the  tradition  of  a  barbarous  age  or  of  a  bar-
barous people,  of  the  religion  being  founded  in
folly,  or  of  its  being  the  production  of  craft;  and
it  repels  also,  in  a  great  degree,  the  rappoataon  of
its  having  been  the  effusion  of  an  enthusiastic  mind.
'  The  division,  under  which  the  subject  may
be  most  conveniently  treated,  is  that  of  toe  things
taught,  and  the  manner  of  teaching.

Under  the  first  head,  I  should  willingly,  if  the
limits  and  nature  of  my  work  admitted  of  it,
transcribe  into  this  chapter  the  whole  of  what  has)
been  said  upon  the  morality  of  the  Gospel,  by  the
author  of  The  Internal  Evidence  of  Christianity  g
because  it  perfectly,  agrees  with  my  own  opinion,
and  because  it  is  impossible  to  amy  the  ammo
things  so  well.  This  acute  observer  of  human
nature,  and,  as  I  believe,  sincere  convert  to  Chris-
tianity, appears  to  me  to  have  made  out  satts&o
torily  the  two  following  positions,  viz.

I.  That  the  Gospel  omits  some  qualities,  which
have  usually  engaged  the  praises  and  admira-
tion of  mankind^  but  which,  in  reality,  and  in
their  general  effects,  have  been  prejudicial  to
human  happiness.

II.  That  the  Gospel  has  brought  forward  soma
virtues,  which  possess  the  highest  intrinsic  Value,
but  which  have  commonly  been  overlooked  and
contemned

The  first  of  these  propositions  he  exemplifies
in  the  instances  of  friendship,  patriotism,  active
courage ;  in  the  sense  in  which  these  qualities  are
usually  understood,  and  in  the  conduct  which,
they  often  produce.

The  second,  in  the  instances  of  passive  courage
or  endurance  of  sufferings,  patience  under  affronts
and  injuries,  humility,  irresistancer  placability. '

The  truth  is,  there  are  two  opposite  descrip-
tions of  character,  under  which  mankind  may
generally  be  classed.  The  one  posoosoos  vigour,
firmness,  resolution ;  is  daring  and  active,  Quick
in  its  sensibilities,  jealous  of  its  fame,  eager  in  its
attachments,  inflexible  in  its  purpose,  violent  in
its  resentments.

The  other,  meek,  yielding,  complying,  forgiving ;
not  prompt  to  act,  but  willing  to  suffer;  silent
and  gentle  under  rudeness  and  insult,  suing  for
reconciliation  where  others  would  demand  satis-
faction, giving  way  to  the  pushes  of  impudence,
conceding  and  indulgent  to  the  prejudices,  the
wrongheadedness,  the  intractability,  of  those  with
whom  it  has  to  deal.

The  former  of  these  characters  is,  and  ere?
hath  been,  the  favourite  of  the  world.  It  is  the
character  of  great  men.  There  is  a  dignity  in  tf
which  universally  commands  respect.


EVIDENCES  OP  CHRISTIANITY.


331


The  Jatier  b  poor-spirited,  tame,  and  abject.
Yet  so  it  hath  happened,  that,  with  the  Founder
of  Christianity,  this  latter  w  the  subject  of  his
commendation,  hi*  precepts,  his  example;  and
that  the  farmer  is  so,  in  no  part  of  its  composition.
This  and  nothing  else,  is  the  character  designed
in  the  following  remarkable  passages:  "Resist
not  evil;  but  whosoever  shall  smite  thee  on  the
right  cheek,  turn  to  him  the  other  also :  and  if
an  j  man  will  sue  thee  at  the  law,  and  take  away  t  by
coat,  let  him  have  thy  doak  also:  and  whosoever
shall  compel  thee  to  go  a  mile,  go  with  him  twain :
love  your  enemies,  bless  them  that  curse  you,  do
good  to  them  that  hate  you,  and  pray  for  them'
which  despitefully  use  you  and  persecute  you."
This  certainly  is  not  common-place  morality.  It
is  very  original.  It  shows  at  least  (and  it  is  for
this  purpose  we  produce  it)  that  no  two  things
can  be, more  dhwrent  than  the  Heroic  and  the
Christian  character.

Now  the  author,  to  whom  I  refer,  has  not  only
marked  this  difference  more  strongly  than  any
preceding  writer,  but  has  proved,  in  contradiction
to  first  impressions,  to  popular  opinion,  to  the  en


of  orators  and  poets,  and  even  to  the  suf-
frages of  historians  and  moralists,  that  the  latter
character  possesses  the  most  of  true  worth,  both  as
being  most  difficult  either  to  be  acquired  or  sus-
tained,, and  as  contributing  most  to  the  happiness
and  tranquillity  of  social  life.  The  state  of  his
argument  is  as  follows:

1.  If  this  disposition  were  universal,  the  case  is
clear;  the  world  would  be  a  society  of  friends.
Whereas,  if  the  other  disposition  were  universal,
it  would  produce  a  scene  of  universal  contention.
The  world  could  not  hold  a  generation  of  such


IL  If,  what  k  the  feet,  the  disposition  be  partial;
if  a  few  be  actuated  by  it,  amongst  a  multitude
who  an  not ;  in  whatever  degree*  it  does  prevail,
in  the  same  proportion  it  prevents,  allays,  and  ter-
minates, quarrels,  the  great  disturbers  of  human
happiness,  and  the  great  sources  of  human  misery,
so  mr  as  man's  happiness  and  misery  depend
upon  man.  Without  this  disposition,  enmities
must  not  only  be  frequent,  but,  once  begun,  must
be  eternal:  for,  each  retaliation  being  a  fresh
injury,  and,  consequently,  requiring  a  fresh  satis-
faction, no  period  can  be  assigned  to  the  recipro-
cation of  affronts,  and  to  the  progress  of  hatred,
bat  that  which  closes  the  lives,  or  at  least  the  in-
tercourse, of  the  parties.

I  would  only  add  to  these  observations,  that
although  the  former  of  the  two  characters  above
described  may  be  occasionally  useful ;  although,
perhaps,  a  great  general;  or  a  great  statesman,
may  be  formed  by  it,  and  these  may  be  instru-
ments of  important  benefits  toinankind,  yet  is
this  mining  more  than  what  is  true  of  many
qualities,  which  are  acknowledged  to  be  vicious.
Envy  m  a  quality  of  this  sort;  I  know  not  a
stronger  stimulus  to  exertion;  many  a  scholar,
many  an  artist,  many  a  soldier,  has  been  produced
by  it ;  nevertheless,  since  in  its  general  effects  it  is
noxious,  it  w  properly  condemned,  certainly  is
not  praised,  by  sober  moralists.

It  was  a  portion  of  the  same  character  as  that
we  are  defending,  or  rather  of  his  love  of  the  same
eharacter,  which  our  Saviour  displayed,  in  his  re-
peated correction  of  the  ambition  of  his  disciples;
hnTfreqnent  admonitions,  that  greatness  with
i  to  conawt  in  humility ;  his  censure  of


that  love  of  distinction,  and  greediness  of  superi-
ority, which  the  chief  persons  amongst  his  coun-
trymen were  wont,  on  all  occasions,  great  and
little,  to  betray.  "  They  (the  Scribes  and  Phari-
sees) love  the  uppermost  rooms  at  feasts,  and  the
chief  seats  in  the  synagogues,  and  greetings  in
the  markets,  and  to  be  called  of  men,  Rabbi,
Rabbi.  "But  be  not  ye  called  Rabbi,  for  one  is
your  Master,  even  Christ,  and  all  ye  are  brethren ;
and  call  no  man  your  fattier  upon  the  earth,  for
one  is  your  Father,  which  is  in  heaven ;  neither
be  ye  called  masters,  for  one  is  your  Master,  even
Christ ;  but  he  that  is  greatest  among  you,  shall
be  your  servant :  and  whosoever  shall  exalt  him-
self, shall  be  abased ;  and  he  that  shall  humble
himself  shall  be  exalted."  *  I  make  no  farther
remark  upon  these  passages,  (because  they  are,  in
truth,  only  a  repetition  of  the  doctrine,  different
expressions  of  the  principle,  which  we  have
already  stated,)  except  that  some  of  the  passages,
especially  our  Lord's  advice  to  the  guests  at  an
entertainment^  seem  to  extend  the  rule  to  what  we
call  manners  ;  which  was  both  regular  in  point  of
consistency,  arid  not  so  much  beneath  the  dignity
of  our  Lord's  mission  as  may  at  first  sight  be  sup-
posed, for  bad  manners  are  bad  morals.

It  is  sufficiently  apparent,  that  the  precepts  we
have  cited,  or  rather  the  disposition  which  these
precepts  inculcate,  relate-to  personal  conduct  from
personal  motives ;  to  cases  in  which  men  act  from
impulse,  for  themselves,  and  from  themselves.
When  it  comes  to  be  considered,  what  U  neces-
sary to  be  done  for  the  sake  of  the  public,  and  out
of  a  regard  to  the  general  welfare  (which  consi-
deration, for  the  most  part,  ought  exclusively  to  .
govern  the  duties  of  men  in  public  stations,)  it
comes  to  a  case  to  which  the  rules  do  not  belong.
This  distinction  is  plain;  and  if  it  were  less- so,
the  consequence  would  not  be  much  felt:  for  it  is
very  seldom  that,  in  the  intercourse  of  private  life,
men  act  with  public  views.  The  personal  mo-
tives, from  which  they  do  act  the  rule  regulates. '

The  preference  of  the  patient  to  the  heroic  cha-
racter, which  we  have  here  noticed,  and  which
the  reader  will  find  explained  at'large  in  the  work
to  which  we  have  referred  him,  is  a  peculiarity  in
the  'Christian  institution,  which  I  propose  as  an
argument  of  wisdom  very  much  beyond  the  situa-
tion and  natural  character  of  the  person  who  de-
livered H.

II.  A  second  argument,  drawn  from  the  mo-
rality of  the  New  Testament,  is  the  stress
which  is  laid  by  -our  Saviour  upon  the  regulation
of  the  thoughts.  And  I  place  this  consideration
next  to  the  other,  because  they  are  connected.
The  other  related  to  the  malicious  passions ;  this,
to  the  voluptuous.  Together,  they  comprehend
the  whole  character.

"  Out  of  the  heart  proceed  evil  thoughts,  mur-
ders, adulteries,  fornications,"  &c.— "  These  are
the  things  which  defile  a  man."*
"  Wo  unto  you,  Scribes  and  Pharisees,  hypo-
crites !  for  ye  make  clean  the  outside  of  the  cup
and  of  the  flatter,  but  within  they  are  full  of  ex-
tortion and  excess.— Ye  are  like  unto  whited  se-
pulchres, which  indeed  appear  beautiful  outward,
but  are  within  full  of  dead  men's  bones,  and  or
all  uncleanness ;  even  so  ye  also  outwardlyanpear


•Matlxxiii.
xiv.7.
fLukexiv.7.


6.  See  also  Mark  xii.  39.  Luke  xx.  40;
|  Matt.  xv.  19.


EVIDENCES  OP  CHRISTIANITY.


righteous  onto  men,  but  within  yc  are  full  of  hy-
pocrisy and  iniquity."*

And  more  particularly  that  strong  expression^
"Whosoever  looketh  on  a  woman  to  lust  after
her,  hath  committed  adultery  with  her  already  in
his  heart."

There  can  be  no  doubt,  with  any  reflecting
mind,  but  that  the  propensities  of  our  nature  must
be  subject  to  regulation ;  but  the  question  is  where
the  check  ought  to  be  placed,  upon  the  thought,
or  only  upon  the  action  ?  In  this  question,  our
Saviour,  in  the  texts  here  quoted,  has  pronounced
a  decisive  judgment.  He  makes  the  control  of
thought  essential.  Internal  purity  with  him  is
every  thing.  Now  I  contend  that  this  is  the  only
discipline  which  can  succeed;  in  other  words,
that  a  moral  system,  which  prohibits  actions,  but
leaves  the  thoughts  at  liberty,  will  be  ineffectual,
and  is  therefore  unwise.  1  know  not  how  to  go
about  the  proof  of  a  point,  which  depends  upon
experience,  and  upon  a  knowledge  of  the  human
constitution,  better  than  by  citing  the  judgment  of
persons,  who  appear  to  have  given  great  attention
to  the  subject,  and  to  be  well  qualified  to  form  a
true  opinion  about  it.  Boerhaave,  speaking  of
this  very  declaration  of  our  Saviour,  "  Whosoever
looketh  on  a  woman  to  lust  after  her,  hath  already
committed  adultery  with  her  in  his  heart,"  and
understanding  it,  as  wc  do,  to  contain  an  injunc-
tion to  lay  the  check  upon  the  thoughts,  was  wont
te  say,  that  "  our  Saviour  knew  mankind  better
than  Socrates."  Haller,  who  has  recorded  this
saying  of  Boerhaave,  adds  to  it  the  following  re-
marks of  his  own  :t  "  It  did  not  escape  the  obser-
vation of  our  Saviour,  that  the  rejection  of  any
evil  thoughts  was  the  best  defence  against  vice  :
for  when  a  debauched  person  fills  his  imagination
with  impure  pictures,  the  licentious  ideas  which
he  recalls,  fail  not  to  stimulate  his  desires  with  a
degree  of  violence  which  he  cannot  resist.  This,
will  be  followed  by  gratification,  unless  some  ex-
ternal obstacle  should  prevent  him  from  the  com-
mission of  a  sin,  which  he  had  internally  resolved
on."  "  Every  moment  of  time,"  says  our  author,
"  that  is  spent  in  meditations  upon  sin.  increases
the  powtfr  of  the  dangerous  object  which  has  pos-
sessed our  imagination."  I  suppose  these  reflec-
tions will  be  generally  assented  to.

III.  Thirdly,  Had  a  teacher  of  morality  been
asked  concerning  a  general  principle  of  conduct,
and  for  a  short  rule  of  life ;  and  had  he  instructed
the  person  who  consulted  him, "  constantly  to  refer
bis  actions  to  what  he  believed  to  be  the  will  of
his  Creator,  and  constantly  to  have  in  view  not
his  own  interest  and  gratification  alone,  but  the
happiness  and  comfort  of  those  about  him,"  he
would  have  been  thought,  I  doubt  not,  in  any  age
of  the  world,  and  in  any,  even  the  most  improved,
state  of  morals,  to  have  delivered  a  judicious  an-
swer; "because,  by  the  first  direction,  he  suggest-
ed the  only  motive  which  acts  steadily  ana  uni-
formly, in  sight  and  out  of  sight,  in  familiar
occurrences  and  under  pressing  temptations ;  and
in  the  second,  he  corrected,  what,  of  all  tendencies
in  the  human  character,  stands  most  in  need  of
correction,  selfishness,  or  a  contempt  of  other  men's
eonveniency  and  satisfaction.  In  estimating  the
value  of  a  moral  rule,  we  are  to  have  regard  not
only  to  the  particular  duty,  but  the  general  spirit ;


•Hatt.xxUi.25,27.  t  Matt.  v.  23.

X  Letters  to  his  Daughter.


not  only  to  what  it  directs  a*  to  do,  bat  to  the
character  which  a  compliance  with  its  direction  is
likely  to  form  in  us.  So,  in  the  present  instance,
the  rule  here  recited  will  never  fail  to  make  him
who  obeys  it  consider  ale,  not  only  of  the  rights,
but  of  the  feelings  of  other  men,  bodily  and  mental,
in  great  matters  and  in  small ;  of  the  ease,  the  ac-
commodation, the  self-complacency,  of  ail  with
whom  he  has  any  concern,  especially  of  all  who
are  in  his  power,  or  dependant  upon  his  will.

New  what,  in  the  most  applauded  philosopher
of  the  most  enlightened  age  of  the  work),  would
have  been  deemed  worthy  of  his  wisdom,  and  of
his  character,  to  say,  our  Saviour  hath  said,  and
upon  just  such  an  occasion  as  that  which  we  have
feigned.

t "  Then  one  of  them,  which  was  a  lawyer,  asked
him  a  question,  tempting  him,  and  saying,  Master,
which  is  the  great  commandment  in  the  law?
Jesus  said  unto  him,  Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord
thy  God  with  all  thy  heart,  and  with  all  thy  soul,
and  with  all  thy  mind;  this  is  the  first  and  great
commandment;  and  the  second  is  like  unto  it,
Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself;  on  these
two  cornmanp!ments  hang  all  the  law  and  the
prophets."*

The  second  precept  occurs  in  Saint  Matthew
(xix.  16)  on  another  occasion  similar  to  this ;  and
both  of  them,  on  a  third  similar  occasion,  in  Luke
(x.  27.)  In  these  two  latter  instances,  the  ques-
tion proposed  was,  "  What  shall  I  do  to  inherit
eternal  life  V

.Upon  all  these  occasions,  I  consider  the  words
of  our  Saviour  as  expressing  precisely  the  same
thing  as  what  I  have  put  into  the  mouth  of  the
moral  philosopher.  Nor  do  I  think  that  it  de-
tracts much  from  the  merit  of  the  answer,  that
these  precepts  are  extant  in  the  Mosaic  code »  for
his  laying  his  finger,  if  I  may  so  say,  upon  these
precepts -his  drawing  them  out  f*om  the  rest  of  that
voluminous  institution ;  his  stating  of  them,  not
simply  amongst  the  number,  but  as  the  greatest
and  the  sum  of  all  the  others ;  in  a  word,  his  pro-
posing of  them  to  his  hearers  for  their  rule-  and
principle,  was  our  Saviour's  own.

And  what  our  Saviour  had  said  apon  the  sub-
ject, appears  to  me  to  have  fixed  the  sentiment
amongst  his  followers.

St  Paul  has  it  expressly,  "If  there  be  any  other
commandment,  it  is  briefly  comprehended  in  this
saying,  Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself  ;},t
and  again,  "-For  all  the  law  is  fulfilled  in  one
word,  even  in  this,  Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbour
as  thyself."* '

Saint  John,  in  like  manner,  "  This  command-
ment have  we  from  him,  that  he  who  lovethGod,
love  his  brother  also.'S

Saint  Peter,  not  very  differently :  "  Seeing  that
ye  have  purified  your  souls  in  obeying  the  truth,
through  the  Spirit,  unto  unfeigned  love  of  the
brethren,  see  that  ye  love  one  another  with  a  pure
heart  fervently."!!

And  it  is  so  well  known,  as  to  require  no  cita-
tions to  verify  it,  that-  this  love,  or  charity,  or,  in
other  words,  regard  to  the  welfare  of  others,  runs
in  various  forms  through  all  the  preceptive  parts
of  the  apostolic  writings.  It  is  the  theme  of  all
their  exhortations,  that  with  which  their  morality


*  Matt.  xiii.  35-40.
X  GaL  v.  14.


fil  Peter  i.JB.


t  Rom.  xhi.  9.
{lJohniv.JM.


EVIDENCES  OF  CHRISTIANITY.


begins  anAeirie,  fan  which  all  their  detail*  and
enumerations  jet  ant,  and  into  which  w)ey  return.
And  that  this  temper,  for  some  time  at  least,
descended  in  its  purity  to  succeeding  Christians,
is  attested  by  one  of  the  earliest  and  best  of  the*
remaining  writings  of  the  apostolical  fathers,  the
epistle  of  the  Roman  Clement,  The  meekness
of  the  Christian  character  reigns  throughout  the
whole  of  that  excellent  piece.  The  occasion  called
fir  it  It  was  to  compose  the  dissensions  of  the
church  of  Corinth.  And  the  venerable  hearer  of
the  apostles  does  not  fell  short,  in  the.  display  of
this  principle,  of  the  finest  passages  of  their
writing*.  He  calls  to  the  remembrance  of  the
Corinthian  church  its  former  character,  in  which
u  ye  were  all  of  you,"  he  tells  them,  "humWe-
aunded,  not  boasting  of  any  thing,  desiring  rather
to  be  subject  than  to  govern,  to  give  than  to  re-
ceive, being  content  with  the  portion  God  had  dis-
pensed to  you,  and  hearkening  diligently  to  his
word j  ye  were  enlarged  in  your  bowels,  having
his  sufferings  always  before  your  eyes.  Ye  con-
tended day  and  night  lor  the  whole  brotherhood,
that  with  compassion  and  a  good  conscience  the
number  of  his  elect  might  be  saved.  Ye  were
sincere,  and  without  offence,  towards  each  other.
Ye  bewailed  every  one  his  neighbours1  sins,
est  owning  their  delects  your  own."*  His  prayer
for  them  was  for  the  "  return  of  peace,  long-suf-
fering, and  patience.'t  And  his  advice  to  those,
who  might  have  been  the  occasion  of  difference  in
the  society,  is  conceived  in  the  true  spirit,  and
with  a  perfect  knowledge,  of  the  Christian  charac-
ter: "  Who  is  there  among  you  that  is  generous?
who  that  is  compassionate?" who  that  has  any
eharity?  Let  him  say.  If  this  sedition,  this  con-
tention, and  these  schisms,  be  upon  my  account,
I  am  ready  to  depart,  to  go  away  whithersoever
ye  please,  and  do  whatsoever  ye  shall  command
Be :  only  let  the  flock  of  Christ  be  in  peace  with
the  elders  who  are  set  over  it.  He  that  shall  do
this,  shall  get  to  himself  a  very  great  honour  in
the  Lord;  and  there  is  no  place  but  what  will  be
ready  to  receive  him:  for  the  earth  is  the  Lord's,
end  the  fulness  thereof.  These  things  they,  who
have  their  conversation  towards  God,  not  to  be
lepented  of,  both  have  done,  and  will  always  be
mdrtod0,"t

-True  sacred  principle,  this  earnest  recommenda-
tion of  forbearance,  lenity,  and  forgiveness,  mixes
with  all  the  writings  of  that  age.  Therearemore
quotations  in  the  apostolical  fathers,  of  texts  which
relate  to  these  points,  than  of  any  other.  Christ's
avyinga  had  struck  them.  "  Not  rendering,"  said
Polv/carp,  the  disciple  of  John,  "evil  for  evilror
jailing  for  railing,  or  striking  for  striking,  or
lor  cursing."!  Again,  speaking  of  some,
haviour  had  given  great  offence,  "  Be  ye

n  antra  Via **  nn  thtm  Mvtflmi a  vul Lvik


,"  says  he,  "on  this  occasion,  and  look
not  npon  sucn  as  enemies,  but  call  them  back  as
wofieAng  and  erring  members,  that  ye  save  your
whole  body."H

"  Be  ye  mild  at  their  anger,"  saith  Ignatius,  the
eonipanaon  of  Polvcarp,  "humble  at  their  boast-
ings, to  their  blasphemies  return  your  prayers,  to
their  enter,  your  firmness  in  the  faith ;  when  they
are  cruel,  be  ye  gentle ;  not  endeavouring  to  imi-
tate their  ways,,  let  us  be  their  brethren  in  all

•  Ed.  Clean-  Sam,  e.  9;  Asp.  Wake's  Translation.
tlbTc-A  lib. c  54.

JfSjTBp.A*Pbii.c.*. Jib.  OIL


kindness  and  moderation:  but  let  us  be  fbBower*
of  the  Lord ;  for  who  was  ever  more  unjustly
used,  more  destitute,  more  despised?"

IV.  A  fourth  quality,  by  which  the  molality  of
the  Gospel  is  distinguished,  is  the  exclusion  of  re-
gard to  tame  and  reputation.

"  Take  heed  that  ye  do  not  your  alms  before
men.  to  be  seen  of  them,  otherwise  ye  have  no  re-
ward of  your  Father  which  is  in  heaven."*

"  When  thou  prayest,  enter  into  thy  closet,  and
when  thou  hast  shut  the  door,  pray  to  thy  Father
which  is  in  secret;  and  thy  Father  which seeth  in
secret,  shall  reward  thee  openly."t

And  the  rule,  by  parity  of  reason^  is  extended
to  all  other  virtues.

I  do  not  think,  that  either  in  these,  or  in  any
other  passage  of  the  New  Testament,  the  pursuit
of  fame  is  stated  as  a  vice;  it  is  only  said  that  an
action,  to  be  virtuous,  must  be  independent  of  it.
I  would  also  observe,  that  it  is  not  publicity,  but
ostentation  which  is  prohibited ;  not  the  mode,  but
the  motive,  of  the  action,  which  is  regulated.  A
good  man  will  prefer  that  mode,  as  Veil  as  those
objects  of  his  beneficence,  by  which  he  can  pro-
duce the  greatest  effect ;  and  tbe^  view  of  this  pur-
pose may  dictate  sometimes  publication,  and  some-
times concealment.  Either  the  one  or  the  other
may  be  the  mode  of  the-  action,  according  as  the
end  to  be  promoted  by  it  appears  to  require.  But
from  the  motive,  the  reputation  of  the  deed,  and
the  fruits  and  advantage  of  that  reputation  to  our-
selves, must  be  shut  out,  or,  in  whatever  propor-
tion they  are  not  so,  the  action  in  that  proportion
finis  of  being  virtuous.

This  exclusion  of  regard  to  human  opinion,  k  a
difference,  not  so  much  in  the  duties  to  which  the
teachers  of  virtue  would  persuade  mankind,  as  in
the  manner  and  topics  of  persuasion.  And  in
this  view  the  difference  is  great.  When  we  set
about  to  give  advice,  our  lectures  are  full  of  the
advantages  of  character,  of  the  regard  that  is  due
to  appearances  and  to  opinion ;  of  what  the  world,
especially  of  what  the  good  or  great,  wilL  think
and  say;  of  the  value  of  public  esteem,  and  of
the  qualities  by  which  men  acquire  it.  Widely
different  from  this  was  our  Saviour's  instruction;
and  the  difference  was  founded  upon  the  best  rea-
sons. For,  however  the  care  or  reputation,  the
authority  of  public  opinion,  or  even  of  the  opinion
of  good  men,  the  satisfaction  of  being  well  received
and  well  thought  of,  the  benefit  of  being  known
and  distinguished,  are  topics  to  which  we  are  lain
to  have  recourse  in  our  exhortations;  the  true
virtue  is  that  which  discards  these  consideratibne
absolutely,  and  which  retires  from  them  all  to  the
single  internal  purpose  of  pleasing  God.  This  at
least  was  the  virtue  which  our  Saviour  taught,
And  in  teaching  tins',  he  not  only  confined  the
views  of  his  followers  to  the  proper  measure  and
principle  of  human  duty,  but  acted  in  consistency
with  his  office  as  a  monitor  from  heaven.


Next  to  what  our  Saviour  taught,  may  be  con-
sidered the  manner  ef  his  teaching:  which  was
extremely  peculiar,  vet,  I  think,  precisely  adapted
to4he  peculiarity  of  his  character  and  situation.
His  lessons  did  not  consist  of  disquisitions ;  of  any
thing  like  moral  essays,  or  like  sermons,  or  like


•  Mate  vi.  l.


t  Matt.  vi6.


384


EVIDENCES  OP  CHRISTIANITY.


set  treatise!  upon-  the  several  point*  which  he
mentioned.  When  he  delivered  a  precept,  it  was
seldom  that  he  added  any  proof  or  argument:  still
mote  seldom,  that  he  accompanied  Jt  with,  what
all.  precepts  require,  limitations  and  distinctions.
His  instructions  were  conceived  in  short,  empha-
tic, sententious  rules,  in  occasional  reflections,  or
in  round  maxims,  I  do  not  think  that  this  was  a
natural,  or  would  have  been  a  proper  method  for
a  philosopher  or  a  moralist ;  or  that  it  is  a  method
which  can  be  successfully  imitated  by  us.  But  I
contend  that  it  was  suitable  to  the  character  which
Christ  assumed,  and  to  the  situation  in  which,  as
a  teacher,  he  was  placed.  He  produced  himself  as
a  messenger  from  God.  He  put  the  truth  of  what
he  taught  upon  authority.*  In  the  choice,  there-
lore,  of  bis  mode  of  teaching,  the  purpose  by  him
to  be  consulted  was  impression:  because  convic-
tion, which  forms  the  principal  end  of  our  dis-
courses, waa  to  arise  in  the  minds  of  his  followers
from  a  different  source,  from  their  respeot  to  his
person  and  authority.  Now,  for  the  purpose  of
impression  singly  and  exclusively  (I  repeat  again,
that  we  an  not  here  to  consider  the  convincing
of  the  understanding),  I  know  nothing  which
would  have  so  great  force  as  strong  ponderous
ma  Trims,  Frequently  urged,  and  frequently  brought
back  to  the  thoughts  of  the  hearers.  1  know  no-
thing that  could  in  this  view  be  said  better,  than
"  Do  unto  others  as  ye  would  that  others  should
do  unto  yon:"*  "  The  first  and  great  command-
ment is,  Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God;  and
the  second  is  like  unto  it,  Thou  shalt  love  thy
neighbour  as  thyself."  It  must  also  be  remem-
bered, that  our  Lord's  ministry,  upon  the  suppo-
sition either  of  one  year  or  three,  compared  with
his  work,  was  of  short  duration  j  that,  within  this
time,  he  had  many  places  to  visit,  various  audi-
ences to  address ;  that  his  person  was  generally
besieged  by  crowds  of  followers:  that  he  was
sometimes  driven  away  from  the  place  where  he
was  teaching  by  persecution,  and  at  other  times,
thought  fit  to- withdraw  himself  from  the  commo-
tions of  the  populace.  -Under  these  circumstance*,
nothing  appears  to  have  been  so  practicable,  or
likely  to  be  so  efficacious,  as  leaving,  wherever  he
came,  concise  lessons  of  duty.  These  circum-
stances at  least  show  the  necessity  he  was  under,
of  comprising  what  he  delivered  within  a  small


In  particular,  his  sermon  upon  the
mount  ought  always  to  be  considered'witn  a  view
to  these  observations.  The  question  is  not,  whe-
ther a  roller,  a  more  accurate,  a  more  systematic,
or  a  more  argumentative,  discourse  upon  morals
might  not  have  been  pronounced ;  but  whether
more  could  have  been  said  in  the  same  room,  bet-
ter adapted  to  the  exigencies  of  the.  hearers,  or
better  calculated  for  the  purpose  of  impression?
Seen  in  this  light,  it  has  always  appeared  to  me
to  be  admirable.  Dr.  Lardner  thought  that  this
discourse  was  made  up  of  what  Christ  had  said  at
different  times,  and  on  different  occasions,  several
of  which  occasions  are  noticed  in  St.  Luke's  nar-
rative: I  can  perceive  no  reason  for  this  opinion.
I  believe  that  our  Lord  delivered  this  discourse  at
one  time  and  place,  in  the  manner  related  by  Saint
Matthew,  and  that  he  repeated  the  same  rules
and  maxims  at  different  times,  aa  opportunity  or


*  "  /say  unto  yon.  Swear  not  at  all ;  /say  unto  yoa,
MttL  £5t »  lJF*  unt0  7Wt  Lot*  JWtt  •,lelniM•,,-


occaskn  suggested;  that -they  were  often  in  nil
mouth,  and  were  repeated  to  different  audiences,
and  in  various  conversations.

It  is  incidental  to  this  mode  of  moral  instruc-
tion, which  proceeds  not  by  proof  but  upon  au-
thority, not  by  disquisition  but  by  precept,  that
the  rules  will  be  conceived  in  absolute  terms,
leaving  the  application,  and  the  distinctions  that
attendit,  to  the  reason  of  the  hearer.  It  is  like-
wise to  be  expected  that  they  will  be  delivered  in
terms  by  so  much  the  more  forcible  and  energe-
tic, as  they  have  to  encounter  natural  or  general
propensities.  It  is  farther  also  to  be  remarked,
that  many  of  those  strong  instances,  which  appear
in  our  Lord's  sermon,  such  as,  "  If  any  man  will
smite  thee  on  the  right  cheek,  turn  to  him  the
other  also :"  "  If  any  man  will  sue  thee  at  the  law,
and  take  away  thy  coat,  let  him  have  thy  cloak
also:"  "Whosoever  shall  compel  thee  to  go  a
mile,  go  with  him  twain :"  though  they  appear  in
the  form  of  specific  precepts,  are  intended  as  de-
scriptive of  disposition  ana  character.  A  specific
compliance  with  the  precepts  would  be  ot  little
value,  but  the  disposition  which  they  inculcate  is
of  the  highest.  He  who  should  content  himself
with  waiting  for  the  occasion,  and  with  literally
observing  the  rule  when  the  occasion  offered,
would  do  nothing  or  worse  than  nothing :  but  ho
who  considers  the  character  and  disposition  which
is  hereby  inculcated,  and  places  that  disposition
before  him  as  the  model  to  which  he  should  bring
his  own,  takes,  perhaps,  the  best  possible  method
of  improving  the  benevolence,  ana  of  calming  and
rectifying  the  vices,  of  his  temper.

If  it  be  said  that  this  disposition  is  unattainable,
I  answer,  so  is  all  perfection :  ought  therefore  a
moralist  to  recommend  imperfections  1  One1  ex-
cellency, however,  of  our  Saviour's  rules,  is,  that
they  are  either  never  mistaken,  or  never  so  mis-
taken as  to  do  harm.  I  could  feign  a  hundred
cases,  in  which  the  literal  application  of  the  rule.
"  of  doing  to  others  as  we  would  that  others  should
do  unto  us,"  might  mislead  us:  but  I  never  yet
met  with  the  man  who  was  actually  misled  by  it
Notwithstanding  that  our  Lord  bade  bis  followers
"  not  to  resist  evil,"  and  "  to  forgive  the  enemy
who  should  trespass  against  them,  not  till  seven
times,  but  till  seventy  tunes  seven  "  the  Christian
world  has  hitherto  suffered  little  by  too  much  pla-
cability or  forbearance.  I  would  repeat  once  more,
what  has  already  been  twice  remarked,  that  these
rules  were  designed  to  regulate  personal  conduct
from  personal  motives,  and  for  this  purpose  alone.

I  think  that  these  observations  will  assist  us
greatly  in  placing  our  Saviour's  conduct,  as  a
moral  teacher,  in  a  proper  point  of  view ;  eapeoV
ally  when  Jt  is  considered,  that  to  deliver  moral
disquisitions  was  no  part  of  his  design, — to  teach
morality  at  all  was  only  a  subordinate  part  of  it ;
his  great  business  being  to  supply,  what  was  much
more  wanting  than  lessons  of  morality,  stronger
moral  sanctions,  and  clearer  assurances  of  a  future
judgment*

*  Some  appear  to  require  a  religions  system,  or,  in
the  books  which  profess  to  deliver  that  system,  minute
directions,  for  every  case  and  occurrence  that  may
arise.  This,  say  they,  is  necessary  to  render  a  revela-
tion perfect  especially  one  which  has  for  its  object  the
regulation  of  human  conduct.  Now,  how  prolix,  and
yet  how  incomplete  and  unavailing,  such  an  attempt
must  have  been,  is  proved  by  one  notable-  example  :
"  The  Iodoo  and  Mussulman  religion  are  institutes


EVIDENCES  OP  CHRISTIANITY.


836


The  parables  of  the  New  Testament  are,  many
of  them,  such  as  would  have  done  honour  to  any
book  in  the  world ;  I  do  not  mean  in  style  and
diction,  but  in  the  choice  of  the  subjects,  in  the
structure  of  the  narratives,  in  the  aptness,  propri-
ety, and  force  of  the  circumstances  woven  into
them ;  and  in  some,  as  that  of  the  good  Sama-
ritan, the  prodigal  son,  the  Pharisee  and  the  pub-
lican, in  a  union  of  pathos  and  simplicity,  which,
in  the  best  productions  of  human  genius,  is  the
fruit  only  of  a  much  exercised  and  well  cultivated
judgment

The  Lord's  Prayer,  for  a  succession  of  solemn
thoughts,  for  fixing  the  attention  upon  a  few  great
points,  for  suitableness  to  every  condition,  for  suf-
ficiency, for  conciseness  without  obscurity,  for
the  weight  and  real  importance  of  its  petitions,  is
without  an  equal  or  a  rival.

From  whence  did  these  dome  ?  Whence  had
Cub  man  bis  wisdom  1  Was  our  Saviour,  in  fact,
a  well-instructed  philosopher,  whilst  he  is  repre-
sented to  us  as  an  illiterate  peasant  1  Or  shall  we
say  that  some  early  Christians  of  taste  and  educa-
tion composed  these  pieces  and  ascribed  them  to
Christ  1  Beside  all  other  incredibilities  in  this
account,  I  answer,  with  Dr.  Jortin,  that  they  could
not  do  it.  No  specimens  of  composition,  which
the  Christians  of  the  first  century  have  left  us,
authorize  us  to  believe  that  they  were  equal  to  the
task.  And  how  little  qualified  the  Jews,  the
countrymen  and  companions  of  Christ,  were  to
assist  him  in  the  undertaking,  may  be  judged  of
from  the  traditions  and  writings  of  theirs  which
were  the  nearest  to  that  age.  The  whole  collec-
tion of  the  Talmud  is  one  continued  proof,  into
what  follies  they  fell  whenever  they  left  their
Bible ;  and  how  little  capable  they  were  of  fur-
nishing out  such  lessons  as  Christ  delivered.


But  there  is  still  another  view,  in  which  our
.Lord's  discourses  deserve  to  be  considered ;  and
that  is,  in  their  negative  character,— not  in  what
they  did,  but  in  what  they  did  not,  contain.
Under  this  head,  the  following  reflections  appear
to  me  to  possess -some  weight.

I.  They  exhibit  no  particular  description  of
the  invisible  world.  The  future  happiness  of  the
good,  and  the  misery  of  the  bad,  which  is  all  we
want  to  he  assured  of,  is  directly  and  positively
affirmed,  and  is  represented  by  metaphors  and
comparisons,  which  were  plainly  intended  as
metaphors  and  comparisons,  and  as  nothing  more.
As  to  the  rest,  a  solemn  reserve  is  maintained.
The  question  concerning  the  woman  who  had  been
married  to  seven  brothers,  "  Whose  shall  she  be  on
the  resurrection  V1  was  of  a  nature  calculated  to
have  drawn  from  Christ  a  more  circumstantial
account  of  the  state  of  the  human  species  in  their
future  existence.  He  cut  short,  however,  the  in-
quiry, by  an  answer,  which  at  once  rebuked
intruding  curiosity,  and  was  agreeable  to  the  best
apprehensions  we  are  able  to  form  upon  the  sub-


of  civil  law,  regulating  the  minutest  questions  both  of
property,  and  of  all  questions  which  come  under  the
cognizance  of  the  magistrate.  And  to  what  length
details  of  this  kind  are^ecessarily  carried,  when  once
begun,  may  be  understood  from  an  anecdote  of  the
Mussulman  code,  which  we  have  received  from  the
most  respectable  authority,  that  not  less  than  teventf-
Jh*  tkmtmnd  traditional  precepts  have  been  promul-
.  gated."— Hamilton's  Translation  of  Hedaya,  or  Guide.


ject.  viz.  "  That  they  who  are  accounted  worthy
of  that  resurrection,  shall  be  as  the  angels  of  God
in  heaven."  I  lay  a  stress  upon  this  reserve,  be-
cause it  repels  the  suspicion  of  enthusiasm ;  for
enthusiasm  is  wont  to  expatiate  upon  the  condi-
tion of  the  departed,  above  all  other  subjects;
and  with  a  wild  particularity.  It  is  moreover  a
topic  which  is  always  listened  to  with  greediness.
The  teacher,  therefore,  whose  principal  purpose  is
to  draw  upon  himself  attention,  is  sure  to  be  full  of
it  The  Koran  of  Mahomet  is  half  made  up  of  it.

II.  Our  Lord  enjoined  no  austerities.  He  not
only  enjoined  none  as  absolute  duties,  but  he
recommended  none  as  carrying  men  to  a  higher
degree  of  divine  favour.  Place  Christianity,  in
this  respect,  by  the  side  of  all  institutions  which
have  been  founded  in  the  fanaticism,  either  of
their  author,  or  of  his  first  followers;  or  rather
compare,  in  this  respect,  Christianity  as  it  came
from  Christ,  with  the  same  religion  after  it  fell
into  other  hands:  with  the  extravagant'  merit
very  soon  ascribed  to  celibacy,  solitude,  voluntary
poverty ;  with  the  rigours  of  an  ascetic,  and  the
vows  of  a  monastic  life ;  the  hair  shirt,  the  watch-
ings,  the  midnight  prayers,  the  obmutescence,
the  gloom  and  mortification  of  religious  orders,
and  of  those  who  aspired  to  religious  perfection.  -

III.  Our  Saviour' uttered  no  impassioned  devo-
tion. There  was  no  heat  in  his  piety ^  or  in  the
language  in  which  he  expressed  it ;  no  vehement
or  rapturous  ejaculations,  no  violent  urgency,  in
his  prayers.  The  Lord's  Praver  is  a  model  of
calm  devotion.  His  words  in  the  garden  are  un-
affected expressions,  of  a  deep  indeed,  but  sober,
piety.  He  never  appears  to  have  been  worked
up  into  any  thing  like  that  elation,  or  that  emotion
or  spirits  which  is  occasionally  observed  in  most
of  those,  to  whom  the  name  of  enthusiast  can  in
any  degree  be  applied.  I  feel  a  respect  for  Me-
thodists, because  I  believe  that  there  is  to  be  found
amongst  them  much  sincere  piety,  and  availing,
though  not  always  well-informed,  Christianity:
yet  I  never  attended  a  meeting  of  theirs,  but  I
came  away  with  the  reflection,  how  different  what
I  heard  was  from  what  I  read !  I  do  not  mean
in  doctrine,  with  which  at  present  1  have  no  con-
cern, but  in  manner ;  how  different  from  the
calmness,  the  sobriety,  the  good  sense,  and  I  may
add,  the  strength  and  authority  of  our  Lord's  dis-
courses!

IV.  It  is  very  usual  with  the  human  mind,  to
substitute  forwardness  and  fervency  in  a  particu-
lar cause,  for  the  merit  of  general  and  regular
morality ;  and  it  is  natural,  and  politic  also,  in  the
leader  of  a  sect  or  party,  to  encourage  such  a  dis-
position in  his  followers.  Christ  did  not  overlook
this  turn  of  thought;  yet,  though  avowedly
placing  himself  at  the  head  of  a  new  institution,
he  notices  it  only  to  condemn  it  "  Not  every  one
that  saith  unto  me,  Lord,  Lord,  shall  enter  into
the  kingdom  of  heaven :  but  he  that  doeth  the
will  of  my  Father  which  is  in  heaven.  Many
will  say  unto  me  in  that  day,  Lord,  Lord,  have
we  not  prophesied  in  thy  name  1  and  in  thy  name
have  cast  out  devils  1  and  in  thy  name  tfpne  many
wonderful  works  1  And  then  will  I  profess  unto
you  I  never  knew  you:  depart  from  me,  ye  that
work  iniquity"*  So  far  was'  the  author  of  Chris-
tianity from  courting  the  attachment  of  his  follow-
ers by  any  sacrifice  of  principle,  or  by  a  conde-


*  Matt  yii.  21, «.


EVIDENCES  OP  CHRISTIANITY.


to  the  erron  which  even  zeal  in  hi*
service  might  have  inspired !  This  waa  a  proof
both  of  sincerity  and  judgment

V.  Nor,  fifthly,  did  he  fell  in  with  any  of  the
depraved  fashions  of  his  country,  or  with  the  na-
tural bias  of  his  own  education.  Bred  up  a  Jew,
under  a  religion  extremely  technical,  in  an  age
and  amongst  a  people  more  tenacious  of  the  cere-
monies than  of  any  other  part  of  that  religion,  he
delivered  an  institution,  containing  less  of  ritual,
and  that  more  simple  than  is  to  be  found  in  any
religion  which  ever  prevailed  amongst  mankind.
We  have  known,  I  do  allow,  examples  of  an
enthusiasm,  which  has  swept  away  all  external
ordinances  before  it.  But  this  spirit  certainly  did
not  dictate  our  Saviour's  conduct,  either  in  his-
treatment  of  the  religion  of  his  country,  or  in  the
formation  of  his  own  institution.  In  both,  he
displayed  the  soundness  and  moderation  of  his
judgment  He  censured  an  overstrained  scrupu-
lousness, or  perhaps  an  affectation  of  scrupulous-
ness, about  the  sabbath :  but  how  did  he  censure
it?  not  by  contemning  or  decrying  the  institution
itself,  but  by  declaring  that  "the  sabbath  was
made  for  man,  not  man  for  the  sabbath ;"  that  is
to  say,  that  the  sabbath  was  to  be  subordinate  to
its  purpose,  and  that  that  purpose  was  the  real
good  of  those  who  were  the  subjects  of  the  law.
The  same  concerning  the  nicety  of  some  of  the
Pharisees,  in  paying  tithes  of  the  most  trifling
articles,  accompanied  with  a  neglect  of  justice,
fidelity,  and  mercy.  He  finds  mult  with  them
for  misplacing  their  anxiety.  He  does  not  speak
disrespectfully  of  the  law  of  tithes,  nor  of  their
Observance  of  it ;  but  he  assigns  to  each  class  of
duties  its  proper  station  in  the  scale  of  moral
importance.  All  this  might  be  expected  perhaps
from  a  well-instructed,  cool,  and  judicious  philoso-
pher, but  was  not  to  be  looked  for  from  an  illi-
terate Jew;  certainly  not  from  an  impetuous
enthusiast.

VI.  Nothing  could  be  more  quibbling,  than
were  the  comments  and  expositions  of  the  Jewish
doctors  at  that  time ;  nothing  so  puerile  as  their
distinctions.  Their  evasion  of  the  fifth  com-
mandment, their  exposition  of  the  law  of  oaths,
are  specimens  of  the  bad  taste  in  morals  which
then  prevailed.  Whereas,  in  a  numerous  collec-
tion of  our  Saviour's  apophthegms,  many  of  them
referring  to  sundry  precepts  of  the  Jewish  law,
there  is  not  to  be  found  one  example  of  sophistry,
or  of  false  subtilty,  or  of  any  thing  approaching
thereunto.

VII.  The  national  temper  of  the  Jews  was
intolerant,  narrow-minded,  and  excluding.  In
Jesus,  on  the  contrary,  whether  we  regard  his
lessons  or  his  example,  we  see  not  only  benevo-
lence, but  benevolence  the  most  enlarged  and
comprehensive.  In  the  parable  of  the  good  Sa-
maritan, the  very  point  of.  the  story  is,  that  the
person  relieved  by  him,  was  the  national  and  reli-
gious enemy  of  his  benefactor.  Our  Lord  de-
clared the  equity  of  the  divine  administration,
when  he  told  the  Jews  (what,  probably,  they
were  surprised  to  hear),  "  That  many  shoujd
come  from  the  east  and  west  and  should  sit  down
with  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob,  in  the  kingdom
of  heaven ;  but  that  the  children  of  the  kingdom
should  be  cast  into  outer  darkness."*  His  reproof


•  Matt  vtil.  II.


of  the  hasty  zeal  of  his  disciples,  who  would  needs
call  down  fire  from  heaven  to  revenge  an  affront
put  upon  their  Master,  shows  the  lenity  of  hk
character,  and  of  his  religion  ;  and  his  opinion  of
the  manner  in  which  the  most  unreasonable  op-
ponents ought  to  be  treated,  or  at  least  of  the
manner  in  which  they  ought  not  to  be  treated.
The  terms  in  which  his  rebuke  was  conveyed,
deserve  to  be  noticed: — "Ye  know  not  what
manner  of  spirit  ye  are  of."*

VI II.  Lastly ,  amongst  the  negative  qualities  of
our  religion,  as  it  came  out  of  the  hands  of  its
Founder  and  his  apostles,  we  may  reckon  its  com-
plete abstraction  from  all  views  either  of  ecclesi-
astical or  civil  policy;  or,  to  meet  a  language
much  in  fashion  with  some  men,  from  the  pontics
either  of  priests  or  statesmen.  Christ's  declara-
tion, that  "  his  kingdom  was  not  of  this  world,"
recorded  by  St  John  ;  his  evasion  of  the  question,
whether  it  was  lawful  or  not  to  give  tribute  unto
Caesar,  mentioned  by  the  three  other  evangelists;
his  reply  to  an  application  that  was  made  to  him,
to  interpose  his  authority  in  a  question  of  proper-
ty ;  "  Man,  who  made  me  a  ruler  or  a  judge  over
you  V1  ascribed  to  him  by  St.  Luke ;  his  declin-
ing to  exercise  the  office  of  a  criminal  judge  in
the  case  of  the  woman  taken  in  adultery,  as  re-
lated by  John,  are  all  intelligible  significations  of
our  Saviour's  sentiments  upon  tjus  head.  And
with  respect  to  politics,  in  the  usual  sense  of  that
word,  or  discussions  concerning  different  forms  ef
government,  Christianity  declines  every  question
upon  the  subject.  Whilst  politicians  are  disput-
ing about  monarchies,  aristocracies,  and  rejwbuce,
the  gospel  is  alike  applicable,  useful,  and  friendly,
to  them  all;  inasmuch  as,  1st,  it  tends  to  make
men  virtuous,  and  as  it  is  easier  to  govern  good
men  than  bad  men  under  any  constitution ;  as,
2dly,  it  states  obedience  to  government  in  ordi-
nary cases,  to  be  not  merely  a  submission  to  force,
but  a  duty  of  conscience ;  as.  3dly,  it  induces
dispositions  favourable  to  public  tranquillity,  a
Christian's  chief  care  being  to  nasi  quietly  through
this  world  to  a  better ;  as,  4thly,  it  prays  for  com-
munities, and  for  the  governors  of  communities,
of  whatever  description  or  denomination  they  be,
with  a  solicitude  and  fervency  proportioned  to  the
influence  which  they  possess  upon,  human  happi-
ness. AH  which,  in  my  opinion,  is  just  as  it
should  be.  Had  there  been  more  to  be  found  in
Scripture  of  a  political  nature,  or  convertible  to
political  purposes,  the  worst  use  would  have  been
made  of  it,  on  whichever  side  it  seemed  to  lie.

When,  therefore,  we  consider  Christ  as  a  i


teacher{remembering  that  this  was  only  a  second-
ary part  of  his  office;  and  that  morality,  by  the
nature  of  the  subject,  does  not  admit  of  discovery,
properly  so  called); — when  we  consider  either
what  he  taught,  or  what  he  did  not  teach,  either
the  substance  or  the  manner  of  his  instruction ;
his  preference  of  solid  to  popular  virtues,  of  a
character  which  is  commonly  despised  to  a  cha-
racter which  is  universally  extolled ;  his  placing,
in  our  licentious  vices,  the  check  in  the  right

Elace,  viz.  upon  the  thoughts ;  his  collecting  of
uman  duty  into  two  well-devised  rules,  his  re-
petition of  these  rules,  the  stress  he  laid  upon
them,  especially  in  comparison  with  positive  du-
ties, and  nis  fixing  thereby  the'sentimenta  6f  hk


♦  Lukeix.55.


EVIDENCES  OF  CHRISTIANITY.


Sft


_ i ;  his  exclusion  of  «J1  regard  to  reputation

in  our  deration  and  alms,  and,  by  parity  of  rea-
son, in  our  other  virtues :— when  we  consider
that  hw  instructions  were  delivered  in  a  form  cal-
culated for  impression,  the  precise  purpose  in  his
situation  to  be  consulted;  and  that  they  were
illustrated  by  parables,  the  choice  and  structure
of  which  would  have  been  admired  in  any  compo-
sition whatever  ;-•-  when  we  observe  him  free  from
the  usual  symptoms  of  enthusiasm,  heat  and  vehe-
mence in  devotion,  austerity  in  institutions,  and  a
wild  particularity  in  the  description  of  a  future
state ;  free  also  from  the  depravities  of  his  age  and
country ;  without  superstition  amongst  the  most
superstitious  of  men,  yet  not  decrying  positive
distinctions  or  external  observances,  but  soberly
calling  them  to  the  principle  of  their  establishment,
and  to  their  olaoe  in  the  scale  of  human  duties;
without  sophistry  or  trifling,  amidst  teachers  re-
markable tor  nothing  so  much  as  frivolous  sub-
tilties  and  quibbling  expositions ;  candid  and
liberal  in  his  judgment  of  the  rest  of  mankind,
although  belonging  to  a  people  who  affected  a
separate  chum  to  divine  favour,  and,  in  conse-
quence of  that  opinion,  prone  tauncharitablcness,
partiality,  and  restriction ; — when  we  And,  in  his
religion,  no  scheme  of  building  up  a  hierarchy,  or
of  ministering  to  the  views  of  human  govern-
ments; — in  a  word,  when  we  compare  Christiani-
ty, as  it  came  from  its  Author,  either  with  other
lefigkxns,  or  with  itself  in  other  hands,  the  most
reluctant  understanding  will  be  induced  to  ac-
knowtedge  the  probity,  I  think  also  the  good
sense,  of  those  to  whom  it  owes  its  origin ;  and
that  some  regard  is  due  to  the  testimony  of  such
men.  when  they  declare  their  knowledge  that  the
religion  proceeded  from  God;  and  when  they
appeal,  for  the  truth  of  their  assertion,  to  mira-
cles, which  they  wrought,  or.  which  they  saw.

Perhaps  the  qualities  which  we  observe  in  the
religion,  may  be  thought  to  prove  something  more.
They  would  have  been  extraordinary,  had  the  re-
ligion come  from  any  person;  from  the  person
from  whom  it  did  come,  they  are  exceedingly  so.
What  was  Jesus  in  external  appearance!  A
Jewish  peasant,  the  son  of  a  carpenter,  living  with
his  father  and  mother  in  a  remote  province  of  Pa-
lestine, until  the  time  that  he  produced  himself  in
his  public  character.  He  had  no  master  to  instruct
or  prompt  him ;  he  had  read  no  books,  but  the
works  of  Moses  and  the  prophets:  he  had  visited
no  polished  cities ;  he  had  received  no  lessons  from
Socrates  or  Plato, — nothing  to  form  in  him  a  taste
or  judgment  different  from  that  of  the  rest  of  his
countrymen,  and  of  persons  of  the  same  rank  of
fife  with  himself.  Supposing  it  to  be  true,  which
it  is  not,  that  all  his  pouts  of  morality  might  be
picked  out  of  Greek  and  Roman  writings,  they
were  writings  which  he  had  never  seen.  Sup-
posing them  to  be  no  more  than  what  some  or
other  had  taught  in  various  times  and  places,  he
eould  not  collect  them  together.

Who  were  his  coadjutors  in  the  undertaking, —
the  persons  into  whose  hands  the  religion  came
after  Ins  death  1  A  few  fishermen  upon  the  lake
of  Tiberias,  persons  just  as  uneducated,  and,  for
the  purpose  of  framing  rules  of  morality,  as  un-
profmsing  as  himself.  Suppose  the  mission  to  be
real,  all  this  is  accounted  tor ;  the  unsuitableness
of  the  authors  to  the  production,  of  the  characters
to  the  undertaking,  no  longer  surprises  us :  but
without  reality,'* is  very  difficult  to  explain,  how


such  a  system  should  proceed  from  such  persons.
Christ  was  not  like  any  other  carpenter ;  toe  apos-
tles were  not  like  any  other  fishermen.

But  the  subject  is  not  exhausted  by  these-  ob-
servations. That  portion  of  it  which  is  most  redu-
cible to  points  of  argument,  has  been  stated,  and,  I
trust,  truly.  There  are,  however,  some  topics,  of
a  more  diffuse  nature,  which  yet  deserve  to  be
proposed  to  the  reader's  attention.

-The  character  of  Christ  is  a  part  of  the  mo-
rality of  the  gospel :  one  strong  observation  upon
which  is,  that,  neither  as  represented  by  his  fol-
lowers, nor  as  attacked  by  his  enemies,  is  he
charged  with  any  personal  vice.  v  This  remark  is
as  old  as  Qrigen :  "  Though  innumerable  lies  and
calumnies  hod  been  forged  against  the  venerable
Jesus,  none  had  dared  to  charge  him  with  an  in-
temperance."* Not  a  reflection  upon  his  moral
character,  not  an  imputation  or  suspicion  of  any
offence  against  purity  and  chastity,  appears  for
five  hundred  years  after  his  birth.  This  fault-
lessness  is  more  peculiar  than  we  are  apt  to  ima-
gine. Some  stain  pollutes  the  morals  or  the  mo-
rality of  almost  every  other  teacher,  and  of  every
other  lawgiver.t  Zeno  the  stoic,  and  Diogenes
the  cynic,  fell  into  the  foulest  impurities ;  of  which
also  Socrates,  himself  was  more'  than  suspected.
Solon  forbade  unnatural  crimes  to  slaves.  Ly-
curgus  tolerated  theft  as  a  part  of  education.  Pla-
to recommended  a  community  of  women.  Aris-
totle maintained  the  general  right  of  making  war
upon  barbarians.  The  elder  Cato  was  remarkable
for  the  ill  usage  of  his  slaves ;  the  younger  gave
up  the  person  of  his  wife.  One  loose  principle  is
found  in  almost  all  the  pagan  moralists ;  is  dis-
tinctly, however,  perceived  m  the  writings  of  Pla-
to, Aenophon,  Cicero,  Seneca,  Epictetus;  and
that  is,  the  allowing,  and  even  the  recommending
to  their  disciples,  a  compliance  with  the  religion,
and  with  the  religious  rites,  of  every  country  into
into  which  they  came.  In  speaking  of  the  found-
ers of  new  institutions,  we  cannot  forget  Mahomet.
His  licentious  transgressions  of  his  own  licentious
rules;  his  abuse  of  the  character  which  he  as-
sumed, and  of  the  power  which  he -had  acquired,
for  the  purposes  of  personal  and  privileged  indul-
gence ;  nis  avowed  claim  of  a  special  permission
from  heaven  of  unlimited  sensuality,  is  known  to
every  reader,  as  it  is  confessed  by  every  writer,  of
the  Moslem  6tory.  4P

Secondly,  In  the  histories  which  are  left  us  of
Jesus  Christ,  although  very  short,  and  although
dealing  in  narrative,  and  not  in  observation  or
panegyric,  we  perceive,  beside  the  absence  of  eve-
ry appearance  of  vice,  traces  of  devotion,  humility,
benignity,  mildness,  patience,  prudence.  I  speak
of  traces  of  those  qualities,  because  the  qualities
themselves  are  to  be  collected  from  incidents ;  in-
asmuch as  the  terms  are  never  used  of  Christ  in
the  Gospels,  nor  is  any  formaf  character  of  him
drawn  in  any  part  of  the  New  Testament.

Thus  we  see  the  devoutness  of  his  mind,  in  his
frequent  retirement  to  solitary  prayer  ;t  in  his
habitual  giving  of  thanks  ;§  in  his  reference  of  the
beauties  and  operations  of  nature  to  the  bounty


*  Or.  En.  Ols.  1. 3.  num.  36.  od.  Boned.

t  See  many  instances  collected  by  Grotius,  do  Von U to
Christiana;  Religionis,  in  the  notes  to  his  second  book,
p.  116.  Pocock's  edition.  ,

tMaU.xiv.23. Luke  ix.  38. Matt.  xxyi.  3G.

5  Mate  xi.Sfr  Mark  viii.6.  John  vi.33.  Luke.zui.  17.
29


838


EVIDENCES  OP  CHRISTIANITY.


of  Providence;*  in  his  earnest  addresses  to  his
Father,  mora  particularly  that  short  but  solemn
one  befon  the  raising  of  Lazarus  from  the  dead  ;t
and  in  the  deep  piety  of  his  behaviour  in  the  gar-
den, on  the  last  evening  of  his  life  :t  hU  humility,
in  his  constant  reproof  of  contentions  for  su  {pri-
ority :S  the  benignity  and  ailectionatencHS  of  his
temper,  in  his  kindness  to  children  ;ll  in  the  tears
which  he  shed  over  his  falling  rountry,ir  and
upon  the  death  of  his  friend  ;••  in  his  noticing  of
the  widow's  mite  ;tt  in  his  parables  of  the  good
Samaritan,  of  the  ungrateful  servant,  and  ot  the
Pharisee  and  publican,  of  which  parables  no  one
but  a  man  of  humanity  could  have  been  the  au-
thor: the  mildness  and  lenity  of  his  character  is
discovered,  in  his  rebuke  of  the  forward  zeal  of
his  disciples  at  the  Samaritan  village  ;t*  in  his
expostulation  with  Pilate  ;§«  in  his  prayer  for  his
enemies  at  the  moment  of  his  suffering,!!  II  which,
though  it  has  been  since  very  properly  and  fre-
duently  imitated,  was  then,  I  apprehend,  new.
His  prudence  is  discerned,  where  prudence  is
most  wanted,  in  his  conduct  on  trying  occasions,
and  in  answers  to  artful  questions,  (jf  these,  the
following  are  examples: — His  withdrawing,  in
various  instance*,  from  the  first  symptoms  ot  tu-
mult,inr  and  with  the  express  care,  as  appears
from  St  Matthew,***  of  carrying  on  his  ministry
in  quietness ;  his  declining  of  every  species  of  in-
terference with  the  civil  affaire  of  tne  country,
which  disposition  is  manifested  by  his  behaviour
in  the  case  of  the  woman  caught  in  adultery  ,ttt
and  in  his  repulse  of  the  application  which  was
made  to  him,  to  interpose  his  decision  about  a  dis-
puted inheritance  :ttt  his  judicious,  yet,  as  it
should  seem,  unprepared  answers,  will  be  confessed
in  the  ease  of  the  Roman  tribute  ;H§  in  the  diffi-
culty concerning  the  interfering  relations  of  a  fu-
ture, state,  as  proposed  to  him  in  the  instance  of  a
women  who  had  married  seven  brethren  ;ll  II  li  and,
more  especially,  in  his  reply  to  those  who  de-
manded from  him  an  explanation  of  the  authority
by  which  he  acted,  which  reply  consisted,  in  pro-
pounding a  question  to  them,  situated  between
the  #ery  difficulties  into  which  they  were  insidi-
ously endeavouring  to  draw  /um.inriT

dor  Saviour's  lessons,  besides  what  has  already
been  remarked  in  them,  touch,  and  that  often-
times by  very  affecting  representations,  upon  some
of  the  most  interesting  topics  of  human  duty,  and
of  human  meditation:  upon  the  principles,  by
which  the  decisions  of  the  last  day  will  be  regu-
lated:**** upon  the  superior,  or  rather  the  su-
preme, importance  of  religion  :ttrt  upon  peni-
tence, by  the  most  pressing  calls,  and  the  most
encouraging  invitations  ;tttt  upon  self-denial,§§§§
watehfuTneas,ll  II II II  placability  .INTUIT  confidence  in
God,*****  the  value  of  spiritual,  that  is,  of  mental
worship.ttttt  the  necessity  of  moral  obedience,


•  Matt.  vi.  28-38.  t  John  xi.  4 1 .

I  Matt.  xxvi.  36—47.  •  t  Mark  ix.  33.

Mark  z.  16.  4  Luke  xix.  41.

•  John  xi.  35.  ft  Mark  xii.  43.

aLukeix.55.  §§  Jobn  xix.  H .

Luke  xxiii.  34.
rMatt.xiv.22. Lnkev.  15,16. Jdhn  v.  13;  vi.  15.
•■•Chap,  xii  19. tttJoha  viii.  1. U I  Luke  xii.  14.

»Matt.  xxii.  19.  Hi|||Matt.xxii.28.

IT  Matt  xxi.  83,  Ac  ****  Matt.  xxv.  31^kc

ttttMark  viii.35.  Mattvi.  31—33.  Luke  xii  4,5.16— 21.
1  ^  1  Lake  xv.  §§§§  Matt.  v.  89.

{Mark  xiii.  3Z Matt  xxi  v.  42. -xxv.  13.
nr  Lake  xvii.  4. Matt,  xviii.  33,  Jbc
»  Matt  vi.  85-30.  ftttt  John  iv.  83, 84.


and  the  directing  of  that  obedience  to  the  spirit
and  principle  of  the  law,  instead  .of  seeking  ht
evasions  in  a  technical  construction  of  its  terms  *

If  we  extend  our  argument  toother  parts  of  the
New  Testament,  we*  may  offer,  as  amongst  the
brst  and  shortest  rules  of  life,  or,  which  is  the  same
thinjr.  descriptions  of  virtue,  that  have  ever  been
delivered,  the  following  passages :

"Pure  religion,  and  undented,  before  God  and
the  Father,  is  this;  to  visit  the  fatherless  and
widows  in  their  affliction,  and  to  keep  himself  un-
spotted from  the  world."  t

"  Now  the  end  of  the  commandment  is,  charity.
out  of  a  pure  heart  and  a  good  conscience,  ana
faith  unfeigned."  t

"  For  the  grace  of  God  that  bringeth  salvation,
hath  appeared  to  all  men,  teaching  us,  that  deny-
ing ungodliness  and  worldly  lusts,  we  should.Iive
soberly,  righteously!  and  godly  in  this  present
world."  S

Enumerations  of  virtues  and  vices,  and  those
sufficiently  accurate,  and  unquestionably  just,  are
given  by  Saint  Paul  to  his  converts  in  three  seve-
ral Epistles.  II

The  relative  duties  of  husbands  and  wives,  of

Sirents  and  children,  of  masters  and  servants,  of
hristian  teachers%nd  their  flocks,  of  governors
and  their  subjects,  are  set  forth  by  the  same  wri-
ter, IT  not  indeed  with  the  copiousness,  the  detail,
or  the  distinctness,  of  a  moralist,  who  should,  in
these  days,  sit  down  to  write  chapters  upon  the
subject,  But  with  the  leading  rules  and  principles
in  each ;  and,  above  all,  with  truth,  and  with  au-
thority.

Lastly,  the  whole  volume  of  the  New  Testa-
ment is  replete  with  piety;  with,  what  were
almost  unknown  to  heathen  moralists,  devotional
virtues,  the  most  profound  veneration  of  the  Deity,
an  habitual  sense  of  his  bounty  and  protection,  a
firm  confidence  in  the  final  result  of  nis  counsels
and  dispensations,  a  disposition  to  resort,  upon  all
occasions,  to  his  mercy,  for  the  supply  of  nuxnan
wants,  for  assistance  in  danger,  for  relief  from
pain,  for  the  pardon  of  sin.


CHAPTER  m.

The  Candour ^  qf  tiit  Writers  qf  (he  New
Testament.

I  make  this  candour  to  consist,  in  their  potting
down  many  passages,  and.  noticing  many  circum-
stances, which  no  writer  whatever  was  likely  to
have  forged ;  and  which  no  writer  Would  have
chosen  to  appear  in  his  book,  who  had  been  care-
ful to  present  the  story  in  the  most  unexception-
able form,  or  who  had  thought  himself  at  liberty
to  carve  and  mould  the  particulars  of  that  story,
according  to  his  choice,  or  according  to  nis  judg-
ment of  the  effect.

A  strong  and  well-known  example  of  the  fair-
ness of  the  evangelists,  offers  itself  in  their  Re-
count of  Christ's  resurrection,  namely,  in  their
unanimously  stating,  that  after  he  was  risen,  he
appeared  to  his  disciples  alone.  I  do  not  mean


•  Matt.  v.  31.  f  James  1. 97.

X  1  Tim.  i.  5.  f  Tit  ii.  11, 18.

|  Gal.  v.  19.  Col.  iii.  19.  1  Coi.  xiii.
IT  Bph.v.33;vi.  L5. 8 Cor.  vi.  6, 7. Rom.  xiii.


EVIDENCES  OP  CHRISTIANITY.


830


tin*  they  hat*  used  the  exclusive  word  alone;
but  that  all  the  instances  which  they  have  record-
ed of  hie  appearance)  are  instances  of  appearance
to  his  disciples ;  that  their  reasonings  upon  it,  and
allusions  to  it,  are  confined  to  this  supposition ;
and  that  by  one  of  them,  Peter  is  made  to  say,
"  Him  God- raised  up  the  third  day,  and  showed
him  openly,  not  to  all  the  people,  but  to  witnesses
chosen  before  of  God,  even,  to  us,  who  did  eat  and
drink  with  him  after  he  rose  from  the  dead."  *
The most  common  understanding  must  have
perceived,  that  the  history  of  the  resurrection
would  have  come  with  more  advantage,  if  they
had  related  that  Jesus  appeared,  after  he  was
risen*  to  his  foes  as  well  as  his  friends,  to  the
Scribes  and  Pharisees,  the  Jewish  council,  and
the  Roman  governor ;  or  even  if  they  had  asserted
the  public  appearance  of  Christ  in  general  uquali-
fied  terms,  without  noticing,  as  they  have  done.
the  presence  of  hk  disciples  on  each  occasion,  and
noticing  it  in  such  a  manner  as  to  lead  their  read-
ers to  suppose  that  none  bat  disciples  were  pre-
sent They  could  have  represented  it  in  one  way
as  well  as  the  other. And  if  their  point  had  been,
to  have  the  religion  believed,  whether  true  or
fidse;  if  they  had  fabricated  the  story  ab  initio;
or  if  they  had  been  disposed  either  to  have  deliver-
ed their  testimony  as  witnesses,  or  to  have  worked
up  their  materials  and  information  as  historians,
in  such  a  manner  as  to  render  their  narrative  as
specipus  and  unobjectionable  as  they  could ;  in  a
word,  if  they  had  thought  of  any  thing  but  of  the
truth  of  the  case,  as  they  understood  and  believed
it;  they  would,  in  their  account  of  Christ's  several
appearances  after  his  resurrection,  at  least  have
omitted  this  restriction. At  this  distance  of  time,
the  account  as  we  have  it,  is  perhaps  more  credi-
ble than  it  would  have  been  the  other  way ;  be-
cause this  manifestation  of  the  historians'  candour,
is  of  more  advantage  to  their  testimony,  than  the
difference  in  the  circumstances  of  the  account
would  have  been  to  the  nature  of  the  evidence.
But  this  is  an  effect  which  the  evangelists  would
not  foresee:  and  I  think  that  it  was  by  no  means
the  case  at  the  time  when  the  books  were  com-
posed.

Mr.  Gibbon  has  argued  for  the  genuineness  of
the  Koran,  from  the  confessions  which  it  contains
to  the  apparent  disadvantage  of  the  Mahometan
cause,  t  The  same  defence  vindicates  the  genu-
ineness of  our  Gospels,  and  without  prejudice  to
the  cause  at  all.

There  are  some  other  instances  in  which  the
evangelists  honestly  relate  what,  they  must  have
perceived,  would  make  against  them.

Of  this  kind  is  John  the  Baptist's  message,  pre-
served by  Saint  Matthew,  (xi.  2,)  and  Saint
Luke  (vii.  18):  "Now  when  John  nad  heard  in
the  prison  the  works  of  Christ,  he  sent  two  of  his
disciples,  and  said  unto  him,  Art  thou  he  that
should  come,  or  look  we  for  another  ?"  To  con-
less,  still  more  to  state,  that  John  the  Baptist  had
his  doubts  concerning  the  character  of  Jesus,
could  not  bot  afford  a  handle  to  cavil  and  objec-
tion. But  truth,  like  honesty,  neglects  appear-
ances. The  same  observation,  perhaps,  holds
concerning  the  apostacy  of  Judas,  t


*  Acts  x.  40,  41.  t  Vol.  ir.  c.  50.  note  96.

f  |1  nad  once  placed  amongst  them  examples  of  fair
concession,  the  remarkable  words  of  Saint  Matthew,  in
Jus  account  of  Christ's  appearance  upon  the  Galilean


John  vi.  66.  "  From  that  time,  many  of  his
disciples  went  back,  and  walked  no  more  with
him."  Was  it  the  part  of  a  writer,  who  dealt  in
suppression  and  disguise,  to  put  down  this  anec-
dote?

Or  this,  which  Matthew  has  preserved?  (ziL
58 :)  "  He  did  not  many  mighty  works  there,  be-
cause of  their  unbelief."

Again,  in  the  same  evangelist :  (v.  >  17.  18 :)
"  Think  not  that  I  am  come  to  destroy  the  law  or
the  prophets  j  I  am  not  come  to  destroy,  but  to
fulfil :  for,  verily  I  say  unto  you,  till  heaven  and
earth  pass,  one  jot,  or  one  tittle,  shall  in  no  wise
pass  from  the  law,  till  all  be  fulfilled."  At  the
time  the  Gospels  were  written,  the  apparent  ten-
dency of  Christ's  mission  was  to* diminish  the'
authority  of  the  Mosaic  code,  and  it  was  so'  con-
sidered by  the  Jews  themselves.  It  is  very  improba-
ble, therefore,  that  without  the  constraint  of  truth,
Matthew  should  have  ascribed  a  saying  to  Christ,
which,  prime  intuitu,  militated  with  the  judg-
ment of  the  age  in  which  hjs  Gospel  was  writ-
ten. Marcion  thought  this  text  so  objectionable
that  he  altered  the  words,  so  as  to  invert  the
sense.  IT

Once  more:  (Acts  xxv.  18,  19:)  "They
brought  none  accusation  against  him,  of  such
things  as  I  supposed,  but  had  certain  questions
against  him  of  their  own  superstition,  and  of  one
Jesus  which  was  dead,  whom  Paul  affirmed  to  be
alive."  Nothing  could  be  more  in  the  character
of  a  Roman  governor  than  these  words.  But  that
is  not  precisely  the  point  I  am  concerned  with,
A  mere  panegyrist,  or  a  dishonest  narrator,  would
not  have  represented  his  cause,  or  have  made  a
great  magistrate  represent  it,  in  this  manner:  t.  e.
m  terms  not  a  little  disparaging,  and  bespeaking,
on  his  part,  much  unconcern  and  indifference
about  the  matter.  The  same  observation  may  be
repeated  of  the  speech  which  is  ascribed  re  Gailio,
(Acts  xviii.  15.)  "  If  it  be  a  question  of  words
and  names,  and  of  your  law,  look  ye  to  it;  for  I
will  be  no  judge  of  such  matters."

Lastly,  where  do  we  discern  a  stronger  mark
of  candour,  or  less  disposition  to  extol  and  magni-
fy, than  in  the  conclusion  of  the  same  history?  in
which  the  evangelist,  after  relating  that  Paul,  on
his  first  arrival  at  Rome,  preached  to  the  Jews'
from  morning  until  evening,  adds,  "  And  some
believed  the  things  which  were  spoken,  and  some
believed  not."

The  following,  I  think,  are  passages  which
were  very  unlikely  to  have  presented  I
to  the  mind  of  a  forger  or  a  fabulist.


mountain : "  And  when  they  saw  Mm,  they  worshipped
him ;  but  tome  doubted."  X  I  have  tines,  however,  been
convinced  by  what  is  observed  concerning  this  pas-
sage in  Dr.  Townshend's  discourse  §  upon  the  resur-
rection, that  the  transaction,  as  related  by  Saint  Mat-
thew, was  really  this :  "  Christ  appeared  first  at a  dis-
tance ;  the  greater  part  of  the  company,  the  moment
they  saw  him,  worshipped,  but  some,  as  yet,  i.  :  upon
the  first  distant  view  of  his  person,  doubted;  where-
upon Christ  came  up  K  to  thorn,  and  spake  to  them,"  Ax. :
that  the  doubt,  therefore,  was  a  doubt  only  at  first,  for  a
moment,  and  upon  his  being  seen  at  a  distance,  and
was  afterward  dispelled  by  his  nearer  approach,  and  by
his  entering  into  conversation  with  them.

1  Chap,  xxviii.  17.  §  p?«*  177.

j  Saint  Matthew's  words  are,  K*i  »pi<ri>.5»»  e  Iqrovc,
ix»ht,<ri»  »utc«5.  This  intimates,  that,  when  he  first
appeared,  it  was  at  a  distance,  at  least  from  many  of
the  spectators.— lb.  p.  197.

IT  Lardner,  Cred.  vol.  xv.  n,  4fi.


m


EVIDENCES  OP  CHRISTIANITY.


Matt.  xxi  21.  "Jesus  answered  and  said  onto
them.  Verily,  I  say  onto  you,  If  ye  have  faith,
and  doubt  not,  ye  shall  not  only  do  this  which  is
done  unto  the  tig-tree,  but  also,  if  ye  shall  say
unto  this  mountain,  Be  thou  removed,  and  be
thou  cast  into  the  sea,  it  shall  be  done ;  all  things
whatsoever  ye  shall  ask  in  prayer,  believing,  it
shall  be  done."*  It  appears  to  me  very  improba-
ble that  these  words  should  have  been  put  into
Christ's  mouth, 'if  he  had  not  actually  spoken
them.  The  term  "  faith,"  as  here  used,  is  perhaps
rightly  interpreted  of  confidence  in  that  internal
notice,  by  which  the  apostles  were  admonished
of  their  power  to  perform  any  particular  miracle.
And  this  exposition  renders  the  sense  of  the  text
more  easy.  But  the  words,  undoubtedly,  in  their
obvious  construction,  carry  with  them  a  difficulty,
which  no  writer  would  have  brought  upon  him-
self officiously.

Luke  ix.  59.  "  And  he  said  unto  another,  Fol-
low me:  but  he  said,  Lord,  surfer  me  first  to  go
and  bury  my  father.  Jesus  said  unto  him,  Let
the  dead  bury  their  dead,  but  go  thou  and  preach
the  kingdom  of  God."t  This  answer,  though
very  expressive  of  the  transcendent  importance  of
religious  concerns,  was  apparently  harsh  and
repulsive;  and  such  as  would  not  have  been
made  for  Christ,  if  he  had  not  really  used  it.  At
least  some  other  instance  would  have  been  chosen.

The  following  passage,  I,  for  the  same  reason,
think  impossible  to  have  been  the  production  of
artifice,  or  of  a  cold  forgery: — "But  I  say  unto
you,  That  whosoever  is  angry  with  his  brother
without  a  cause,  shall  be  in  danger  of  the  judg-
ment ;  and  whosoever  shall  say  to  his  brother,
Raca,  shall  be  in  danger  of  the  council ;  but  who-
soever shall  say,  Thou  fool,  shall  be  in  danger  of
hell-fire  (Gehenna)."  Matt.  v.  22.  It  is  empha-
tic, cogent,  and  weU  calculated  for  the  purpose  of*
impression ;  but  is  inconsistent  with  .the  supposi-
tion of  art  or  wariness  on  the  part  of  the  reiater.

The  short  reply  of  our  Lord  to  Mary  Magda-
len, after  his  resurrection,  (John  xx.  16,  17,)
"  Touch  me  not,  for  I  am  not  yet  ascended  unto
my  Father,"  in  my  opinion,  must  have  been
founded  in  a  reference  or  allusion  to  some  prior
conversation,  for  the  want  of  knowing  which,  his
meaning  is  hidden  from  us.  This  very  obscurity,
however,  is  a  proof  of  genuineness.  No  one
would  have  forced  such  an  answer.

John  vi.  The  whole  of  the  conversation  re-
corded in  this  chapter,  is,  in  the  highest  degree,
unlikely  to  be  fabricated,  especially  the  part  of
our  Saviour's  reply,  between  the  fiftieth  and  the
fifty-eighth  verse.  I  need  only  put  down  the  first
sentence:  "I  am  the  living  bread  which  came
down  from  heaven:  if  any  man  eat  of  this  bread,
he  shall  live  for  ever :  and  the  bread  that  I  will

Sive  him  is  my  flesh,  which  1  will  give  for  the
fe  of  the  world.*'  Without  calling  in  question
the  expositions  that  have  been  given  of  this  pas-
sage, we  may  be  permitted  to  say,  that  it  labours
under  an  obscurity,  in  which  it  is  impossible  to
believe  that  any  one,  who  made  speeches  for  the
persons  of  his  narrative,  would  have  voluntarily
involved  them.  That  this  discourse  was  obscure,
even  at  the  time,  is  confessed  by  the  writer  who
had  preserved  it,  when  he  tells  us,  at  the  conclu-
sion, tJiat  many  of  our  Lord's  disciples,  when  they


•  See  also  chap.  zvii.  90. Luke  xvii.  6.
t  Bee  also  Matt.  viii.  Si.


had  heard  this,  said,  "This  is  a  1^  saying;  who
can  bear  itl"

Christ's  taking  of  a  young  child,  and  placing  it
in  the  midst  of  his  contentious  disciples,  (Matt,
xviii.  2,)  though  as  decisive  a  proof  as  any  could
be,  of  the  benignity  of  his  temper,  and  very  ex-
pressive of  the  character  of  the  religion  which  he
wished  to  inculcate,  was  not  by  any  means  an
obvious  thought.  Nor  am  I  acquainted  with
any  thing  in  any  ancient  writing  which  resem-
bles it

The  account  of  the  institution  of  the  eucharist
bears  strong  internal  marks  of  genuineness.  If  it
had  been  feigned,  it  would  have  been  more  full :
it  would  have  come  nearer  to  the  actual  mode  of
celebrating  the  rite,  as  that  mode  obtained  very
early  in  Christian  churches ;  and  it  would  have
been  more  formal  than  it  is.  In  the  forged  piece,
called  the  Apostolic  Constitutions,  the  apostles]
are  made  to  enjoin  many  parts  of  the  ritual  which
was  in  use  in  the  second  and  third  centuries,  with
as  much  particularity  as  a  modern  rubric  could
have  done.  Whereas,  in  the  History  of  the  Lord's)
supper,  as  we  read  it  in  Saint  Matthew's  Gospel,
there  is  not  so  much  as  the  command  to  repeat  it.
This,  surely,  looks  like  undesignedness.  I  think
also  that  the  difficulty  arising  from  the  conciseness
of  Christ's  expression,  "  This  is  my  body,"  would
have  been  avoided  in  a  made-up  story.  I  allow
that  the  explication  of  these  words,  given  by  pro-
testants,  is  satisfactory;  bat 'it  is  deduced  from  a
diligent  comparison  of  the  words  in  question  with
forms  of  expression  used  in  Scripture,  and  espe-
cially by  Christ  upon  other  occasions.  No  writer
would  arbitrarily  and  unnecessarily  have  thus
cast  in  his  readers  way  a  difficulty,  which,  to  say
the  least,  it  required  research  and  erudition  to
clear  up.

Now  it  ought  to  be  observed,  that  the  argument
which  is  built  upon  these  examples,  extends  both
to  the  authenticity  of  the  books  and  to  the  truth
of  the  narrative :  for  it  is  improbable  that  the  for-
ger of  a  history  in  the  name  of  another  should
have  inserted  such  passages  into  it :  and  it  is
improbable  also,  that  the  persons  whose  names
the  books  bear  should  have  fabricated  such  pas*
sages;  or  even  have  allowed  them  a  place  in
their  work,  if  they  had  not  beliewd  them  to  ex-
press the  truth.

The  following  observation,  therefore,  of  Dr.
Lardner,  the  most  candid  of  all  advocates,  and  the
most  cautious  of  all  inquirers,  seems  to  be  well-
founded  : — "  Christians  are  induced  to  believe  the
writers  of  the  Gospel,  hy  observing  the  evidences
of  piety  and  probity  that  appear  in  their  writings,
in  which  there  is  no  deceit,  or  artifice,  or  cunning,
or  design."  "  No  remarks,"  as  Dr.  Beattie  hath
properly  said,  "  are  thrown  in,  to  anticipate  ob-
jections; nothing  of  that  caution  which  never
fails  to  distinguish  the  testimony  of  those  who  are
conscious  of  imposture ;  no  endeavour  to  reconcile
the  reader's  mind  to  what  may  be  extraordinary
in  the  narrative."

I  beg  leave  to  cite  also  another  author  *  who
has  well  expressed  the  reflection  which  the  ex-
amples now  brought  forward  were  intended  to
suggest.  "  It  doth  not  appear  that  ever  it  came
into  the  mind  of  these  writers,  to  consider  how
this  or  the  other  action  would  appear  to  mankind,
or  what  objections  might  be  raised  upon  them.


•  Duchal,  p  97, 98.


EVIDENCES  OP  CHRISTIANITY.


841


But  without  at  all  attending  to  this,  they  lay  the
Acts  before  you,  at  do  pains  to  think  whether  they
Would  appear  credible  or  not  If  the  reader  will
not  believe  their  testimony,  there  is  no  help  for  it :
they  tell  the  truth,  and  attend  to  nothing  else.
Surely  this  looks  like  sincerity,  and  that  they
published  nothing  to  the  world  but  what  they  be-
lieved themselves."

As  no  improper  supplement  to  this  chapter,  I
.crave  a  place  here  for  observing  the  extreme  na-
turalness of  some  of  the  things  related  in  the  New
Testament.

Mark  ix.  23.  "  Jesus  said  unto  him.  If  thou
canst  believe,  all  things,  are  possible  to  him  that
beheveth.  And  straightway  the  father  of  the
child  cried  out,  and  said,  with  tears.  Lord,  I  be-
lieve ;  help  thou  mine  unbelief."  This  struggle
in  the  father's  heart;  between  solicitude  for  the
preservation  of  his  child,  and  a,  kind  of  involuntary
distrust  of  Christ's  power  to  heal  him,  is  here  ex-
pressed with  an  air  of  reality,  which  could  hardly
lie  counterfeited.

Again,  (Matt  xxi.  9,)  the  eagerness  of  the  peo-
ple to  introduce  Christ  into  Jerusalem,  and  their
demand,  a  short  time  afterward,  of  his  crucifixion,
when  he  did  not  turn  out  what  they  expected  him
to  be,  so  far  from  affording  matter  of  objection,
represents  popular  favour  in  exact  agreement  with
nature  and  with  experience,  as  the  flux  and  reflux
of  a  wave.

The  rulers  and  Pharisees  rejecting  Christ,
whilst  many  of  the  common  people  received  him,
was  the  effect  which,  in  the  then  state  of  Jewish
prejudices,  I  should  have  expected.  And  the
reason  with  which  they  who  rejected  Christ's
mission  kept  themselves  in  countenance,  and  with
which  also  they  answered  the  arguments  of  those
who  favoured  it,  is  precisely  the  reason  which  such
men  usually  give : — "  Have  any  of  the  scribes  or
Pharisees  beheved  on  him  1" — John  vii.  48.

In  our  Lord's  conversation  at  the  well,  (John
ir.  39,)  Christ  had  surprised  the  Samaritan  woman
with  an  allusion  to  a  single  particular  in  her  do-
mestic situation,  "  Thou  hast  had  five  husbands ;
and  he,  whom  thou  now  hast,  is  not  thy  hus-
band." The  woman,  soon  after  this,  ran  back
to  the  city,  and  called  out  to  her  neighbours,
*  Come,  see  a  man  which  told  me  all  things  that
ever  I  did."  This  exaggeration  appears  to  me
very  natural:  especially  in  the  hurried  state  of
spirits  into  which  the  woman  may  be  supposed  to
nave  been  thrown.

-  The  lawyer's  subtilty  in  running  a  distinction
upon  the  word  neighbour,  in  the  precept,  "  Thou
efialt  love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself,"  was  no  less
natural,  than  our  Saviour's  answer  was  decisive
and  satisfactory.-— Luke  x.  29.  The  lawyer  of  the
New  Testament,  it  must  be  observed,  was  a  Jew-
ish divine.

The  behaviour  of  Gallio  (Acts  xviii.  12—17).
end  of  Pestus  (xxv.  18,  19),  have  been  observed
upon  already.

The  consistency  of  St.  Paul's  character  through-
out the  whole  of  his  history  (viz.  the  warmth  and
activity  of  his  real,  first  against,  and  then  for,
Christianity),  carries  with  it  very  much  of  the  ap-
pearance of  truth.

There  are  also  some  properties,  as  they  may  be
Called,  observable  in  the  Gospels:  that  is,  cir-
cumstances separately  suiting  with  the  situa-
tion, character,  and  intention,  of  their  respective


St.  Matthew,  who-was  an  inhabitant  of  Gafilee,
and  did  not  join  Christ's  society  until  some  time
after  Christ  had  come  into  Gaiuee  te  preach,  has
given  us  very  little  of  his  history  prior  to  that
period:  Saint  John,  who  had  been  converted  be*
fore,  and  who  wrote  to  supply  omissions  in  the
other  Gospels,  relates  some  remarkable  particulars,
which  had  taken  place  before  Christ  left  Judea,  to
go  into  Galilee.*

Saint  Matthew  (xv.  1)  has  recorded  the  cavil
of  the  Pharisees  against  the  disciples  of  Jesus,  for
eating  "  with  unclean  hands."  St  Mark  has  also
(vii.  F)  recorded  the  same  transaction  (taken  pro-
bably from  St.  Matthew),  but  with  this  addition  r
"  For  the  Pharisees,  and  all  the  Jews,  except  they
wash  their  hands  often,  eat  not,  holding  the  tra-
dition of  the  elders:  and  when  they  come  from
the  market,  except  they  wash,  they  eat  not:  and
many  other  things  there  be  which  they  have  re-
ceived to  hold,  as  the  washing  of  cups  and  pots,
brazen  vessels,  and  of  tables.  Now  Saint  Mat-
thew was  not  only  a  Jew  himself,  but  it  is  evident,
from  the  whole  structure  of  his  Gospel,  especially
from  his  numerous  references  to  the  Old  Testa-
ment, that  he  wrote  for  Jewish  readers.  The
above  explanation,- therefore,  in  him,  would  have
been  unnatural,  as  not  being  wanted  by  the  read-
ers whom  he  addressed.  But  in  Mark,  who,
whatever  use  he  might  make  of  Matthew's  Gos-
pel, intended  his  own  narrative  for  a  general  cir-
culation, and  who  himself  travelled  to  distant
countries  in  the  service  of  the  religion,  it  was  pro-
perly added.


CHAPTER  IV.

Identity  qf  Christ's  Character.

The  argument  expressed  by  this  title,  I  apply
principally  to  the  comparison  of  the  first  three  Gos-
pels with  that  of  Saint  John.'  It  is  known  to  every
reader  of  Scripture,  that  the  passages  of  Ohrisrs
history,  preserved  by  Saint  John,  are,  except  his
passion  and  resurrection,  for  the  most  part,  differ-
ent from  those  which  are  delivered  by  the  other
evangelists.  And  I  think  the  ancient  account  of
this  difference  to  be  the  true  one;  viz.  that  Saint
John  wrote  after  the  rest,  and  to  supply  what  he
thought  omissions  in  their  narratives,  of  which
the  principal  were  bur  Saviour's  conferences  with
the  Jews  of  Jerusalem,  and  his  discourses  to  hie
apostles  at  his  last  supper.  But  what  I  observe  in
the  comparison  of  these  several  accounts  is,  that,
although  actions  and  discourses  are  ascribed  to
Christ  by  Saint  John,  in  general  different  from
what  are  given  to  nimby  the  other  "evangelists,
yet,  under  this  diversity,  there  is  a  similitude  of
manner,  which  indicates  that  the  actions  and  dis-
courses proceeded  from  the  same  person,  I  should
have  laid  little  stress  upon  the  repetition  of  action*
substantially  alike,  or  of  discourses  containing
many  of  the  same  expressions,  because  that  is  a
species  of  resemblance,  which  would  either  belong
to  a  true  history,  or  might  easily  be  imitated  in  a
false  one.  Nor  do  I  deny,  that  a  dramatic  writer
is  able  to  sustain  propriety  and  distinction  of
character,  through  a  great  variety  of  separate  in-
cidents and  situations. But  the  evangelists  were


*  Banters  Observations,  vol.  ii.  p.  103.
29*


3«


EVIDENCES  OF  CHRISTIANITY.


not  dramatic  writers;  nor  possessed  the  talents  of
dramatic  writers;  nor  will  it,  I  believe,  be  ins-
pected, that  they  studied  uniformity  of  character,
or  ever  thought  of  any  such  thing,  in  the  person
who  was  the  subject  of  their  histories.  Such  uni-
formity, if  it  exists,  is  on  their  part  casual;  and  if
there  be,  as  I  contend  there  is,  a  perceptible, re-
semblance of  manner j  in  passages,  and  between
discourses,  which  are  in  themselves  extremely  dis-
tinct, and  are  delivered  by  historians  writing  with-
out any  imitation  of,  or  reference  to,  one  another,
it  affords  a  just  presumption,  that  these  are,  what
they  profess  to  be,  the  actions  and  the  discourses
of  the  same  real  person;  that  the  evangelists  wrote
from  feet,  and  not  from  imagination.

•The  article  in  which  I  find  this  agreement  most
strong,  is  in  our  Saviour's  mode  of  teaching,  and
in  that  particular  property  of  it,  which  consists  in
his  drawing  of  his  doctrine  from  the  occasion ;  or,
which  is  nearly  the  same  thing,  raising  reflections
from  the  objects  and  incidents  before  him,  or
turning  a  particular  discourse  then  passing,  into
an  opportunity  of  general  instruction.

It  will  be  my  business  to  point  out  this  manner
in  the  first  three  evangelists ;  and  then  to  inquire,
whether  it  do  not  appear  also,  in  several  examples
of  Christ's  discourses,  preserved  by  Saint  John.

The  reader  will  observe  in  the  following  quota-
tions, that  the.  Italic  letter  contains  the  reflection ;
the  cemmon  letter,  the  incident  or  occasion  from
which  it  springs.

Matt  xiL  47—60.  "  Then  they  said  unto  him,
Beholdj  thy  mother  and  thy  brethren  stand  with-
out desiring  to  speak  with  thee.  But  he  answered
and  said  unto  him  that  told  him.  Who  is  my  mo-
ther? and  who  are  my  brethren?  And  he
stretched  forth  his  hand  towards  his  disciples,  and
said,  Behold  my  mother  and  my  brethren:  for
whosoever  shall  do  the  will  of  my  Father  which
is  in  heaven,  the  same  is  my  brother,  and  sister,
and  mother.

Matt  xvi.  5.  "  And  when  his  disciples  were
come  to  the  other  side,  they  had  forgotten  to  take
bread;  then  Jesus  said  unto  them,  Take  heed,
and  beware  of  the  leaven  of  the  Pharisees,  and
cf  the  Sadducee*.  And  they  reasoned  among
themselves,  saying,  It  is  because  we  have  taken
too  bread. — How  is  it  that  ye  do  not  understand,
that  I  spake  it  not  to  you  concerning  bread,  that
ye  should  beware  of  the  leaven  of  the  Pharisees,
and  of  the  Sadduoees?  Then  understood  they,
how  that  he  bade. them  not  beware  of  the  leaven
of  bread,  but  of  the  doctrine  of  the  Pharisees
and  of  the  Sadducees"

Matt.  xv.  1,2,  10,  11,  15—20.  "Then  came
to  Jesus  scribes  and  Pharisees,  which  were  of
Jerusalem,  saying,  Why  do  thy  disciples  trans-
gress the  traditions  of  the  elders  1  for  they  wash

not  their  hands  when  they  eat  bread. And  he

called  the  multitude,  and  said  unto  them,  Hear
and  understand :  Not  that  which  goeth  into  the
mouth  deJUeth  a  man,  but  that  which  cometh  out
of  the  mouth,  this  defileth  a  man. Then  an-
swered Peter,  and  said  unto  him,  Declare  unto  us
this  parable.  And  Jesus  said,  Are  ye  also  yet
without  understanding  1.  Do  ye  not  yet  under-
stand, that  whatsoever  entereth  in  at  the  mouth,
ffoeth  into  the  belly,  and  is  cast  out  into  the
draught  1  but  those  things  which  proceed  out  of
the  mouth,  come  forth  from  the  heart,  and  they
defile  the  manijbr  out  of  the  heart  proceed
evil  thoughts,  murders,  adulteries,  fornications,


thefts,  false  witness,  blasphemies:  these  art  the
things  which  defile  a  man :  but  to  eat  with

UNWASHEN  HANDS  DEFILETH  NOT  A  MAN.1' OUT

Saviour,  on  this  occasion,  expatiates  rather  more
at  large  than  usual,  and  bis  discourse  also  is  mora
divided :  but  the  concluding  sentence  brings  back
the  whole  train  of  thought  to  the  incident  in  the
first  verse,  viz.  the  objugatoxy .  question  of  the
Pharisees,  and  renders  it  evident  that  the  whole
sprang  from  that  circumstance.

Mark  x.  13—15.  "  And  they  brought  young
children  to  him,  that  he  should  touch  them;  and
his  disciples  rebuked  those  that  brought  them :  but
when  Jesus  saw  it,  he  was  much  displeased,  and
said  unto  them,  Suffer  the  little  children  to  come
unto  me,  and  forbid  them  not;  for  of  such  is  the
kingdom  of  God:  verily  I  say  unto  you,  Whoso-
ever shall  not  receive  the  kingdom  qf  God  as  a
little  child,  he  shall  not  enter  therein:1

Mark  i.  16,  17.  "  Now  as  he  walked  by  the  sea
of  Galilee,  he  saw  Simon  and  Andrew  bis  brother
casting  a  net  into  the  sea,  for  they  were  fishers;
and  Jesus  said  unto  them,  Come  ye  after  me,  and
I  will  make  you  fishers  of  men."  ~

Luke  xi.  27.  "  And  it  came  to  peas  as  he  spake
these  things,  a  certain  woman  of  the  company
lifted  up  her  voice,  and  said  unto  him,  Blessed  is
the  womb  that  bare  thee,  and  the  paps  which  thou
hast  sucked :  but  he  said,  Yea,  rather  blessed  art
they  that  hear  the  word  of  God  and  keep  it"

Luke  ziii.  1—3.  "  There  were  present  at  that
season,  some  that  told  him  of  the  Galileans,  whose
blood  Pilate  had  mingled  with  their  sacrifices ;  and
Jesus  answering,  said  unto  them,  Suppose  ye,  that
these  Galileans  were  sinners  above  all  the  Gali-
leans, because  they  suffered  such  things  ?  I  tell
you,  Nay :  but,  except  ye  repent,  ye  shall  all  like-
wise perish."

Luke  xiv.  15.  "  And  when  one  of  them  that
sat  at  meat  with  him.  heard  these  things,  he  sals'
unto  him,  Blessed  is  ne  that  shall' eat  bread  in  the
kingdom  of  God.  Then  said  he  unto  him,  A  cer-
tain man  made  a  great  supper,  and  bade  many,
&c.  The  parable  is  rather  too  long  for  insertion,
but  affords  a  striking  instance  of  Christ's  manner
of  raising  a  discourse  from  the  occasion.  Observe
also  in  the  same  chapter  two  other  examples  of
advice,  drawn  from  the  circumstances  of  the  or*
tertainment  and  the  behaviour  of  the  guests.

We  will  now  see,  how  this  manner  discovers
itself  in  St.  John's  history  of  Christ.
~  John  vi.  25.  "  And  when  they  had  found  him
on  the  other  side  of  the  sea,  they  said  unto  him,
Rabbi,  when  earnest  thou  hither  *  Jesus  answer
ed  them,  and  said,  Verily  I  say  unto  you,  ye  seek
me  not  because  ye  saw  the  miracles,  but  because
ye  did  eat  of  the  loaves,  and  were  filled.  Labour
not  for  the  meat  which  perisheth,  but  for  that
•meat  which  endureth  unto  everlasting  Itfe,  which
the  Son  of  man  shall  give  unto  your

John  iv.  12.  "  Art  thou  greater  than  our  father
Abraham,  who  grave  us  the  well,  and  drank  there-
of himself,  and  his  children,  and  his  cattle  1  Jesus
answered,  and  said  unto  jier  (the  wonmn.of  Sa-
maria,) Whosoever  drinketh  of  this  water  shall
thirst  again ;  but  whosoever  drinketh  of  the  water
that  I  shall  give  him,  shall  never  thirst ;  but  the
water  that  I  shall  give  him,  shall  be  in  him  a
well  qf  water,  springing  up  into1  everlasting
life"

John  iv.  31.  "  In  the  mean  while,  bis  disciples
prayed  him,  saying,  Master,  eat;  but  he  said  unto


EVIDENCES  OP  CHRISTIANITY.


818


them,  I  have  meat  to  eat  that  ye  know  not  of.
Therefore  said  the  disciples  one  to  another,  Hath
any  man  brought  him  aught  to  eat  ?  Jesus  saith
unto  them,  My  meat  is,  to  do  the  will  of  him  that
sen*  me,  and  to  finish  his  work."

John  iz.  1 — 5.  '*  And  as  Jesus  passed  by,  he
•aw  a  man  which  was  blind  from  nis  birth ;  and
his  disciples  asked  him,  saying,  Who  did  sin,  this
man  or  his  parents^  that  he  was  born  blind  1
Jesus  answered,  Neither  hath  this  man  sinned,
nor  his  parents,  but  that  the  works  of  God  should
be  made  manifest  in  him.  I  must  work  the  works
of  him  that  sent  me,  while  it  is  day  ;  the  night
cometh,  when  no  man  can  work.  As  long  as  I
am  in  the  world,  I  am  the  light  of  the  world."

John  iz.  35-40.  "Jesus  Heard  that  they  had
cast  him,  (the  blind  man  above-mentioned;  out:
and  when  he  had  found  him,  he  said  unto  him,
Dost  thou  believe  on  the  Son  of  God  1  And  he
answered;  and  said,  Who  is  he,  Lord,  that  I
might  believe  on  himl  And  Jesus  said  unto  him,
Thou  hast  bom  seen  him,  and  it  is  he  that  talketh
with  thee.  And  he  said,  Lord,  I  believe ;  and  he
worshipped  him.  And  Jesus  said,  For  judgment
I  am  come  into  this  world,  that  they  which  see
not,  might  see  ;  and  that  they  which  see,  might
be  made  blind."

All  that  the  reader  has  now  to  do,  is  to  com-
pare the  series  of  examples  taken  from  Saint  John,
with  the  series  of  examples  taken  from  the  other
evangelists,  and  to  judge  whether  there  be  not  a
visible  agreement  of  manner  between  them.  In
the  above-quoted  passages,  the  occasion  is- stated,
as  well  as  the  reflection.  They  seem,  therefore,
the  most  proper  for  the  purpose  of  our  argument.
A  large,  however,  and  curious  collection  has  been
made  by  different  writers  *  of  instances,  in  which
it  is  extremely  probable  that  Christ  spoke  in  allu-
sion to  some  object,  or  some  occasion,  then  before
him,  though  the  mention  of  the  occasion,  or  of  the
object,  be  omitted  in  the  history.  I  only  observe,
that  these  instances  are  common  to  Saint  John's
Gospel  with  the  other  three.

*  I  conclude  this  article  by  reniarking,  that  no-
thing of  this  manner  is  perceptible  in  the  speeches
recorded  in  the  Acts,  or  in  any  other  but  those
which  are  attributed  to  Christ,  and  that,  in  truth,
it  was  a  very  unlikely  manner  for  a  forger  or  fa-
bulist to  attempt ;  and  a  manner  very  difficult  for
any  writer  to  execute,  if  he  had  to  supply  all  the
materials,  both  the  incidents  and  the  observations
upon  them,  out  of  his  own  head.  A  forger  or  a
fabulist  would  have  made  for  Christ,  discourses
exhorting  to  virtue  and  dissuading  from  vice  in
general  terms.  It  would  never  have  entered  into
the  thoughts  of  either,  to  have  crowded  together
such  a  number  of  allusions  to  time,  place,  and
other  little  circumstances,  as  occur,  for  instance,
in  the  sermon  on  the  mount,  and  which  nothing
but  the  actual  presence  of  the  objects  could  have
•twesteaV't

IT.  There  appears  to  me  to  exist  an  affinity  be-
tween the  history  of  Christ's  placing  a  little  child
in  the  midst  of  his  disciples,  as  related  by  the  first
three  evangelists,*  and  the  history  of  Christ's
washing  his  disciples'  feet,  as  given  by  Saint
John.f In  the  stories  themselves  there  is  no  re-


*  Newton  oa,Daniel,  p.  148,  note
JD2. Bishop  Law'f  Life  of  Christ.


Jortin,  Dii.  p.


ISee  Bishop  Laws  Life  of  Christ.
Matt.  xviti.  L  Hark  ix.  33.  Lake  ix.  46.
Cbap.xiii-3.


semblance.  But  the  affinity  which  I  would  point
out  consists  in  these  two  articles:  First,  that  both
stories  denote  the  emulation  which  prevailed
amongst  Christ's  disciples,  and  his  own  care  and
desire  to  correct  it ;  the  moral  of  both  is  the  same.
Secondly,  that  both  stories  are  specimens  of  the
same  manner  of  teaching,  viz.  by  action ;  a  mode
of  emblematic  instruction  extremely  peculiar,  and,
in  these  passages,  ascribed,  we  see.  to  our  Saviour,
by  the  first  three  evangelists,  ana- by  Saint  John
in  instances  totally  unlike,  and  without  the  small-
est suspicion  of  their  borrowing  from  each  other,

III.  A  singularity  in  Christ's  language,  which
runs  through  all  the  evangelists,  and  which  is
found  in  those  discourses  of  Saint  John  that  have
nothing  similar  to  them  in  the  other  Gospels,  is
the  appellation  of  "  the  Son  of  man ;"  and  it  is  in
all  the  evangelists  found  under  the  peculiar  cir-
cumstance of  being  applied  by  Christ  to  himself,
but  of  never  being  used  of  him,  or  towards  him,
by  any  other  person.  It*  occurs  seventeen  times
in  Matthew's  Gospel,  twenty  times  in-  Markka,
twenty-one  times  in  Luke's,  and  eleven  times  in
John's,  and  always  with  this  restriction*

IV.  A  point  of  agreement  in  the  conduct  of
Christ,  as  represented  by  his  different  historians,
is  that  of  his  withdrawing  himself  out  of  the  way.
whenever  the  behaviour  of  the  multitude  radicated
a  disposition  to  tumult.

Matt.  xiv.  22.  "  And  straightway  Jesus  con-
strained his  disciples  to  get  into  a  ship,  and  to  go
before  him  unto  the  other  side,  while  he  sent  the
multitude  away.  And  when  he  had  sent  the  mul-
titude away,  he  went  up  into  a  mountain  apart
to  pray."

Luke  v.  15, 16.  "  But  so  much  the  more  wept
there  a  fame  abroad  of  him,  and  great  multitudes
came  together  to  hear,  and  to  be  healed  by  him  of
their  infirmities :  and  he  withdrew  himself  into
the  wilderness,  and  prayed."

With  these  quotations,  compare  the  following
from  Saint  John :  ' ^

Chap.  v.  13.  "  And  he  that  was  healed  wist  net
who  it  was ;  for  Jesus  had  conveyed  himself  away,
a  multitude  being  in  that  place."

Chap.  vi.  15.  "  When  Jesus  therefore  perceived
that  they  Would  come  and  take  him  by  force  to
make  him  a  king,  he  departed  again  into  a  moun-
tain himself  alone."

In  this  last  instance,  Saint  John  gives  the  mo-
tive of  Christ's  conduct,  which  is  left  unexplained
by  the  other  evangelists,  who  have  related  the
conduct  itself.

V.  Another,  and  a  more  singular  eircumstanee
in  Christ's  ministry,  was  the  reserve,  which,  for
some  time,  and  upon  some  occasions  at  least,  he
used  in  declaring  ms  own  character,  and  his  leav-
ing it  to  be  collected  from  his  works  rather  than
his  professions.  Just  reasons  for  this  reserve  have
been  assigned*  But  it  is  not  what  one  would
have  expected.  We  meet  with  it  in  Saint  Mat-
thew's Gospel:  chap.  xvi.  20.  "Then  charged
he  his  disciples,  that  they  should  tell  no  man  that
he  was  Jesus  the  Christ"  Again,  and  upon  a
draerent  occasion,  in  Saint  Mark's:  chap.  in.  11.
"  And  unclean  spirits,  when  they  saw  him,  foil
down  before  him,  and  cried,  saying,  Thou  art  the
Son  of  God :  and  he  straightly  charged  them  that
they  should  not  make  him  known."  Another  in-
stance similar  to  this  last  is  recorded  by  Saint

■  ■ '  i ■■»

•  See  Locke's  Beasonablenesi  of  Christianity.


944


EVIDENCES  OP  CHRISTIANITY.


Luke,  chap,  fo  41.  What  we  thus  find  in  the
three  evangelists,  appeals  also  in  a  passage  of
Saint  John.  chap.  z.  24,  35.  "Then  came  the
Jews  nana  about  him,  and  said  unto  him.  How
long  dost  thou  make  us  to  doubt?  If  thou  be  the
Christ,  tell  us  plainly."  The  occasion  here  was
different  from  any  of  the  rest ;  and  it  was  indirect
We  onlv  discover  Christ's  conduct  through  the
upbraidings  of  his  adversaries.  But  all  this
strengthens  the  argument  I  had  rather  at  any
lime  surprise  a  coincidence  in  some  oblique  allu-
sion, than  read  it  in  broad  assertions.

VL  In  our  Lord's  commerce  with  his  disciples,
one  very  observable  particular  is  the  difficulty
which  they  found  in  understanding  him,  when  he
spoke  to  them  of  the  future  part  of  his  history,
especially  of  what  related  to  his  passion  or  resur-
rection. This  difficulty  produced,  as  was  natural,
a  wish  in  them  to  ask  for  farther  explanation;
from  which,  however,  they  appear  to  nave  been
sometimes  kept  back,  by  the  fear  of  giving  offence.
All  these  circumstances  are  distinctly  noticed  by
Mark  and  Luke  upon  the  occasion  of  his  inform-
ing them,  (probably  for  the  first  time,)  that  the
Son  of  man  should  be  delivered  into  the  bands  of
men.  "  They  understood  not,"  the  evangelists  tell
os,  "this  saying,  and  it  was  hid  from  them,  that
they  perceived  it  not:  and  they  feared  to  ask  him
of  that  saving."  Luke  ix.  45.  Mark  ix.  32.  In  St
John's  Gfospel  we  hawj,  on  a  different  occasion,
and  in  a  different  instance,  the  same  difficulty  of
spprehension,  the  same  curiosity,  and  the  same
restraint: — "A  little  while,  and  ye  shall  not  see
me:  and  again,  a  little  while,  and  ye  shall  see  me;
because  I  go  to  the  Father.  Then  said  some  of
his  disciples  among  themselves,  What  is  this  that
he  saith  unto  us?  A  little  while,  and  ye  shall  not
see  me:  and  again,  A  little  while,  and  ye  shall
see  me:  and,  Because  I  go  to  the  Father?  They
said  therefore,  What  is  this  that  he  saith,  A  little
while?  we  cannot  tell  what  he  saith.  Now  Jesus
knew  that  they  were  desirous  to  ask  him,  and
said  unto  them,"  Ac.  John  xvi.  16,  dec.

VII.  The  meekness  of  Christ  during  his  last
sufferings,  which  is  conspicuous  in  the  narratives
of  the  first  three  evangelists,  is  preserved  in  that
of  Saint  John  under  separate  examples.  The
answer  given  by  him,  in  Saint  John,*  when  the
high  priest  asked  him  of  his  disciples  and  his  doc-
trine ;  "  I  spake  openly  to  the  world ;  I  ever  taught
in  the  synagogue,  and  in  the  temple,  whither  the
-Jews  always  resort;  and  in  secret  have  I  said  no-
thing; why  askest  thou  me?  ask  them  which
heard  me,  what  I  have  said  unto  them ;"  is  very
much  of  a  piece  with  his  reply  to  the  armed  party
which  seized  him,  as  we  read  in  Saint  Mark's
Gospel,  and  in  Saint  Luke's :t  "Are  you  come
out  as  against  a  thief,  with  swords  and  with  staves
to  take  me?  I  was  daily  with  you  in  the  temple
teaching,  and  ye  took  me  not."  In  both  answers,
we  discern  the  same  tranquillity,  the  same  refer-
ence to  his  public  teaching.  Hu  mild  expostula-
tion with  Pilate,  on  two  several  occasions,  as  re-
lated by  Saint  John,*  is  delivered  with  the  same
unruffled  temper,  as  that  which  conducted  him
'  through  the  last  scene  of  his  life,  as  described  by
his  other-evangelists.  His  answer  in  Saint  John  s
Gospel,  to  the  officer  who  struck  him  with  the
pabn  of  his  hand,  "If  I  have  spoken  evil,  bear


►Chap,  xvili.  90.  SL f  Mark  xiv.48.  Lake  xxu.  52.
J  Chap,  xviii.  94;  six.  11.


witness  of  the  evil;  but  if  well,  wiry  smHestthoa
me?"*  was  such  an  answer,  as  might  have  been
looked  for  from  the  person,  who,  as  he  proceeded
to  the  place  of  execution,  bid  his  companions,  (as
we  are  told  by  Saint  Luke,)t  weep  not  for  mm,
but  for  themselves,  their  posterity,  and  their  coun-
try ;  and  who,  whilst  he  was  suspended  upon  the
cross,  prayed  for  his  murderers,  "  for  they  know
not"  said  he,  "what  they  do."  The  urgency  also
of  ms  fudges  and  his  prosecutors  to  extort  from
him  a  defence  to  the  accusation,  and  his  unwilling*
new  to  make  any,  (which  was  a  peculiar  circum-
stance.) appears  in  Saint  John's  account,  as  well
as  in  that  of  the  other  evangelists.*

There  are  moreover  two  other  correspondencies
between  Saint  John's  history  of  the  transaction
and  theirs,  of  a  kind  somewhat  different  from
those  which  we  have  been  now  mentioning.

The  first  three  evangelists  record  what  is  called
our  Saviour  s  agony,  t.  c.  his  devotion  in  the  gar-
den immediately  before  he  was  apprehended ;  in
which  narrative  they  all  make  him  pray,  "that
the  cup  might,  pass  from  him."  This  is  the  par-
ticular metaphor  which  they  all  ascribe  to  him.
Saint  Matthew  adds,  "  O  my  Father,  if  this  cup
may  not  pass  away  from  me  except  I  drink  it,  thy
will  be  done."§  Now  Saint  John  does  not  give
Che  scene  in  the  garden:  but  when  Jesus  was
seized,  and  some  resistance  was  attempted  to  be
made  by  Peter,  Jesus,  according  to  his  account!
checked  the  attempt  with  this  reply :  "  Put  up  thy
sword  into  the  sheath:  the  cup  which  my  Father
hath  given  me,  shall  I  not  drink  it?"fl  This  is
something  more  than  consistency;  it  is  coinci-
dence :  because  it  is  extremely  natural,  that  Jesus,
who.  before  he  was  apprehended,  had  been  pray-
ing nis  Father,  that  "  that  cup  might  pass  from
him,"  yet  with  such  a  pious  retraction  of  his  re-
quest, as  to  have  added,  "  If  this  cup  may  not  pass
from  me,  thy  will  be  done ;"  it  was  natural,  I  say,
for  the  same  person,  when  he  actually  was  appre-
hended, to  express  the  resignation  to  which  he
had  already  made  up  his  thoughts,  and  to  express
it  in  the  form  of  speech  which  he  had  before  used,
"  The  cup  which  my  Fatherhath  given  me,  shall
I  not  drink  it  ?"  This  is  a  coincidence  between
writers,  in  whose  narratives  there  is  no  imitation,
but  great  diversity.

A  second  similar  correspondency  is  the  follow-
ing :  Matthew  and  Mark  make  the  charge  upon
which  our  Lord  was  condemned,  to  be  a  threat  of
destroying  the  temple;  "We  heard  him  say,  I
will  destroy  this  temple  made  with  hands,  and
within  three  days  I  will  build  another  made  with-
out hands  :"1T  but  they  neither  of  them  inform  us,
upon  what  circumstances  this  calumny  was  found-
ed. Saint  John,  in  the  early  part  of  the  history,**
supplies  us  with  this  information ;  for  he  relates,
that,  on  our  Lord's  first  journey  to  Jerusalem,
when  the  Jews  asked  him,  "  What  sign  showest
thou  unto  us,  seeing  that  thou  doest  these  things?
he  answered,  Destroy  this  temple,  and  in  three
days  I  will  raise  it  up."  This  agreement  could
hardly  arise  from  any  thing  but  the  truth  of  the
case.  From  any  care  or  design  in  Saint  John,  to
make  his  narrative  tally  with  the  narratives  of
other  evangelists,  it  certainly  did  not  arise,  for  no
such  design  appears,  but  the  absence  of  it


*  Chan,  xviii.  23.  t  Chap,  xxiii.  86.

{See  John  xix.  9.  Matt,  xivii.  14. Luke  xxiii.  9.
Chap,  i xvi.  42.  (Chap,  xviii.  11.

Mark  xiv.  56.  ••Chap. ii.  19.


EVIDENCES  OF  CHRISTIANITY.


M5


A  strong  JuT-more  general  instance  of  agree-
ment is  the  following: — The  first  three  evange*
lists-  have  related  the  appointment  of  the  twelve
apostles,*  and*  have  given  a  catalogue  of  their
names  in  form.  John,  without  ever  mentioning
the  appointment',  or  giving  the  catalogue,  supposes
.  throughout  his  whole  .narrative,  Christ  .to  be  ac-
companied by  a  select  party  of  his  disciples ;  the
number  of  those, to  be  .twelve  ;t  ai\d  whenever  he
happens  to  notice  any  one  as  of  that  number,*  it
.  is  one  included  in  the  catalogue  of  the  other  evan-
gelists: and  the  names  principally  occurring  in
the  course  of  his  history  of  Christ,  are  the  names
extant  in  their  list.  This  last  agreement,  which
is  of  considerable  moment,  pins  through  every
Gospel,  and  through  every  chapter  of  each.

An  this  bespeaks  reality.


CHAPTER  V.

Originality  qfour  Saviour's  Character.

, '  The  Jews,  whether  right  or  wrong,  had  under-
stood their  prophecies  to  foretell  the  adyent  o/
a  person,  wno  by  some  supernatural 'assistance
should  advance  their  nation  to  independence,  and
to  a  supreme  degree  of  splendour  and  prosperity.
•  This  was  tjie  feigning  opinion  and  expectation
of  the  times.  <

Now,  had  Jesus  been  an  enthusiast,  it  is  .proba-
ble that  his  enthusiasm  would  have  fallen  in  with
the  popular  delusion,  and  that,. -whilst  he  gave
himself  out  to  he  the  person  intended  by  these
predictions,  he.  would  have  assumed  the  character
to  which»they  were  universally  suppoeed  to  relate.

Had  he  been  an  impostor,  it  was  his  business
to  have  flattered  the  prevailing  hopes,  because
these  hopes  vjere  to  be  the  instruments  of  his  At-
traction and  success;

But,  what  is  better' than  conjecture,  is  the  fact,
chat  all  the  pretended  Messiahs  actually  did  so.
"We  learn  -from  Josephus,  that  there  were  many
of  these.  Some  of  them,  it  is  probable,  might  be
impostors,  who  thought  that  an  advantage  was  to
be  taken  of  the'state  of /public  opinion.  Others,
perhaps,  were  enthusiasts,  whose  imagination  had
men  drawn  to  this  particular  object,  by  the  lan-
guage and  sentiments  which  prevailed  around
tnem;  But,  whether  impostors  or  enthusiasts,
they  concurred" in  producing  themselves  in  the
character  which  their  countrymen  looked  for,  that
is  to  say,  as  the  restorers  and  deliverers  of  the  na-
tion, in  that  /sense  in  which  restoration. and  deli-
verance were  expected  by  the  Jews.  ,

Why  therefore  Jesus,  if  he  was,  like  them,
either  an  enthusiast  or  impostor,  did  not  pursue
the  same  conduct  as  they  did,  in  framing  his
character  and  pretensions,  it  will  be  found  dif-
ficult to  explain.  A  mission,  the  operation  and
benefit  of  which  was  to  take  place  in  another  life,
was  a  thing  unthought  of  as,  the  subject  of  these
prophecies.  That  Jesus,  coming  to  them,  as  their
Messiah,  should  come  under  a  character  totally
different  from  that  in  which  they  expected  him ;
should  deviate  from  the  general  persuasion,  and
deviate  into  pretensions-  absolutely  singular  and
original ;  appears  to  be  inconsistent  with  the  im-
putation oi  enthusiasm  or  Imposture,  both  which,

•Mattx.  1. Mark  Ui.  14. JUkevi.jS.
tChapkVi.70.  {Chap,  xx,  34  ;vi.  71.


by  their  nature,  I  should  expect  would,  and, both
which,  throughout  the  experience  which  tins  very
subject  furnishes,  in.  fact  hate,  followed  the  opi-
nions, that  obtained  at  the  time.

If  it  be  said,  that  Jesus,  having  tried  the.  other
plan,  turned  at  length,  to  this;  \  answer,  that  the
thing  is  said  without  evidence;  against  evidence;
that  it  was  competent  .to  the  rest  to. have*  done
the  same,  yet  that  nothings  of  this  sort  was
thought  of  by  any.


CHAPTER  Vl ' * '  -

One  argument,  which  has  been  much  relied  .
upon  (but  not  more  Uian  its  just  weight  deserves,)
is  the  conformity  of  the  facts  occasionally  men-
tioned or  referred  to  in  Scripture,  with  the  slate
of  things  in  those  times,  as  represented  by  foreign
and  independent  accounts:  which  conformity
proves,  that  the  writers  of  the  New  Testament
possessed  a  species  of  local  knowledge,  which
could  only  belong  to  an  inhabitant  of  that  country,
and  to  one  living  in  that  age.  This  argument,  if
well  made,  out  by  examples,'  is  very  little  short  of-.

rving  the  absolute  genuineness  of  the  writings,
carries  them  up  to  the  age  of  the  refuted
authors,  to. an  age  in  which  it  must  have  been
difficult  to  impose  upon  the  Christian  public,
forgeries  in  the  names  of  those, authors,  and  m
which  there  is  no  evidence  that  anyforgcries  were
attempted.  It  proves,  at  least,  that  the  books,  ^
whoever  were  the  authors  of  them,  were  com- ~
posed  by  persons  living  in  the  time  and  country  in:
which  these  things  were  transacted;  and -conse-
quently capable,  by  their  situation,  of  being  well
informed  of  the  facts  which  they  rente.  -  And  the^
argument  is  stronger  when'  applied  to  Jhe  New
Testament,  than  it  is  in  the  case  of  almost  any  '
other  writings,  by  reason  of  the  mixed  nature  of
the  allusions  which  .this  book,  contains.  The
scene  of  action  is  not  confined  to-a  single  country,
but  displayed  in  the  greatest  cities  of  .the  Roman,
empire.  Allusions  are  made  to  the  manners  and
principles  of.  the  Greeks,  the  RoinansL  and  the
Jews.  This  variety  renders  a  forgery  proportion-
ably  more  difficult,  especially  to  writers  or  a  pos-
terior age.  A  Greek  or  Roman  Christian,  who
lived  in  the  second  or  third  century,  would  have
been  wanting  in  Jewish  literature ;  a  Jewish  con-
vert in  those  ages- would  have  been  equally  defi-
cient in  the  knowledge  of  Greece  and  Rome.  *  -
This,  however,  is  art  argument  which  depends
entirely  upon  an  induction  of  particulars';  and  as,  v"
consequently,  it  cafries  with  it  little  force,  without
a  view  of  the  instances  upon  which  it  is  built,  I
have  to  request  the  reader's  attention  to  a  detail
of  examples,  distinctly  and  articulately  proposed.
In  collecting  these '  examples,  I  have  done  no
more  than  epitomize  the  ,firet  volume  of  the  first
part  of  Dr.  Lardner's  Credibility  of  the  Gospel
History.  'And  I  have  brought  the  argument
within  its  present  compass,  first  by  passing  over
some  of  his  sections  in  which  the  accotdajicy  ap-
peared to  me  less  certain,  or  upon  subjects  not
sufficiently  appropriate  or  circumstantial-, second-
ly, by  contracting  every  section  into  the  fewest
words  possible,  contenting  myself  for  the-  most


*  Micbaelfs'B  Introduction  to  the  New  Testament
(Mann's  Translation,)  c.  2.  sect.  xi.


946


EVIDENCES  OF  CHRISTIANITY.


part  with  a  mere  appositimltf  jpumgea;  and,
thirdly,  by  jOmitting  many,  disquisitions*,  which,
though  learned  aiid  accurate,  are  not 'absolutely
necessary  to  the  understanding  or  verification  of
the  argument.

.  The  writer  principally  made  use  of  in  the  in-
quiry, is  Josephus.  Josephus  was  bom  -at  Jeru-
salem lour  "years  after  Christ's  ascension.  He
wrote  Ms  history  of  the  Jewish  war  some  time
after  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem,  which  happen-
ed in  the  year  of  our  Lord  lxjc,  that  is,  ttiuty-
*  seven  years  after  the  ascension ;  and  his  history
of  the  Jews  he  finished  in  the  year  xcm,  that  is,
sixty  years  after  the  ascension.

At  the  head -of  each  article,  I  have  referred,  by
figures  included  in  brackets,  to  the  page  of  Pr.
Lardner's  volume,  where  the  section,  from  which
the  abridgment  is  made,  begins.  The  edition
used,  is  that  of  1741.  " •

J.  Jp.  14.1  Matt;  ii.  22.  "When  he  (Joseph)
beard  that  Archelaus  did  reign  jn  Judea,  in  the
room  of  his  father  Herod,  he  was  afraid  to  50
thither  r  notwithstanding,  being  warned  of  God  in
a  dream,  he'  turned  aside  into  the  parts  of  Gah\
Jee,*

In  this  passage  it  is  asserted,  that  Archejfcus-
tucceeded  Herod  in  Judea;  and  it'  is  implied,  that
his  power  did  not  extend  to  Galilee.  Now  we
learn  from  Josephus,  thai  Herod  the  Great,  whose
dominion  included  ah*  the  land  of  Israel,  appointed
Archelaus*  his  successor  in  Judsa,  and  assigned
the  rest  of  hlaxlominiortB  to  other  sons ;  and  that
this  disposition  was  ratified,  as  to  the  main  parts
of  it  .by  the  Roman"  emperor.  *

'  Saint  Matthew  says,  that  Archelaus  reigned,
Was  king  in  Judeo.  Agreeably  to  this,  we  are
informed  by  JosepHus,  not  only  that  Herod  ap-
pointed Archelaus  his  successor  in  Judea,  but
-that  he  also  appointed  him  with  the  title  of  King ;
and  the  Greek  verb  BamivM,  which  the  evangelist
Uses  toVlenote  the  government  and  rank  of  Ar-
chelaus, is  used  likewise  by  Josephus.  t

The  cruelty  of  Archelaus 's  character,  which  is
not  obscurely  intimated  by  the  evangelist,  agrees
with  divers  particulars  in  his  history,  preserved
by  Josephus : — "  In  the  tenth  year  of  his  govern-
.meh^  the  chief  of  the  Jews  and  Samaritans,  not
being  able  to  endure  his  cruelty  and  tyranny,  pre-
sented complaints  against  him  to  Cajsar."  t '

II,  [p.  19.]  Lukeiii.  1.  "  In  the  fifteenth  year
of  the  reign  of  Tiberius  Cesar, — Herod  being
tetrarch  of  Galilee,  and  bis  brother  Philip,  tetrarch
of  Iturea  and  of  the  region  of  Trachonitis, — the
word  of  God  came  urito  John."

By  the  will  of  Herod  the  Qreat,  and  the  decree
of  Augustus  thereupon,  his  two  sons  were  ap-
pointed, one  (Herod  Antipas)  tetrarch  of  Galilee
and  Persa,  and  the  other  (Philip)  tetrarch  of
Trachonitis  and,  the  neighbouring  countries.  IF
We  have  therefore  these  two  persons  in  the  situa-
tions in  which  Saint  Luke  places  them ;  and  also,
that  theywerc  in  these  situations  in  the  fifteenth
year  of  Tiberius  j  in  other  words,*that  they  con-
■  turned  in  possession  of  thejr  territories  and  titles
lDitiT  that  time,  and  afterward,  appears  from  a
passage  of  Josephus,  which  relates  of  Herod,
"  that  he  was  removed  by  Caligula,  the


of  Tiberias ;»  and  of  Philip,  that  he  died  in  the
twentieth  year  ot  Tiberius,  when  he  had  govern-
ed Trachonitis  and  Bataaea  and  Gacuasitis  thirty
seven  years."  t  "' r

III.  [p.  20.1  Mark  vi.  17.*  "Herod  had  seat
/brth,  and  laid  hold  upon  John,  and  bdund  him
in  prison,  for  Herodias'  sake,  his  brother  Philip's
wife ;  for  he  had  married  her.''

With  this  compare  Joseph.  Antiq.  I.  xviii.  c  6.
sect.  1.— "  He  (Herod  the  tetrarah)  made  a  visit
to  Herod  his  brother. — Here,  falling  in  love. with
Herodias,  the  wile  of  the  said  Herod,  he  ventured
to  make  her  proposals  of  marriage,  f  '

Again,  Mark  vi.  22.  "  And  vrhenlbe  daughter
of  the  said  Herodias  came  in  and  danced-:-*-^-."

With  this  also  compare  Joseph.  Antiq.  1.  xviiL
c.  6.  sect.  4.  "  Herodias  was  married  to  Herod,  sou
of  Herod  the  Great.  They  had  a  daughter,
whose  name  was  Salome;  after  whose  birth,
Herodias,  in  utter  violation  of  the  laws  of  hex
country,  left  her  husband,  then  living;  and  mar-
ried Herod  the  tetrarch  of  Galilee,  her  husband's
brother  by  the  father's  side."

IV.  [p.  29]  Acts  xii.  1.  "Now  about  that
time,  Herod  the  king  stretched  forth  his  hands  to
vex  certain  of  the  church."  In  the  conclusion  of
the  same  chapter,  Herod's  death* k  represented
to  have  taken  place  soon  after  this  persecution.
The  accuracy. of  our  historian,  or,  rather,  the
unmeditated  coincidence,  which  truth  of  its  own
accord  produces,  is  in  this  instance  remarkable.
There  was  no  portion  of  time,  for  thirty  yean
before,:  nor  ever  afterward,  in  which  there  was  a
king  at  Jerusalem,  a  person  exercising  that  au-
thority in  Judea,  or  to  whom  that  title  could  be
applied,  except  the  three  last  years  of  this  Herod's
life,  within  which  period  the  transaction  recorded
in  the  Acts  is  stated  to  have"  taken  place.  This
prince  was  the  grandson  of  Herod  the  Great.*  In
the  Acts,  he  appears  under  his  family-name  of
Herod ;'  by  Josephus  he  was  called  Agrippa.  For
proof  that  he  was  a  king,  properly  so  called,
we  have  the  testimony  of  Josephus  in  full  and
direct  terms: — "Sending  for  him  to  his  palace,
Caligula  put  a  crown  -upon  his  head,  and  appoint-
ed him  king  of  the  tetrarchie '  of  Philip,  intending
also  to  give  him  the  tetrarchie  of  Lysanias.'Tl
And  that  Judea  was  at  last,  but  not  until  the  last,
incjuded  in  his  dominions,  •  appears  by  a  subse-
quent passage  of  the  same  Josephus,  wherein  he
tells  us,  that  Claudius,  by  a  decree,  confirmed  to
Agrippa  the  dominion  Vhich1  Caligula  had  given
him ;  adding  also  Judea  and  Samaria,  in  the
utmost  extent,  as  possessed  by  his  grandfather
Hcrod.V .  »  ,


•  Ant.  lib.  xvii.  e.  8.  sect.  1.

!De  Bell.  lib.  i.  c.  33.  sect.  7.
Ant.  lib.  xvii.  c  1&  sect  1.
Aat.  lib.  xvii.  c  8.  sect.  L


*  Ant.  lib.  xviii.  c.  8.  Beet.* .  t  /bid.  c  &  sect.  6.

t  See  also  Matt.  xiv.  1—13. Luke  iii.  19.

§  The  affinity  or  the.  two  accounts  in  unquestionable;
but  there  is  a  difference  in  the  name  of  Herodias**  Brat
husband,  which,  in  the'  evangelist,  is  Philip;  in  Jose-
phus, Herod.  The  difficulty,  however,  will  not  appear
considerable,  when  we  recollect  how  common  it  was  in
those'  times  Tor  the  same  person  to  bear  two  names.
" Simon,  which  is  called  Peter:  Lebbeus,  whose  sur-
name is  Thaddeus ;  Thomas,  which  n  called  Didymus ;
Simeon,  wlio  was  called  Niger ;  Saul,  who  was  also  call-
ed Paul."  The  solution  is  Tendered  likewise  easier  ia
the  present  case,  by  the  consideration,  that  Herod  the
Great  had  children  by  seveh  or  eight  wives ;  that  Jose-
phus mentions  three  of  his  sons  under  the  name  or  He-
rod :  that  it  is  nevertheless  highly  probable,  that  the
brothers  bore  some  additional  name,  by  which  they  were
distinguished  from  one  another.  Lardner,  vol.  it  p.  897.

||  Antiq.  xviii  c  7.  sect.  10. IT  lb.  xix  c  5.  sect.  1.


EVIDENCES  OP  CHRISTIANITY.


347


V.  fo.  32.]  Aetaxii.  19-23.  "  And  he  (Herod)
went  down  from.  Judea  to  Genres,  and  there
abode,— And  on  a  'set  day,-  Herod,  arrayed  in
royal  apparel,  sat  upon  his  throne,  and  made  an
oration  unto,  them :  and  the  people  gave-  a  shout,
saying,  It  is  the  voice  of  a  god,'  and  not  of  a  man;
and'  immediately  the  angel  of  the  Loni}  emote
htm,  because  he  gave  not  God  the  story ;  and  he
was  eaten  of  worms,  and  gave  up  the  ghost."

.  Joseph.  Antiq.  lib*,  xix.  c.  8.  sect.  2.  u  He
went  to  the  city  of  Cesarean  Here  he  celebrated
shows  in  honour  of  Caesar.  On  the  second,  day
'of  the  shows,  early  in  the  morning,  he  came  into
the  theatre,  dressed  in  a  robe  of  silver,  of  most
carious  *  work  ma  nship.  The  rays  of  the  rising
son,  rejected  from  such  a  splendid  garb,  gave  him
a  majestic  and  awful  appearance.  They  called
him  a  god ;.  and  entreated  him  to  be  propitious  to
them,  saving,  Hitherto  we  have  respected  you  as
«  man :  but  now  We  acknowledge  you  io  be  more
than  mortal  The  king  neither  reproved' these
personal  nor  rejected  the  impious- flattery. — Im-
mediately after  this,  he  was  seized  with  pains  in
his  bowels,  extremely  violent  at  the  very  first. —
He  was  carried  therefore  with  all  haste  to  his
palace'.  These  pains  continually  tormenting.'him,
he  expired  in  five  days'  time." t ^  » *

The -reader  will  perceive  the  accordancy  of
these  accounts  in  various  particulars.  The  place
(Cesarea),  the  set  day,  the  gorgeous  dress,  the
acclamations  of  tho  assembly,  the  peculiar  turn
of  the  flattery,  the  reception  of  it,  the  sudden  and
critical  incursion  of  the  disease,  are  circumstances
noticed  in  both  narratives.  The-  worms,  men-
tioned by  Saint  Luke,  are  not  remarked  by  Jose-
phus:  but  the  appearance  of  these  is  a  symptom,
not  unusually, ,  I  believe,  attending  the  diseases
which  JoseDhua  describes,  viz.  violent  affections
of  the  bowels.

'  VL  [p.  41.1  Acts  xxiv.  24.  "  And  after  sertain
when  Felix  came  with  hia  wife  Drusilla,
i  was  a  Jewess,  he  Bent  for  Paul."

Joseph.  Antiq.  fib.  xx.  c  6.  sect.  1,  2.  ".Agrip-
pa  gave  his  sister  Drjusilla  in  marriage  to  Azizua,
long  of  the  Entesenes,  when  he  had  consented  to
he  circumcised— But  this  marriage  of  Drusilla
with  Aznus  was  dissolved  in  a  short  time  after  in
this  manner : — When  Felix  was  procurator  of
Judes,  having  had  a.  sight  of  her,  he  was  mightiy
ly  taken  whhher. — She  was  induced  totransgreas
fltt  laws  of  her  country,  and  marry  Felix."

Here  the  public  station  of  Felix,  the  name  of
hia  wife,  and  the  singular  circumstance  of  her
ietignn;  aU  appear  in  perfect  conformity  with  the


daya,  i

which


evangelist.
VH  [p.


[p.  46 J  "And  after? certain  daya,  king

..Agrippa  and  Bernice  came  to  Cesarea  to  salute
Festus."  By  this  passage  we  are  in  effect  told,
that  Agrippa  was  a  king,  but  not  of  Judea ;  for
he  came  to  salute  Festua/who  at  this  time  ad-
ministered the  government  of  that  country  at
Cesarea.

Now„  how  does  the  history  of  the  -  age  corres-
pond with  this  account  ?  The  Agnppa  here
spoken  ot,  was  the  son  of  Herod  Agrippa,  men-
tioned in  the  last  article :  but  that  he  did  not  suc-
ceed to  his  father's  kingdom,  nor  ever  recovered
Judea,  which  had  been  a  part  of  it,  we  learn  by
the  information  of  Josephus,  who  relates  of  him
that,  when  his  father  was  dead,  Claudius  intend-
ed, at  first,  to  have  put  him  immediately  in  pos-
sessknoffushUl^sdoiuiiion&i  bulthat^grip-


pa  being  then  but  seventeen  jean  of  age*  the
emperor  was  persuaded  to  alter  hia  mind,  and
appointed  Cuspius  Fades  prefect  of  Judea,  and
the  whole,  kingdom  ;♦  which,Fadus  was  succeeded
by  Tiberius  Alexander,  Cumanus,  Felix,  Festus.t
But  that,  though  disappointed  of  his  lather V  king*
dom,  in  which  was  included  Judea,  he  was  never-
theless rightly  styled  King  Agrippa,  and  that  he
was  in  possession  of  considerable  territories  border-
ing  upon  J  ucjea,  we  gather  from  fche*ame  authority;
for,  after  several  successive  donation*  of  country,
"  Claudius;  at  the  "same  time  that  he  sent  Fehx
to  be  procurator  of  Judea,  promoted  Agrippa  frejn
Ohalcis  to  a  greater  kingdom,  giving  to  him  the
tetrarchie  which  had  been  Philip's;  and  he  added
moreover  the  kingdom  of  Lysanias;  and  the  pro-
vince that,  had  belonged.*)  Varus."*  '

Saint  Paul  addresses  this  person  as  a  Jew:
"  King  Agrippa,  believest  thou  the  prophets  1  I
know  that  thou  believest."  As  the  son  of  Herod
Agrippa,  who  is.  described  by  Josephus -to  have
been  a  zealous  Jew,  iris  reasonable  to  suppose
that  he  maintained  the  same  profession,  cot
what  is  more  .material  to  .remark,  because  it  ia
more  close  and  circumstantial,  is,  that  Saint  Lake,
speaking  of  the  Father,  (Acts  xii.  V— 3,)  calk,
him  Herod  the  king,  and  gives  an  example  of  the
exercise  of  his  authority  at  Jerusalem :  speaking
of  the  son,  f  xxv.  13,)  he  calls  him  king,  out  not
of  Judea ;  which  distinction  agrees  correctly  with
the  history.

VIII.  [p<  51.]  Acta  xiii.  6.  "And  when  they
had  gone  through  the  isle  (Cyprus)  to  Paphos,
they  found  a  certain  sorcerer,  a  false  prophet,  a
Jew,  whose  name  was  Barjesus,  which  waa  the
deputy  .ef  the  country,  Serguia  Paujus,  a  prudent
man."

The  word,  which  ia  here  translated  deputy,
signifies  proconsul,  and  upon  this  word  our  of*
servation  is  founded.  The  provinces  of  the  Ro-
man empire  were  of  two  kinds ;  those  belonging
to  the  emperor,  in  which  the  governor  waa  called
propraetor ;  and  those  belonging  to  the  senate,  in
which  the  governor  was  called  proconsul.  And
this  was  a  regular-  distinction.  Now  it  appears
from  Pio  Casaius,§  that  the  province  of  Cyprus,
which' in  the  original  distribution' waa  assigned
to  the  emperor,  had  been  transferred  to  the  senate,
in  exchange  for  some  others;  and  that,  after  this
exchange,  the  appropriate  title  of  the  Roman  go-
vernor was  proconsul.

lb.  xvUL  12.  [p.  55  J  «  And  when  Galiio  wae
deputy  (proconsul)  of  Achaia,"

The-  propriety  of  the  title  "  woconsoj,"  is  ia
this  passage  still  more  critical.  For  the  province  *
of  Achaia,  after  passing  from  the  senate  to  the
emperor',  had  been  restored4  again  by  the  emperor
Claudius  to  the  senate  (and  consequently  its  go-
vernment had  become  proconsular)  only  six  or
seven  years  before  the  tune  in  which  this  transac-
tion is  said  to  have  taken  place.lt  And  what  con-
fines with  strictness  the  appellation'  to  the  time  is,
that  Achaia  under  the  following  reign  ceased  to
be  a  Roman  province  at  all.  . .  j r

IX.  [p..  152.]  It  appears,  as  well  from  the1  ge-  m
neral  constitution  of  a  Roman  province,  as  from
what  Jdsepluis  delivers  concerning  the  state  of


•  Antiq.  xix.  c.P.  ad  fin.

■  lb.  xx. De  Bell.  lib.  ii.
De  Belt.  irb.  ii.  c.  12.  ad  fin
Da  Bell  lib.  liv.  ad  A.  U.  739.
Suet,  in  Claud.  0.24. Dio.lib.UU


848


EVIDENCES  OP  CHRISTIANITY.


Judea  in  particular,*  that  the  power  of  life  and
death  resided  exclusively  in  the  Roman  governor ;
but  that  the  Jews,  nevertheless,  had  magistrates
and  a  councft,  invested  with  a  subordinate  and
municipal  authority.  This  economy  is  discerned
Hi  every  part  of  the  Gospel  narrative  of  our  Sa-
viour's crucifix  ioni  -

X.  {p.  203.]  Acts  ix.  31.  "  Then  had  the
.churches  rest  throughout  all  Judea  and  Galilee
and  SamariaV1  '

*  This  rest  synchronies  with  the  attempt  of
Caligula  to  place  his  statue  in  the  temple  oi  Jeru-
salem;' the  threat  of  which  outrage  produced
sjmongst  the  Jews  a  consternation  •  that,  for  a
season,  diverted  their  attention  from  every  other
oMectt

Xi  [p.  218.]  Acta  xxi  30.  "And  they  took
Paul,  and  drew  him  oat  of  the  temple ;  and  forth-
with the  doors  were  shut.  And  as  they  went
about  to  kill  him,  tidings  came  to  the  chief  cap-
tain of  the  band,  that  all  Jerusalem  was  in  an  up-
roar. Then  the  chief  captain  came  near,  and
took  hinv&nd  commanded  him  to  be  bound  with
two  chains,  and  demanded,  who  he  was,  and
what  he  had  done ;  ami  some  cried  one  thing,  and
some  another,  among  the  multitude.' and,  when
ha  could  not  know-  tne  certainty  for  the  .tumult,
be  commanded  him  to  be  carried  into  the  castle.
And  when  he  came  upon  the  stairs,  so  it  was,
that  he  was  borne  of  the  soldiers  lor  the  violence
of  the  people."

In  this  quotation,  we  have  the  band  of  Roman
soldiers  at  Jerusalem,  their  office  (to  suppress  tu-
mults;) the  castle,  the  stairs,  both,  as  it  should,
•earn,  adjoining  to  the  temple.  Let  ua  inquire
whether  we  can  find  these  particulars  in  any
other  record  of  that  age  and  place.
-  Joseph.  de-Bell.  fib.  ▼.  c.  5.  sect.  8.  "  Antonia
was -situated  at  the  angle  of  the  western  and  north-
ern porticoes  of  the  outer*  temple.  It  was  built
upon  a  rock  fifty  cubits  high,  steep  on  all  aides.—
On  that  side  where  it  joined  to  the  porticoes  of
the  temple,  there  were  stairs  reaching  to  each
portico,  by  which  the  guard  descended ;  for  there
was  always  lodged  here  a  floman  legion,  and
posting  themselves  in  their  armour  m  several
places  in  the  porticoes,  they  kept  a  watch  on  the
people  on  the  feast  days  to  prevent  all  disorders ;
for  as  the  temple  was  a  guard  to  the  city,  so  was
Antonia  to  the  temple."

XII .  [p.  334.]  Acts  iv.  1.  "  And  asthey  spake
unto  the  people,  the  priests,  and  the  captain  of
the  temple,  and  the  Sadducees,  came  upon  them."
Here  we  have  a  public  officer,  under,  the  title  of
captain  of  the  temple,  and  he  probably  a  Jew,  as
he  accompanied  the  priests  and  Sadducees  in  ap-
prehending the  apostles.

Joseph,  de  Bell.  lib.  ii.  c.  17.  sect.  3.  "  And  at
the  temple,  Eleazar,  the  son  of  Ananias,  the  high-
<  priest,  a  young  man  of  a  bold  and  resolute  dispo-
sition, then  captain^  persuaded  those  who  per-
formed the  sacred  ministrations  not  to  receive  the
gift  or  sacrifice  of  any  stranger.1'

XIII.  ("p.  225]  Acts  xxv,  12.  « Then Festus,
when  he  had  conferred  with  the  council,  answer-
ed, Hast  thou  appealed  unto  Caesar  1  unto  Cesar
shaltthou  go." That  it  was  usual  for  the  Ro-

'  man  presidents  to  have  a  council,  consisting  of
their  mends,  and  other  chief  Romans  in  the  pro-


vince, appears  express! jr  in  the  tbflbwinc  passage
of  Cicero  s  oration  against  Verres: — "  lUud  ne-
gare.  posses,  aut  nunc  negabis,  te,  concHio  tuo  di-
misso,  viris  primariis,  qui  in  conaitio  C  Sacerdotia
fuerant,  tibique  esse  volebant,  remotis,  de-re  jud>
cata  judirasse  ?"

XIV.  [p.  235.1  Acta  xri.  13.  "And  (at  Phi-
lippi)  on  tne  sabbath  we  went  out  of  the  city  by  a
rivjer-side,  where  prayer  Waa  wont  to  be  made,"
or  where  a  r<°«-««xi,  oratory,  or  place  of  prayer
was  allowed.  The  particularity  to  be  remarked,
is  the  situation  of  the  place  where  prayer/  waa
wont  to  be  made}  viz.  by  a  river-side.

Philo,  describing  the  conduct  of  the  Jews  of
Alexandria,  on  a  certain  public  occasion,  relates
of  them,  that  "  early  in  the  morning,  flocking  out
of  the  gates  of  the  city,  they  go  to  the  neighbour-
ing shores  (for  the  «-{»«>•« jea<  were  destroyed,)  and,
standing  in  a  most  pure  place,  they  lift  up  their
voices  with  one  accord."*

Joaephus  gives  us  a  decree  of  the  city  of  Hali-
carnassua,  permitting  the  Jews  to  build  oratories;
a  part  of  which  decree  runs  thus:—"  We  ordain
that  the  Jews  who  are  willing,  men  and  women,
do  observe  the  sabbaths,  and  perform  sacred  rites
according  to  the  Jewish  laws,  and  build  oratories
by  the  seaside.'^

Tertullian,  among  other  Jewish  rites  and  cus-
toms, such  as  feasts,  sabbaths,  lasts,  and  unleaven-
"ed  bread,  mentions  "  orationes  Morales  f"  that  is,
prayers  by  the  river-side.*  v

XV.  [p.  255]  Acts  xxvi.  5.  "  After  the  most
straitest  sect  of  our  religion,  I  lrred  a  Pharisee,'*

Joseph.de,  Bell.  lib.  i.  c.  5i  sect.  2.  "The  Pha-
risees were  reckoned  the  most  religious  of  any  of
the  Jews,  and  to  be  the  most  exact  and  skilful  in
explaining  the  laws."

In  the  original,  there  is  an  agreement  not  only
in  the  sense,  but  in  the  expression,  it  being  the
same  Greek  adjective,  whicn  is  rendered  "  strait'1
in  the  Acts,  and  "  exact"  in  Joaephus.

Xyi.  [p.  255!]  Mark  vii.  3, 4.  "  The  Phari-
sees and  all  the  Jews,  except  they  wash,  eat  not,
holding  the  tradition  of  the  elders;  and  many
other  things  there  be  which  they  have  received  to
hold."  „  •

Joseph.  Antiq.  lib.  xiii.  e.  10.  sect  '6.  ,f  The
Pharisees  have  delivered  to  the  people  many  insti-
tutions, as  received  from  the  fathers,  which  are
•not  written  in  the  law  of  Moses."

XVII.  [p.  259.1  Acts  xxiii.  8.  "  For  the  Sad-
ducees say,  that  there  is  no  resurrection,  neither
angel,  nor  spirit :  but  the  Pharisees  confess  both.1'

Joseph,  de  BeH.  lib.  ii.c  8.  sect  14.  "They
(the  Pharisees)  believe  every  soul  to  be  ip^n*!**',
but  that  the  soul  of  the  good  only  passes  into  an-
other body,  and  that  the  soul  of  the  wicked  is
punished  with  eternal  punishment"  On  the
other  hand,  (Antiq.  lib.  xvfii.  c.  1.  sect  4,)  "It
is  the  opinion  of  the  Sadducees,  that  souls  perish
with  the  bodies."

.  XVIII.  [p.  268.1  Acts  v.  17.  "Thenthahi^h-
priest  rose  up,  and  all  they  that  were  with  him
(which  is"  the  sect  of  the  Sadducees,)  and  were
rdled  with  indignation."  Saint  Luke  here  inti-
mates, that  the  high-priest  was  a  Sadducee ;  which
is  a  character  one  would  not  have  expected  to
meet  with  in  that  station*  The  circumstance,  re-


*  Antia.  lib.  zx.  c  8.  sect.  5 ;  c  1.  sect.  9.
t  Joseph,  <te  BelL  lib,  xL  c  13.  seat  1, 3,  4.


*  Philo.  in  Flacc  p.  382.

t  Joseph.  Antiq.  lib.  xiv.  e.  10.  sect  *L

1  Twrtul.  ad  Nat.  lib,  i.  c  13.


EVIDENCES  OP  CHRISTIANITY.


349


maskable  M  it  is,  wti  not  however  Without  exam-
ples.

Joseph.  Antiq.  Hb.  xihVc.  10.  secf  <L  7.  "  John
Hyrcanut,  high-priest'  of  the  Jews,  forsook  the
Pharisees  upon  a  disgust,  and  joined  himself  to
the  party  of  the  Sadduceee."  This  high-priest
died  one  hundred  and  seven  years  before  the  Chris-
tian'era.

\  Again,  (Antiq.  lib.  it:  c.  8.  sect.  1.)  "This
Ananus  the  younger,  who,  as  we  have  said  just
now,  had  received  the  high-priesthood,  was  fierce
and  haughty  in  his  behaviour,  and,  above  all  men,
bold  and  daring,  and,  moreover,  vas  qfthe  sect  of
the  Sadduceesr  This  high-priest  lived  little  more
than  twentyyears  after  the  transaction  in  the  Acts.

XIX.  [p.  28fcJ  Luke  ix.  51.  "  And  it  came  to
pass,  when  the  tune  was  oome  that  he  should  be
Tecerved  up;  he*  steadfastly  set  his  face  to  go  to
Jerusalem,  and  sent  messengers  before  his  face.
And  they  went,  and  entered  into  a  village  of  the.
Samaritans,  to  make  ready  for  him.  And  they
did  not  receive  him,  because  his  face  was  as  though
he  would  go  to  Jerusalem."

Joseph.  Antiq.  lib.  xx. c. 5.  sect.  L  "It  was  the
custom  of  the  GadUean»,'who  went  up  to  the  holy
city  at  the  feasts,  (o  travel  through  the  country  of
Samaria.  A*4hey  were  m  their  journey,  some
inhabitants  of  the  village  called  Ginea,  which  lies
en  the  borders  of  Samaria  and  the  great  plain,
Jailing  upon  them,  killed  a  great -many  of  them/'

XX.  [p.  278]  John  iv.  30.  « Our  fathers,"
said  the  Samaritan  woman,  "  worshipped  in  this-
mountain;  and  ye  say,  that  Jerusalem  is  the
place  where" men  ought  to  worship."

Joseph.  Antiq.  lib.  xviii.  c.  5.  sect.  1.  "  Com-
manding them  to  meet  him  at  mount  Qerxzim,
'which  is  by  them  (the  Samaritans)  esteemed  the
most  sacred  of  all  mountains."

XXI.  (p.  312.]  Matt.  xxvi.  3.  "  Then  assem-
bled together  the  chief  priests,  and  the  elders  of
the  people,  unto  the  palace  of  the  high-priest.  y)ho
was  called  Caiaphas/'  .  That  Caiaphas  was  high-
priest,  and  high-priest  throughout  the  president-
ship of  Pontius  Pilate,  and  consequently  at  this
time,  appears  from  the  following  account:— He
was  made  high-priest  by  Valerius  Gratus,  vrede-  •
eeseor  of  Pontius  Pilate,  and  was  removed  from
his  office  by  Vitellius,  president  of  Syria,  after
Pilate  was  sent  away  out  of  the  province  of  Judea.
Josephus  relates  the  advancement  of  Caiaphas  to
the  high-priesthood  in  this  manner:  "  Gratus  gave
the  high-priesthood  to  Simon,  the  son  of  Camithus.
He,  having  enjoyed  this-  honour  not  above  a  year,
was  succeeded  by  Joseph,  who  is  also  called  Caia-
phas* After  this,  Gratus  went  away  for  Rome,
having  been  eleven  years  in  Judea ;  and  Pontius
Pilate  came  thither  as  his  successor. M  Of  the  re-
moval of  Caiaphas  from  his  office,  Josephus,  like-
vise,  afterward  informs  us;«  and  connects  it  with
•  circumstance  which  fixes  the  time  to  a  date  sub-
sequent to  the  determination  of  Pilate's  govern-
ment— "Vitellius,* he  tells  us,"oidered  Pilate  to
repair  to  Rome;  and  after  that,  went  up  him-
self to  Jerusalem,  and  then  gave  directions  con-
cerning several  matters.  And  having  done  these
things,  he  took  away  the  priesthood  from  the.
high-priest  Joseph;  who  is  called  CaiapHas.ni

XXII.  (Michaelis,  c  zi.  sect.  11.)  Acts  zxiii.
4.  «  And  they  that  stood  by.  said,  JRevifest  thou
God's  high-priest  1  Then  said  Paul,  I  wist  not,


•AatA*ttkxvuic2.seeua  ttt.ixvu.e.&awt.&


brethren,  that  he  was  .the  high-priest."  Now,  up-
on inquiry  Into  the  history  of  the  age.  it  turns  out,
that  Ananias,  of  whom  this  is  spoken,  was,'  in
truth,  not  the  high-priest,  though  he.  was  sitting
in  judgment  in  that  assumed  capacity.  The  case
was,  that  he  "had  formerly  holden  the  office,  and
had  been  deposed ;  that  the  person  who  succeeded
him  had  been  murdered ;  that  another  was  not  yet
appointed  to  the  station  j  and  that,  during  the  va-
cancy, he  Bad,  of  bis  own  authority,'  taken  upon
himself  the  discharge  of  the  office.*  This  singular
situation  'of  the  high-priesthood  took  place  during
the  interval  between  the  death  of  Jonathan,  who
was  murdered  by  order  of  Fehx,  and  the  accession
of  Ishmasl  who  was  invested  with  the  high-priest-
hood by  Agrippa;  and- precisely  in  this  interval  it v
happened  that  Saint  Paul  was  apprehended,  and
brought  before  the  Jewish  council.

XXIII.  [p.  323.1  Matt  xxvi- 59.  "Now  the
chief  priests  and  elders,  and  all  the.founcil,  sought
false  witness  against  him."

Joseph.  Antiq.  lib.  xviil.  c  15.  sect.  3, 4.  "  Then
might  he  seen  the  high-priests  themselves,  with
ashes  on  their  heads,  and  their  breasts  naked."

The  agreement  here  consists  in  speaking  of  the
high-priests  or  chief  priests  (Tor  the  name  in  the *
original  is  the  same)  in  the  plural  number,  when,
in  strictness,  there  was  only  one%  high-priest:
which  may  be  considered  as  a  uroo£  that'  the
evangelists  were  habituated  to  the  manner  of
speaking  then  in  use,  because  they  retain  it  when
it  is  neither  accurate  nor  just  For  the  sue  of
brevity,  I  have  put  down,  from  Josephus,  only  a
single 'example  of  the  application  of  this  title  in
the  plural  number ;  but  it  is  bis  usual  style.

lb.  [p.  871.]  Luke  Hi  1.-"  Now  in  the  fifteenth
year  of  the  reign  of  Tiberius  Caesar,  Pontius  Pi-
late being  governor  of  Judea,  and  Herod  being
tetrarch  of  Galilee,  Annas  and  Caiaphas  being
the  high-priests,  the  word  of  God  came  unto
John."  There  is  a  passage  in  Josephus  verj  near-
ly parallel  to  this,  and  which  may  at  least  serve  to
vindicate  the  evangelists,  from  objection,  with  re-
spect to  his  giving  the  title  of  high-priest  speci-
fically to  two  persons  at  the  same  tune :  "  Q,uadra~
tus  sent  two  others  of  the  most  powerful  men  of
the  Jews,  as  also  the  high-priests  Jonathan  and
Ananias  "i  That  Annas  was  a  person  in  an  emi-
nent station,  and  possessed  an  authority  oo-ordi-
nate-with,  or  next  to,  that  of  the  high-priest  pro-
perly so  called,  may  be  inferred  from  Saint  John's
Gospel,  which,  in  the  history  of  Christ's  cructv
fixion,  relates  that  "  the  soldiers  led  him  away  to
Annas  first."t\  And  this  might  be  noticed  ait  an
example  of  'undesigned- coincidence  in  the  two
evangelists.

Ajgain,  [p.  870.]  Acts  iv.  6,  Annas  is  called
the  high-priest,  though  Caiaphas  was  in  the  office
of  the  high-priesthood.  In  like  manner,  hi  Jose-
phus,* "  Joseph,  the  son  of  Gorion,  and  the  high-
priest  Ananus,  were  chosen  to  be  supreme  go-
vernors of  all  things  in  the  city."  Yet  Ananus;
though  here  called  the  high-priest' Ananus,  was
not  then  in  the  office  of  the  high-priesthood.  The
truth  is,  there  is  an  indeterminateness  in  the  -use
of  this  title  in  the  Gospel:  sometimes  it  is  applied
exclusively  to  the  person  who  held  the  office  at
the'  time ;  sometimes  to  one  or  two  more,  who
probably  shared  with  him  some  of  the  powers  or


•  Antiq.  1.  xx.  e.  5.  seot.  2 ;  c.  ft.  sect  8.
t  De  Bell,  lib;  ix.  e.  12.  Met.  6.  J  xviii.  13.

|  lift.  iLc.  90.  tact*.
30


EVIDENCES  OF  CHRISTIANITY.


faction* of  the  office;  and,  sometime*,  to  such
of  <the  priests  as  were  eminent  by  their  station  01
character  ;*  and  there  is  the  very  same  indetermi-
natenaas  in  Josephus.

XXIV.  [p.  3«.]  John  xix.  19, 20.  «  And  Pi-
late wrote  a  title,  and  pat  it  on  the  cross." That

?  anch  was  the  custom  of  the  Romans  on  these  oc-
casions, appears  from  passages  of  Suetonius  and
Kb  Cassras:  "  Patron  famuW^-canibus  objecit,
com  hoc  tfruZo,  AnoU  locutusparmularituk"  Suet.
Demit,  cap.  x.  And  in  Die  Cassius  we  have  the
following:  "  Having  led  him  through  the  midst
of  (he  court  or  assembly,  with  a  writing  signify-
ing the  cause  of  his  death,  and  afterward  crucify-
ing aim."— Book  h>. -

lb,  "And  it  was  written' in  Hebrew,  Greek;
and  Latin."  That  it  was  also  usual  about  this,
time,  in  Jerusalem,  to  set  up  advertisements  in
different  languages,  is  gathered  from  the  account
which  Josephus  gives  of  an  expostulatory  message
from  Titus  to  the  Jews,  when  the  city  was  almost
in  his  hands;  in  which  he  says,  Pitf  ye  not  erect
pillars  with  inscriptions  on.  them,  in  the  Greek
and  in  our  language.  "Let  no  one  pass  beyond
these  bounds  1,p

XXV.  [p.  358.]  Matt.  xxvii.  96.  "When  he
had  scourged  Jesus,  he  delivered  hint  to  be  cru-


The  following  passages  occur  in  Josephus:
"Being  beaten,  they  were  crucified  opposite  to

vrged  with  whips,  he


"Whom,  having  first
crucified"*

■• "  He  was  burnt  alive,  having  been  first  beaten."%

To  which  may  be  added  one  from  Ljvy,  fib.  xi.

c,  5/  "  Productions  omnes,  virgisque  cassi,  ac  se~


A  modem  example  may  illustrate  the  use  we
make  of  this  instance.  The  preceding  of  a  capi-
tal execution  by  the  corporal  punishment  of  tne
sufferer,  is  a  practice  unknown  in  England,  but
Detained,  in  some  instances  at  least,  as  appears  by
the  hUe  execution  of  a  regicide,  in  Sweden.  This
circumstance,  therefore,  in  the  account  of  an  Eng-
lish execution,  purporting  to  come  from  an  Eng-
lish writer,  would  not  only  bring  a  suspicion  upon
.the  truth  of  the  account,  but  would,  in  a  consider-
able degree,  impeach  its  pretensions  of  having
been  written  by  the  author  whose,  name  it  bore.
Whereas  the  same  circumstance,  in  the  account
ef  a  Swedish  execution,  would  verify  the  account,
and  support  the  authenticity  of  the  book  in  which
it  was  found ;  .or,  at  least,  would  prove  that  the
wed  the  in!


>r,  whoever  he  was,  possessed  the  information
and  the  knowledge  which  he  ought  to  possess.

XXVI.  [p.  353.1  John  xix/m  "  And  they
took  Jesus,  and  led  him  away  ;:and  he,  bearing
kit  croat,  went  forth.?

Plutarch,  De  tie  qui  aero  punhintur,  p.  554:  a
Park,  1624.  "  Every  kind  of  wickedness  produces
ita  own  particular  torment,  just  as  every  malefac-
tor, when,  he  is' brought  forth  to  execution,  carries
his  own  cross*1

XXVII.  John  xix.  33.  "Then  came  the  sol-
diers, and  brake  the  lege  of  the  first,  and  of  the'
other  which  was  crucified  with  him."

Constantino  abolished  the  punishment  of  the
cross ;  hv  commending  which  edict,  a  heathen  wri-
ter notices  this  very  circumstance  of  breaking  the


•Mark  xi  v.  53.


tP,  1347,  edit  94.
j  P.  1327,  edit  43.


legs:  "Ed*  pins,  at  etiam  vetus  ■

supplicjum,  patibulum.  et  crurtbus  trufringendis,

parous  removerit" — Aur.  Vict  Ces.  cap.  xli

XX  VIII.  [p.  457]  Acts  iii.  1.  "  Now  Peter  and
Jolm  went  up  together  into  the  temple,  at  the
hour  of  prayer,  being  the  ninth  hour."

Joseph.  Antiq!  tib.  xv,  c.  7.  sect  8.  "Twice
every  day,  in  theanorning  and  at  the  ninth  hour,
the  priests  perform  their  duty  at  the  altar.7'

XXIX.  [p.  4G2.]  Acts  xv.  21.  "  For  Moses,  of
old. time,  hath,  in  every  city,  them  thai  preach
him,  being  read  in  the  synagogues  every  sabbath*
day." ,  mw  %

Joseph,  contra  Ap.  1.'  il  "  He  (Moses)  gave  us
the  law,  the  most  excellent  of  all -institutions;  nor
did  he  appoint  that  it  should  be  heard  once  only,
or  twice,  or  often,  but  that  laying  aside  all  other
works,  we  should  meet  together  every  week  to
hear  it  read,  and  gain  a  perfect  imderstandihg  of
it"

XXX.  (p.  465.]  Acts  xxf.  23.  "  We  have  four
men,  which  have  a  vow  on  them;  them  take,  and
purify  thyself  with  them,  that  they  may  shave
their  heads."

Joseph,  de  BelL  L  xi'c.  15.  "  It  is  customary
for  those  who  have  been  afflicted  with  some  dis-
temper, or  have  laboured  under  any  other  dtfficni-
ties,  to  make  a  vow  thirty  days  before  they  offer
sacrifices,  to  abstain  from  wine,  and  shave  the,
hair  of  their  heads." .

Ih.  v.  24.  "  Them  rake,  and  purify  thyself  with
thenvand  beat  charges  with  them,  that  they  may
shave  their  heads."

Joseph.  Antiq.  1.  xix.c.  6V  "  He  (Herod  Agrip-
pa)  coming  to  Jerusalem,  offered  up  sacrifice*  at
thanksgiving,  and  omitted  nothing  that  was  pre-
scribed by  the  law.  For  which  reason  he  also  or*
dered  a  good  number  cf  Nazarites  to  be  shaved."
We  here  find  that  it  was  an  act  of  piety  amongst
the  Jews,  to  defray  for  those  who  were  under  the
Nazarite  vow  the  expenses  which  attended  its
completion ;  and  that  the  phrase  was-,  "  that  they
might  be  shaved"  The  custom  and  the  expression
are  both  remarkable,  and  both  in  close  conibixnirj
with  the  Scripture  account ,

XXXI.  {p.  474.1  2  Cor.  xi.  24.  "Of  the  Jews,
five  times  received  1  forty  stripes,  save  one.9*

Joseph.  Antiq.  iv.  c  &  sect  21.  "  He  that  acts
contrary  hereto,  let  him  receive  forty  stripes,
warding  one,  from  the  public  officer.'1.

The  coincidence  here  is  singular,  because  the
law  allowed  forty  stripes  :-*-"  Forty  stripes  he  mar
give  him,  and  not  exceed."  Dent  xxv»  3.  It
proves  that  the  author  of  the  Epistle,  to  the  Corin-
thians was  guided,  not  by-  taoke,  but  by  nctsj
because  this  statement  agrees  with  the  actual-cue-
torn,  even  when  that  custom  deviated  from  the
written  law,  and  from  what  he  must  have  learnt
by  consulting  the  Jewish  code,  as  set  forth  in  the
Old  Testament

XXXII..  [p,  490.1  Luke  iiL  12.  "  Then  <


ajso  publicans  to  be  baptised."  From  tme  quota-
tion, as  well  as  from  the  history  of  Levi  cor  Mat-
thew, (Luke.v.  29,)  and  of  Zaccheus,  (Luke  xix.
2,)  it  appears,  that  the  publicans,  or  tax-gatherers
were,  frequently  at  least,  if  not  always,  Jews:
which,  as  the  country  was  then  under  a  Roman
government,  and  the  taxes  were  paid  to  the.  Ro-
mans, -.  was  a  circumstance  not  to  be  expected.
That  it  was  the  troth.however  of  the  case,  appears,
from  a  short  passage-of  Josephus.
. JPc  Bell,  lit.  it  1 14.  wet,  45.  "  But,  Floruanot


EVIDENCES  OP  CHRISTIANITY.


restraining  these  practises  by  hie  authority,  foe
chief  men  of  the  Jews,  among  whom  was  John
ihe  publican,  not  knowing  well  what  course  to
lake,  wait  upon  Floras,  and  give  him  eight  ta-
lents of  silver  to  stop  the  building."

XXXIII.  {p.  496]  Acts  xxu.  25.  "And  as
they  bound  him  with  thongs,  Paul  sai<i.  unto  the
centurion  that  stood  by,  la  it  lawful  for  you  to
scourge  a  man  that  is  a  Roman,  and  uncon-
demnedr

"Facinusest  vineiri  civem  Romanum;  soelus
^wrberari."— Cie.  in  Verr.

"  Cedebatur  viigis,  in  medio  foro  Messarue,  ci~

vis  Romanus,  Indices :  cum  interea  nullus  gcmi-

-  tut,  nulla  vox  alia,  istius  miaeri  inter  dolorem

erepitumque  ptaearam  audiebatur,  nisi  hoc,  Oivis.

Romanus  sum.

XXXI V.  [p.  **3.]  Actsxxii.27.  "Then  the
thief  captain- came,  and  said  unto  him  (Paul),  Tell
me,  art  thou  a  Roman?  He  said,  Yea."  The
circumstance  here  to  be  noticed  is,  that  a  Jew  was
a  Roman  citizen.

Joseph.  Antiq.  lib.  xiv.  c.  1  Of  sect.  13,  "Lucius
Lenttuus,  the.  consul,  declared,  I  have  dismissed
from  the  service'  the  Jewish  Roman  citizen*,  who
observe  the  rights  of  the- Jewish  religion  at  Ephe-

•  lb.  ver.  28.  "And  the  chief  captain  answered,
With  a  great  sum. obtained  I  this  freedom.91

Dio  Cassias,  lib.  Ix. '  "'This  privilege,  which
had  been  bought  formerly  at  a  great  price,  be-
came so  cheap,  (hat  it  was  commonly  said,  a  man
,  might  he  made  a  Roman  citizen  for  a  few  pieces
ofbroken  glass."

XXXV.  [p.  531.]  Acts  xxviii.  16.  "And
when  we  came  to  Rome,  the  centurion  delivered
the  prisoners  to  the  captain  of  the  guard ;  but
Paul  was  suffered  to  dwell  by  himself,  with  a  soL
dier  that  kept  him."

With  wmch  join- ver -20.  "  For  the  hope  of  Is-
rael, I  am  bound  with  this  chain.n  -

"  Clnemadmddum  eadem  catena  et  custodiam
et  militem  copulat;  sic  jsta,  qua  tarn  dissimilia
stjntjpariter  incedunt."— Seneca,  Ep.  ▼.

"  Proconsuls3stiinare  solet,  utrum  in  carcerem
tecipienda  sit'persona,  an  militi  tradenda."—\5\-
pian.  I.  i  sect  De  Custod.  et  Exhib.  Reor.

In  the  confinement  of  Agrippa  by  the  order  of
Tiberius,  Antonia  managed,  that  the  centurion
who  presided  over  the  frauds,  and  the  soldier  to
whom  Agrippa  was  to  be  bound}  might  be  men  of
mild  character.  (Joseph.  Antiq.  lib.  xviii.  c.~7.
fleet.  5.)  After  the  accession  of  Caligula,  Agrip-
pa also,  like  Paul,  was  suffered  to  dwell,  yet  as  a
prisoner,  in  his  own  house.

XXXVI.  fp.531.]  Acts  xxvii.  1.  "And  when
it  was  determined  that  we  should  mil  into  Italy,
they  delivered  Paul,  and  certain  othef  prisoners,
unto  one  named  Julius."  Since  not  only  Paul
but  certain  other  prisoners  were  sent  by  the  same
ship  into  Italy,  the  text  must  be  considered  as
carrying  with  it  an  intimation,  that  the  sending
of  persona  from  J  odea  to  be  tried  at  Rome,  was
am  ordinary  practice.  That  in  truth  it  was  so,  is
made  out  by  a  variety  of  examples  which  the
writings  of  Josephus  furnish  j  and,  amongst  others,
hythe  following,  which  comes  near  both  to  the  time
and  the  subject  of  the  instance  in  the  Acts.  "  Fe-
lix, for  some  slight  offence,  bound  and  sent  to
Rome  several  priests  of  his  acquaintance,  and  very
good  and  honest  men,  to  answer  for  Uwmseivasto
Caw."— Joseph,  in  Vk.  sect,*.


XXXVII.  [p.  539.1  Acts  x£  27.  "And  in
these  days  came  propbsts  from  Jerusalem*  unto
Antioch ;  and  there  stood  up  one  of  them  named
'  Agabus,  and  signified  by  the  spirit  that  there
should  be  a  great  dearth  throughout  all  the  world
(or  all  the  country);  which  came  to  fass  in  tfee  %
days  of  Claudius  Casar."  '

Joseph.  Antiq.  I.  xx.  c.  4.  sect  2.  "In  their
time  (t.  e.  about  the  fifth  or  sixth  year  of  Clau-
dius) a  great  dearth  happened  in  Judea,"

XXXVIII.  [n.  555.1  Acts  xvlii.  1,  3.  *  Be-
cause that  Claudius  had  commanded- ail  Jews"  to
depart  from  Rome."

Suet.  Claud,  c.  xxv.  "  Judaos,  impulsore  Chret-
'to  assidue  tumultuantes,  Roma  expulit."

XXXIX.  jp.  664.1  Acts  v.  37.  "After  this
man,  rose  up  Judas  of  Galilee,  in  the  days  of.  the
taxing,  and  drew  away  much  people  after  him,"

Joseph,  de  Bell.  1.  vit.  "  He  (viz.  the  person
who  in  another  place  is  called,  by  Josephus,  Judas
the  Galilean,  or  Judas  of  Galilee)  persuaded  not  a
few  not  to  enroll  themselves,  when  Cyrenius  the
censor  was  sent  into  Judea."

XL.  [p.  942.] Acts  xxi.  38.  « Art  not  thou
that  Egyptian  which,  before  these  days,  madeat
an  uproar,  and  leddest  out  into  the  wilderness  foot .
thousand  men  that  were  murderers  ?'

Joseph:  de  Bell.  1.  ii.  c.  13.  sect.  5.  "But  the
Egyptian  false  prophet  brought  a  yet  heavier  dis-
aster upon  the  Jews;  for  this  impostor, coming
into  the  country,  and  gaining  the  reputation  of  a
prophet,  gathered  together  thirty  thousand  meo,
who  were  deceived  by  him.  Having  brought
them  round  out  of  the  wilderness,  up  to  the  mount
of  Olives,  he  intended  from  thence  to  make  his
attack  upon  Jerusalem;  but  Felix,  coming 'sud-
denly upon  him  with  the  Roman  sokliert,  pre-
vented the  attack."— A  great  number,  or'  (as  it
should  rather  be  rendered)  the  greatest  part,  of
those  that  were  with  him,  were  either  slain  or
taken  prisoners.

In  these  two  passages,  the'  designation  of  thfct
impostor;  an  "Egyptian,"  without  the  proper
name ;  "-the  wilderness ;"  his  escape,  though  nu
followers,  were  destroyed ;  the  time  of  the  transact
tkm,  in  the  presidenUhip  of  Felix,  which  could
not  be  any  long  tame  before  the  words  jn  Luke
are  supposed  to  have  beenSspoken;  are  circum-*
stances  of  close  correspondency.  There  is  one,
and  only  one,  point  of  disagreement  and  that  is,
in  the  number  of  his  followers,  which  in  the  Ada
are  called  four  thousand,  and  by  Josephus  thirty
thousand :  but,  beside  that  the  names  of  numbers,
more  than  any  other  wonls,  are  liable  to  the  errors
of  transcribers,  we  are,  in  the  present  instance,
under  the  less  concern  to  reconcile  the  evangelist
with  Josephus,  as  Josephus  is  not,  in  this  point,
consistent  with  himself.  -  For  whereas,  in  the  pas-
sage here  quoted,  -he  calls  the  number  thirty  thou-
sand, and  tells  us  that  the  greatest  part,  or  a  great
number  (according  as  his  words  are  rendered;  of
those  that  were  with  him,  were  destroyed ;  in  his
Antiquities,  he  represents  four  hundred  to  have
been  Killed  upon  this  occasion,  and  two  hundred
taken  prisoners:*  which  certainly  was  not  the
"  greatest  part,"  ner  "  a  great  part,"  nor  "  a  great
number,"  out  of  thirty  thousand.  It  is  probable
also,  that  Lysias  and  Josephus  spoke  of  the  expe-
dition in  its  different  stages :  Lysias,  of  those  wha
followed  the  Egyptian  out' of  Jerusalem :  Josephus,


» lib.  M.-C.7.  sect*


388


EVIDENCES  OP  CHRISTIANITY.


of  all  -vrho  wen  collected  about  him  afterward,
from  different  quarter*.

XLI.  (Lardncr's  Jewish  and  Heathen  Testi-
monfes,  vol.  iii.  p.  31.)  Acta  xvli.  22.-  "  Then  Paul
stood  in  the  nridst  of  Mars-hill,  and  said,  Yc  men
of  Athens,  TL  perceive  that  in  all  things  ye  are  too
superstitious  j  for  as  I  passed  by  and  beheld  your
devotions,  I  found  an  altar  with  this  inscription,
TO  THE  UNKNOWN  GOD.  Whom  there-
fore ye  ignorantly  worohip,  him  declare  I  unto  yon."
•  Diogenes  Lair  tins,  who  wrote  about  the  year
910,  in  his  history  of  Epimenides.  who  is  sup-
*  posed  to  have  flourished  nearly  six  hundred  yean
before  Christ,  relates  of  him  the  following  story :
that  being  invited  to  Athens  for  the  purpose,  he
delivered  the  city  from  a  pestilence  in  this  man-
-  ner ; — "  Taking  several  eheep,  some  black,  others
white,  he  had  them  up  to  the  Areopagus,  and
then  let  them  go  where  they  would,  and* gave  or-
ders to  those  who  followed  them,  wherever  any  of
them  should  lie  down,  io  sacrifice  it  to  the  god  to
whom  it  belonged :  and  so  the  plague  ceased. —
Hence,"  says  the  historian,  "it  has  come  to  pass,
that  t6.th.is  present  time,  may  be  found  in  the  bo-
roughs of  the  Athenians  anonymous  altars:  a
memorial  of  the  expiation  then  jnajle."*  .  These
altars, -it  may  be  presumed,  were  called  anony-
*tou«,  because  there  was  not  the  name  of  any  par-
ticular deity  inscribed  upon  them.

.Pavsanias,  who  wrote  before  the  end  of  the
second  century,  in  his  description  of  Athens,
saving  mentioned  an  altar  of  Jupiter  Olympius,
adds,  "  And  nigh  unto  it  is  an  altar  of  unknown
gods.'t  And  in  another  place,  he  speaks  "  of
altars  of  gods  called  unknown"t

PhUostratus,  who  wrote  in  the  beginning  of
the  third  century,  records  it  as  an  observation  of
Apollonius  Tyaneus,  "  That  it  was  wise  to  speak
well  of  all  the  gods,  especially  at  Athens,  where
altars  of  unknown  demons  were  erected.1**

The  author  of  the  dialogue  PhUopatris,  by
many  supposed  to  have  been  Lucian,  who  wrote
about  the  year  170,  by  others  some  anonymous
Heathen  writer  of  the  fourth  century,  makes.
Critias- swear  by  the  unknown  god  of  Athens;
and,  near  the  end  of.  the  dialogue,  has  these  words,
"  But  let  us  find  out  the  unknown  god  of  Athens,
and,  stretching  our  hands  to  heaven,  oner  to  him
ourpraises  and  thankagivings."ll

This  is  a  very  curious  and  a  very  important
coincidence.  It  appears  bevond  controversy,  that
altars  with  this  inscription  were  existing  at
Athens,  at  the  time  when  Saint  Paul  is  alleged
to  have  been  there.  It  seems  also  (which  is  very
worthy  of  observation),  that  this  inscription  was
peculiar  to  the  Athenians.  There  is  no  evidence
that  there  were  altars  inscribed  "  to  the  unknown
god"  in  any  other  country.  Supposing  the  his-
tory of  Saint  Paul  to  have  been  a  fable,  how  is  it
possible  that  such  a  writer  as  the  author  of  the  Acts
of  the  Apostles  was,  should  hit  upon  a  circumstance
so  extraordinary,  and  introduce  it  by  an  allusion
so  suitable  to  Saint  Paul's  office  and  character  1


The  examples  here  collected  will  be  sufficient,
I  hope,  to  satisfy  us,  that  the  writers  of  the  Chris-
tian history  knew  something,  of  what  they  were


•  In  Epimenide,  1.  ju  seem.  110. '  t  Paus.  1.  v.  p.  413.
1  Paus.  I.  i.  p.  4. §  Philas.  April.  Tyjn.  1.  vi.  c  3.
I  Lucisa.  in  Pulop.  to*,  ii.  Qrcv.  p.  787, 780.


writing  about.  Theargument  is  also  strengthen-
ed by  Die  following  considerations : —

I.  That  these  agreements  appear,  not  only  in
articles  of  public  history,  but  sometimes,  in  mi-
nute, recondite,  and  very  peculiar  circumstances,
in  which,  of  all  others,  a  forger  is  most  likely  to
have  been  found  tripping.

II.  That  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem,  Which
tookplace  forty  years  after  the  commencement  of
the  Christian  institution,  produced  such  a  change
in  the  state  of  the  country,  and  the  condition  of
the  Jews,  that  a  writer  who  was  nn««*pi»intf4
with  the  circumstances  of  tfye  nation  before  that
event,  would  find  it  difficult  to  avoid  mistakes,  in
endeavouring  to  give  detailed  accounts  of  transac-
tions connected  with  those  circumstances,  foras-
much as  he  could  no  longer  have  a  living  exemplar
to  copy  from.

III.  That  there  appears,  in  the  writers  of  the
NeW  Testament,  a  knowledge  of  the  affairs  of
those  times,  which  we  do  not  find  in  authors  of
later  ages.  In  particular,  M  many  of  the  Christian
writers  of  the  second  and  third  centuries,  and  of
the  following  ages,  had  false  notions  concerning
the  state  of  Judea,  between,  the  nativity  of  Jesus
and  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem."*  Therefore
they  could  not  have  composed  our  histories.

•  Amidst  so1  many  conformities,  we  are  not  to
wonder  that  we  meet  with  some,  difficulties.  The
principal  of  these  I  will  put  down,  together  with
the  solutions  which  they  have  received.  But  in
doing  this,  I  must  be.  contented  with  a  brevity
better  suited  to  the  limits  of  my  volume  than  to
the  nature  of  a  controversial  argument.  For  the
historical  proofs  of  my  assertions,  and  for  the
Greek  criticisms  upon  which  some  of  them  are
founded,  I  refer  the  reader  to  the  second  volume
of  the  first  part  of  Dr.  Ltirdner's  large  work.

I.  The  taxing  during  which  Jesus  was  born,
was  "  first  made,"  as  we  read,  according  to  our
translation,  in  Saint  Luke,  "  whilst  Cyremus  was
governor  of  Syria,  "t  Now  it  turns  out  that  Cy-
renius  was  not  governor  of  Syria  until  twelve  or,
at  the  soonest,  ten  years  after  the  birth  of  Christ;
and  that  a  taxing,  census,  or  assessment',  was
made  in  Judea  in  the  begmning  of  his  govern-
ment. The  charge,  therefore,  Drought  against
the  evangelist  i»}  that,  intending  to  refer  to  this
taxing,  he  has  misplaced  the  date  of  it  by  an  error
of  ten  or  twelve  years.

.The  answer  to  the  accusation  is  found  in  his
using  the  word  "first:" — "And  this  taxing  was
first  made :"  for  according  to  the  mistake  imputed
to  the  evangelist,  this' word  could  have  no  signifi-
cation whatever ;  it  could  have  had  no  place  in
his  narrative :  because,  let  it  relate  to -what  it  will,
taxing,  census,  enrolment,  or  assessment,  it  im-
ports that  the  writer  had  more  than  one  of  those
in  contemplation.  It  acquits  him  therefore  of  the
charge :  it  is  inconsistent  with  the  supposition  of
his  knowing  only  of  the  taxing  in  the  beginning
of  Cyrenius^s  government.  And  if  the  evangelist
knew  (which  this  word  proves  that  he  did)  of
some  other  taxing  beside  that,  it  is  too  much,  for
the  sake  of  conyicting  him  of  a  mistake,  to  lay  it
down  as  certain  that  Tie  intended  to  refer  to  that

The  sentence  in  Saint  Luke  maybe  construed
thus :  "  This  was  the  first  assessment  (or  enrol-
ment) of  CyreniuB,  governor  of  Syria  ;"*  the  words


*  Lardner,  part  1.  vol.  ii.  p.  960. t  Chap.  Ii.  v.  3.
4  If  toe  worfl  which  we  reader '« first,"  be  reaasfes


EyiDENCES  OF  CHRISTIANITY.


,803


wg«^«f«cirrfSyri^rJ?ei^iwedaitprth€wname  of
Cyrenius  as  his  «dditibii  o{  title.  .  And  this  titfe-
betoogtilg  to'  him  at  the  time  of  writing  the  aa-.
count,  .was  naturally  «noo£h  subjoined'  to  his
name,  Chough  acquired-  after  the  transaction  Which
Ibe  account  describes.  A  modern  writer  who
was  «ot  very  exact  in  the  choice  of  his  expres-
tdorW,  in  relating  the  "affairs  of  the  Eau&  Indies,
might  easily  say v  that  «nch  a  thing  wai  done  by
Governor-  Hastings ;*  thotigft,  in  truth,  the  thing
had  hem  done  by  njna  before  his.  advancement  to
the  station  from  whjtfh  he  received  the  \name;  of
'«oyernor7  And- this,  as  we  contend,  is  precj&ry.
tne'ina<»uiacy  whioh  has  produced  the  difficulty
m  Saint/Lake.  ,  .  --.-.'  -"•;;•■
•-  At  any  rate,  it  appeal*  from  the  form'  of  the
expression,  thatiie-  had  two  taxings  or  enrolfoeftte
|n  ^cpotemplatioh.  -And  if  Cyreiiius  had  .been
sent  upon  -this  b*siriessjnto  Judear,  taforehe.be-
cajne  governor  of  Syria  (against  which  eupposi--
tion  there  is  nppreof;  but  rather  external  evidence'
of  an  enrolment  going  on  aboaC~tais  time  under
somcr  person -or  ether/)  then  the  census,  on*  all
faahds  acknowledged  to  have  been  mode  by 'him
ipr  the  "beginning  or  his  government,  would  form
a  second,  so  as  to  occasion  ttfc  other  to  be  called

iL .'  Another  chronological  objection  arises  upon
a  date  '•  assigned  'in  the  beginning  of  the-  third
chapter  of.  Saint  Luke.t  u  Now  in  the  fifteenth
year  of  the  reign  of  Tiberius  C«sar,M— Jesus
began  &be  qXjiout  fAsrty' years  of  -age :,  for,  sup-
poping,  Jesus  to.  have  been-  born,  as  Sainf.Mat-
thew,  and  Saint  Lake- also  himself,  relate,  in -the
Mmt  ef  Herod,  he  most,  according  to  the  dates
given  in  JoseBfiOS  and  by  the  Roman  historians,
have  bean  at  least  thirty»one  years  of  age  in,  the
fifteenth  year  of  Tiberius.  If  he  was/born,  as
Saint  Matthew's  narrative  intimates,  tme  err.  two
year»befbwj  Herod  s  death, -he  would"  have  been
thirty -two  or  thirty- three*  years  old.  at  that  time. "
-  ^Thistti  the'diffcoltyVthe  solution  turns  upon.
8B  alteration  in  .the  coristructlon  of  the  Greek'.
Saint  Luke 'swords  in  the  original  are.  allowed),
by  -the  general  opinion  of  learned  men,,  to  si^tttfy,
rjot  "that  Jesus  began  to  to  about- thirty  years -of
s»,"  bat  4*  that  he  was  about  thirty  years  of  age
'  when  he  began  bis  ministry.-'  'this  construction
being  admitted,  the  advert  ^Sbout"  gives  ntfall
the  latitude  we  want,  "arid  more, -especially  when
applied,  as  it  is  in  the  present  instance,'  to  a.  deci-
mal number;  for  such* numbers,  even^  without
tills  4«ajiftdri  addiUpn;  are  often  used  in  a  laxer
sense,  than  is There  contended  for.* .


.  III.  Acts  t.  36.  "For  before  th*ae-days  rose
up  Thendas,  boasting  himself  tsa  be  somebody  j  to
whom  a  nujnber^oT  men,  about  -four-  hOiMfoebf,
joined  themselves:  whs  was  slam:  and  shy  as
many  as  obeyeH  hint,' were  scattered  and  bionght
tojionght." .  -  • * •"  _ t-

Xosephns  -has  preserved -Che  aecoant  of  arT  im-
postor of  Che  name  o('Theudas,  who  crea{e4  some
disturbanoes,  and  wastelajn;  but  according  to!  the
date  assigned  to  this  man's  appearance  (in  which,
however,  it  is  very  possible  that  Josephos  may  have
-been  mistaken,  ♦)  it  must  have  been,  at  least,  seven .
year*  after  Gamaliel's  speech,' of  which  this  text
is  a  part,  was  delivered.  It  has  been  replied  to
the  objection,  f  that  there  .might  be  two  impostors
of  this  nama-r  and  it  has  been  observed,  in  order
to  give  a  jpnerar  profahility  to  the  solution-,  that
the  same  tiding  appears  to  have  happened  in  other
instances  of  the  same  kind.  It  is  proved  from-  jfc
sephus,  that  there  were  not  fewer  than  four  per-  '
sons  of  the.  name  of  Shnoli  within  forty  years,
-and'not  fewer  than  thr£e  of  the  name  of  Judas
within  ten  years,  who  were  all  leaders  of*  insur-
rections j  and  k  is  likewise  recorded  by  the  histo-
rian, that, upon  the  death  of  Herod  the  .Great,
(which  agrees  very  weir  with  the  time  af  the
commotion  referred  to  by  Gamaliel, 'and  with  life
manner  of  stating  that  time,;"  befitfe_ih&evdav«lMy
'there  Were  innumerable  disturbances  in  Judfea:  t
Archbishop  Usher  wasof  opinion,  that  one  of  thfr
three  Judases  above-mentioned  'was  -pamahej's
Theudas ;  *  and  that  with  a  less  variation-  of  the
name  than  we  actually  find  in  Jjie  Gospels,  where
one  .of  the  -twelve  apostles  -is  called,  by  Luke,  •
Judas;-  and  by  Mark,  Thaddeus.lt  Origeri,
however  he  came  at  his  fntbrraatipn,  appears  to
-have  believed  that'  there  was  "an  unpostor  of  the
Tiame  W  Theudas  Wore  the  nativity  of  Christ.  1T

IV.  Matt:  xxiii.  .34.  ?<  Therefore,  behold  _  I
send  unto  you  prophets,  and  wise  men*  and
scribes ;  and  some  of  them. ye  shall  kut  and  era*
oify ;  and  some  of  them  shall  ye  scourge  Trryeur
synagogues,  and  persecute  them  from  city  }o
city;  that  upon  yod  may  come  all  the  righteous  •
blood  shed  upon  tne  eartl^  from*  the  -blood  of
righteous  Abel  unto  the  blood,of  Zacharias,  sfy
ofBurachias,  whom*  ye  slew-between  the  tewplt
andthe&Uar."  ••*.."< '*

"  There  is  a  Zacharias,  whose  death  is  related  in
the  second  book  df- Chronicles,  .*♦  in.  a-mdnner
which  perfectly  supports  our .  Saviour's  -allusion.
But  .this .  £acharias  was  the  son  of  Jdi  ouida.

There  is  also  Zacharias  the  prophet ;  who  wlur


•«  befont;' wbich  it  has  bean  strongly  contended-  that
the  Greek  idjoai  allows  toi  (he,  whole  difficulty  vn.-
Btfefa4s:  for  "then  the  passsje.  woi^ld  Bfe,— "  Now  this
taxing^  was  made  before  i^renius  was  ^lovernor  of
dyria .""  wbjch  correafopnds  with  the  chroYiology .  Bat  I
rather  choose  to  argue,  thai  however  the  word"  first*'.
bo  rendered;  to  give  it  a  meaninr  af  all,  it  nrifitates
v^ith  the  objeeuoB.  la  this  I  think  there  can  be.  no
■pistake.  •  . .  " • w  ■  •  v

•  Jossphus  (Antlq.  xvH.  <t.  2.  sect.  6.)  has  \\\*9  m-
vpkttMMbkc  passage :  <VWhen  therefore  tbe  whole  Jewifch
lMtkm  took  an  oath  te  he  faithful  tcOsar,  and  the
interests  of  the  king.**  This  transaction,  sorfesponds
ift  the  course  of  the  history  with  the  tiow  of  Christ-e
birth,  yvtait  is  called  a  census,  arid  which  we*ender
tsuririg,  was  delivering  upon*  oath  in  accopnt  of  their.
Wotettr.  This  might  be  aeeompaiiied  with  an  oa)h  of
fMsiity,  or  might  be  ntistsJnn  by  Joeephus.for.it.
t  Lacdoer,  pVK  vol.  i|.b.708L.  •  ,
J  livy,  speaking  of  the  peace  which  the  conduct  of
I  nasi  swenred  to  the'  state,  daring  too  whole


kieign  of  his  successor  (Noma),  hasthssewords  jft^-"  Ah
illoeiiini  prefect  is  viribiis  datis  taatnm  valujlt,  ut,  in

,  qnadraginta  deinde  snnos,  tutam  pace.m  haboret  :'"yet
afterward*  in  the,  saine  chapter, 'vRoiAuIub  (he  says)
septem  et  trigmta  xegaacit  aanos. .  Nama  tr#s  et  qua*
draginla."*  .

*  Mlchaelis's  Introducflon  to.  tha  New  Testament
(Marsh's  Translation,)  vol.  i.  p.  61; .

*  Lardner,  part  t.  v6l.  Ii.  p.'  9& •  '  :  ■ • .  t
v  1  Antiq.  1.  xvii:  c.  12.  sect.  4r §  Annals,  p:797«t  •

{Luke  vf.  IB. tfark'iii.  1&  '

T  Orlg.  cont.  Cels.  p.  44.  '

**  *•  And  «ie  Spirit  orGoJcamenpon  Zachariah,  the
son  of  Jettoiada  ijie  priea.1,  which-  stood  above  the
people,  >nd  said  unto  thorn.  Thus  salth-Ged,  Why
nranHgrcss  ve  the  commandments  of  the  Lord,  that  *s
cannot-proijppr  ?  Because Vc  have  forsaken  the  Lord,  he
hath  also  forsaken-  you.  And  they  conspired  against
him,  *nd  stonW  Aim  with  xtoncs,  at  the  commamlmenl  qf .
els  kmg,  in  tM  town  (if  the  ho**t  of  IAS  lord/- dOb/pn.
,txiv.80,81. . ^  _  N "

* ft  Liv.  Hist.  cl.  sect.  11^


w


EVIDENCES  OP  CHRISTIANITY


the  «m  of  Banchbh,  and  ii  so-described  in  the
superscription  of  his  prophecy,  bu\f  of  whose  death
we  have  no  account.  *' * ♦

1  have  little  doubt  but  that  the  flnt  Zachsrias
Was  the\perso»kspqVeri'of  by  our  Saviour;  and
that  the  name  of  the  father  Jus  been  since  added,
or  changed,  by  some  one, -who. took  it  from  the
title  of  the  prophecy,  which  happened  to  be  better
•known  to  mm  than  the  history  in  the-  Chroni-
cle*. . ,  •. ^ \ ,-

Them  k  likewise  a  Zaehafias,  the  jen^of  Ba-
ruch,  related  by  Josephos  to  have  been  .slain  hi
thejemplea  few  years  befoie  the  destruction  of
Jerusalem.  -  It  has  been  insinuated,  that  the  words
put  into  our  Saviour's  mouth  -contain  a  reference
to  this  transaction,  and  were  cQjmposepj.by  some,
writer,  who  either  confounded  the-,  time  of  the
tsansactjon  with  our  Saviour's  age,  or  inadvert-
anUy  overlooked  the  anachronism^  '
,  Now  suppose  it  to  have  been  so ;  suppose  these
words  to  have  been  suggested  by  the  transaction
related  in  Josephus,  and  to  have  been  fidssly  as-
cribed to  Christ ;  and  observe,  what  extraordinary
coincidences  (accidentally,  as  it  must  in  that  case
have  been  V  attend  the  forger's  mistake.
'  First,'  that  we  have  a  Zaeharias  in  the  book  of
Chronicles,  whose  death,  and  thomahnerof.it,
correspond*. with  the  allusion.

Secondly,  that  although  the  name  of  this  -per-
son's father  be  erroneously  put  dqWn  in  the  Gos-
«ei,  yet  we  have  a  way  of  accounting  for  the  error,
by  )  showing  another  Zaohahas  in  the  Jewish
ecriptatyes,  much  better  known  than  the  former,

"  whoie  patronymic  was  actually  that-  which .  ap-
pears .in  Vh'e  t£xt.  -  ..
,  -Every  one  who  thinks  upon  this*  subject  will,
find  these  to  he  circumstances  which,  could  not;
have  met  together  , in  a  ^mistake,  which  did  net
proceetLfrom  the  circumstances  themselves.

I  have  notice*!,  I  think,  alj  the  difficulties  of  this
kind.  They  ere  few ;  some  of  them  admit  of  a
clear,  others  of  aprobable  solution.  The  ,-retfder
will  compare  them  with]  the  number,  the  variety,

•  the  closeness,  -and  the  sattafacteriness,  of  the  in-
stances which  are  to^  be  set  against  them ;  and  he

'  will  remember  the  scantiness,  in  many  cases,  of
our  intelligence,  afcd  that  difficulties  alway*attend
imperfect  information^  *  -  * '  .  >v


CHAPTER  VII.

^Undesigned  Coincidences.
'  *  *  .  " ' -* "

^  Bbtwebn  the  letters  which,  bear  the  name  of
Saint  Paul  in  our  collection,  and  his  history  iir
the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  tjicre  exist  many  notes
of  correspondency,  The  simple'  perusal  of  the
wfitihgB  is  sufficient  to  prove,  that  neither  the  his-
tory was  taken  from  the. letters,  nor  the  letters
from  the  history.  Aild  the  undesignedness  of
the  agreements  (which  undesignednees'is  gather-
ed from  then*  latency,  their  minuteness,  their  -ob-
houity,  the  suitableness  -of  the  circumstances  in
wmen  they  consist,  to  the  places  in  Which  those
circumstances  occur,  and  the  circuitous  references
by  which  they  are  traced  but')  demonstrate^  that
tftey  have  not  been  produced  by  meditation,  or  by
any  fraudulent  contrivance.  But.  coincidences,
from  which  these  causes  are  excluded,  and  which


are  too  close  and  nutnertws  to  be  accounted  lor  bjr
accidental  eoncuneneetf  of  fiction,  'must  nveeasari-
Jy  have  truth  for  their  foundation.

This  argument^  appeared  to  my  mind  of  so
much  value  (especially  for  it*  assuniiiur^nnlbing
beside  the  existence,  of  the  books.)  that  1  have
1  puisued  it  through  Saint  Paul's  thirteen  .epistles,
in''%  work  pubUHoed  by  me  four  years-  ago,  under
the  title  .ot  Hora  Pauline.  -  I  am  sensible  how
feebly  any  argument  wjiich  depends  'upon  en  in-
ductasn  of  pertisolers,  is  represented*  without  '
examples.  On  which  account,  I  wished  to  have
abridged  my  own  volume,  in  the.  manner  m  winch
1  have*  treated  Dr.  I^ardnet's  in  the  preceding
chapter.  BuV  upon  making  the  attempt,  I'difl
not  find  hvin  my  power  to  render  the  articles  in-
telligible by  fewer  words  than  I  .have  there  used.
I  must  be  content,  therefore,  to  refer  (he  reader  to
the  work  itself.  And  J  would  particularly  JnvSte
his  attention  to  the  observations  which-  areJmade
in  it  upon  the^tet-lhres  epistles,.  \  persuade
■myself  that  he  will  find  the  proofe,  both  of  agree-
ment and  undeaignedness,  supplied  by  these  epv>
ties,  sufficient  to  support  the  conclusion  which  is.
there  maintained,'  u>  Javour  both  of  the  genuine--
nets  of  the  writings  arid  tfce  truth  of the  sana-
tive. w  . .

It  remains  only,  in  this  place,  to  point  out  haw
the  argument  beat*  upori  the  general  question  of
the  Christian  history.  • •  ,

.First,  Saint  Paid  (n  these  letters  affirms,  in
unexiiiivocaLterma,  his  own  performance- of  mira-
cles, and,  What  ought  particularly  to  he  rememr
^ered.  "  That  miracles-  were  tfu(  Hgns  of  an
apostle"*  If . this . testimony  come  fjom  Saint
Paul's. own  hand,  it. is  invariable;  ? And  that  it
does  so,  the  argument  before  us  $xes  in  my  mind
a.  firm  assurance. '*

Secondly,  it  shows  that  the  series  of  actio*  re-
presented m  the  epistles  of  Sajnt  Paul,  waa  real  ;
which  alone'  lass  a  foundation  for  the  proposition
which  forms  the  .subject  of  .the  nrst  pigrt  of  our
pvesent  work>  viz.  that  the  original  witnesses  of
the  Christian  history  devoted  themselves,  to  tires
of  toil,  suffering;  and  danger,  in  consequence  of
their  belief  of  the  truth  of  that  .history,  and  jfoar  the
eake  pf  ^communicating  the  knowledge -of  it  to
others.  •  /  > r

Thirdly,  \t  proves-  that  Luke,  or  whoever,  was
the  author  of  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  (for  the  ar-
gument does  not  depend  upon  the  name,  of  the  ^
author  though  1  know  no  reason  lor  questioning
it,)  was  well  acquainted  with  Saint  Paul's  history;
and  that  ho  probably  was;  what  he  professes  him-
self to  be,  a  companion  of  Saint  Paul's  travels;
which,  if  true,  establishes,  in  a'  considerable  de-
gree, the  credit  even^df  his,  Gospel,  because  it
shows,  that  the  writer,  from  his  time,  f&untiop,
and  connexions,,  posses^*!' opportunities  of  hk.
forming  himself  truly  concerning  the  transactincui
which  he  relates.  I  have'  little  difficulty  in  ap-
plying to  the  Gospel  of-  Saint  Luke  what  w
proved  concerning  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  cdn-
sidering  them,  as  two  parts,  of  the  same  history;
for,. though  there  are'  instances  of*  second  parts
being  forgeries,  I  know  none  where-  the  second
part  is  genuine,,  and  the  first  not  so.

I  will  only  observe,  as  a  sequel  of  the  argument,
though  not  noticed  in  my  work,  the  remarkable
similitude  between  the  style  of  Saint  John's  Got-


•Koai,  iv.  1^,19, 8Cor.xii.15.


EVIDENCES  OF  CHRISTIANITY.


866


neL  tnd  of  Saint  John's  Epistle.  The  style  of
Saint  John's  is  not  at  all  the  style  of  Saint  Paul's
Epistles,  thdUgh  both  are*  very  singular ;"  nor  is  it
t&  style  of  Saint  James's  m  of  SWt  Peter's
EpisUe :  but.it  bears  a  resemblance  to  diestyle  of
th*  Gospel  inscribed  with ,  Saint  JpWf  name,  so
fer  as  that  resemblance  can.  be  expected  to  appear,
winch  .is  not  .in  synpier  narrative;  so  ranch  si  in
~  teflectiens,  and  in  the  representation  of  discourses.
Writing^  so  cjrcumst&ced,  prove  •  themselves,
and  one  another,  to-  be  genuine.  *  This  corres-
pondency, in  the.  more  valuable,  84  the  -epistle
Itself  assents,'  in  $aim}  John's  manner  indeed,  but
in  terms  sufficiently  explicit,  the. writer's  personal
knowledge  of  Christ's  history;  '.'  Thatwfaicl}  was
firom  the  beginning,,  which  we  have  feaard,  which
we  have  seen  with  our  eves,  which  we  have  Ifiok1
ed  upon,  and  our  hands  have  bandied)  of  the  word
of  Jife;.U)at  which  we  have  seen  and  hear;},  de-
dare  we  unto  von."*  Who  would  not  desjre-r-
who  perceives  not  4he  value  of  an  accoiint,>deuver-
ed  by  a  writer  so  well  informed  as  this  ?


CHAPTER  vin.

Of  ifye  History  of  the  Resurrecttobl

Ths  history  of  the  resurrection  of  Christ  is  a
part  of  the  evidence  of  Christianity ;  but  I  do  not
know,  whether  the.  proper  strength  of  this  passage
of-  the  Christian  history,  or  wherein  its  peculiar
value,  as  a  head  of  evi(Jence>  consists,  be  generally
understood  It  is  not  thai,  as  a  miracle,  the  re-
surrection ought  to  be  accounted  a^  more  decisive
proof  of  supernatural  agency  than  other  miracles
are;  it  is  not  that,  as  it  stands  in. the  Gospels,  it
is  better  attested  than  seine,  others^  it  is  not,  for
either  of  these  reasons,  that'mQre  weight  belongs^
to  it  than  to  other  miracles,  but  for  the  following,

,  viz.  That  it  is  completery  certain  lhat  the  apostles,
ef  Christ.  «nd  the  first  teachers -of  Christianity,
asserted  the  fact.  And  ihis  would  Tiave  been  cer-
tain, if  the  four  Gospels  had  been  lost,  or\  never

'  written.  Qtot.  piece  of  Scripture  recognises  the
leesjrrection.  -E&ery  epistle  of  every  apostle,  every

■  author  contemporary  with  the  apostles,  of  the  age
unmediately  succeeding  tjie  apostles,  every  writing
'rrom,ttiat  age  to  the  present,  genuine  or,  spurious,
on  the  side  of  Christianity  oftagainst  it,  concur"  in
representing  tfee'  resutrectfoh  of  Christ  as  an
article  of 'his  history,  received  without  doubt  or
disagreement  >y  all  who:  <sall*  themselves^  Christ
^ _«__.*  m —  *i„  v__!_^-__,by  thepro^


fens,  as'  alleged  from  the- ^  ..  m

pagaton  of.  the  institution,  and  alleged  as  the
centre  of  their  testimony. :  Nothing;  I  apprehend,
which,  a,  man  does  nst  himself  see  or  hear;  can  be
more  certain,  to  {urn  than  thi»  point  -  I  do  net
mean,  that  nothing  can  be  mere  certain  than
that  Christ  rose  from  the  dead ;  but  that  nothinjr
earn  be  mores  certain,  than  that  Ma  apostles,  and
the  first  teachers  of  Christianity,  gave  out  that  he
dkj  so.  In  the  other  parts  ef  the  gospel  narrative,
a  Question  may  be  made,  whether  the  things,  re-
lated of  Christ  be  the  very  .things  which  the  apo*-
ties  and  tint  teachers  of  tfife  religion  delivered  ,coi>-
ceming  him  1  3ihd , this  question  depehds  a  g6od
deal  upon  the  evidence  we'  possess  of  the  genuine-.
Beat,  or  rather,  perhaps,  df  the  antiquity,  credit,
and  jreceptfen,  or  the  books. On  the  subject  of


>tfcap.Lver.l— ?»


the  resurrection,  ne  such,  diajmssfonis  necessary*
because  no  such  doubt  can  be  entertained.  Tfo
only  points  which  can  enter  into  our  consideration
are,  *  whether  the  apostles  knowingly  published'  a
falsehood,  ot  whether 'they  were  themselves,  de-  ;
ceived :  whether  either  -of  these  suppositions  be
-pdefflbTe.-  The>  first,  J  think,  is.  ^etty  generally

S"  van  -up.  The  .nature  of  the  undertaking,  and  of
e  men ;  the  extreme  unlikelihood  that  such  mail,
should  engage  in  such  a  measure  as  a*  scheme;
their  pergonal  toHs,  and  dangers,  and  sufferings,
in  the  eause  \  their  appropriation  of  their  whole. ,
time  to^he  object:  the  warm,  and  seemingly  rtuv
afected,-  zeal  and  earnestness'  with  winch  they
psofess.  their  sincerity ;  exempt  their  memory  from
the  suspicion  of  imposture.  The  solution  more  /
deserving  of  notice,  is  that  which  would  resolve
)he  conduct  of  the,  apostles  into  enthusiasm ;
which  SvouJd  class  the  evidence  of  Chrisfg  resur- •
"rectioh  with  the  numerous  stories'  that  are  extant
of  the  apparitions  of  dead  men.  *  There  are  cir-
cumstances in,  the  narrative,  eft  it  is  preserved  ,in
our,  histories,^  which,  destroy  this  comparison  en-
tirely. It  was  not  one  person,  but  many,  who
saw  him  J  they  saw  him  not  only  separately  but  '
together,  not  only  by  nigh^  but  by  day,  not  at  a
distance  but  near,  not  once  but  several  .tpmes ;
they  not  only  saw  hup,  but  touched  him,  eon-
versed  withe  mm*  ate.  with  him,  exafhineo!  his  per*
son.  to -satisfy  their  doubts.  These  particulars  are
decisive:;  but  they  stand,  ,1*  do  admit,  upon  the
credft  of  our  records.,  I  would  answer,  therefore, .
the^insinuauon  of  enthusiasm,  by  a  circumstance
which  arisen  out  of  the  nature  of  the  thing;  and  *
the  reality  of  which  miisf  be  confessed  by  ul  who  -
allow,  what  I  believe  is  Hot  denied,  that  the  re-
surrection'of  Christ,  whether  true  or  false,  w,as
asserted  by  his  disciples  frpm  the  beginning ;  and
that  circumstance  is,  the  nou-produc£ion<of  the
dead  body.  It  is  related  in  tfee  history,  what  in-
deed the  story  of  the  resurrection  necessarily
implies,  that,  the 'corpse  was  nussine  out  of  the
sepulchre:  it  is  related  also  in  the. history,* that
the  Jews  reported  4Tiat  the  followers  oT  Ohpst  had'
stolen  it  av«ay.*  And  this^accbunt,  thonghdoa/jed
wfth  great  injprobabilities,  such  as  the  situation
of  the  disciples,'  their  fears  for  their  own  safety
at  the  time,  thennTtkelihood  of  their  expecting  to
succeed,  the  difficulty  of  actual  iBuccess,t  and  the
inevitable"  consequence  of  detection  and  failure,
was*,  nevertheless,  the  most  credible  account  that
could  be  grVen  of  the  matter.  But  it  proceeds
entirely  upon  the  -supposition  of  Craud;  as  all  the
ofd  objections,  did.  What  account  can  be  given
of  the  fcxfy/upon  'the  supposition  of  enthusiasm  a
It  is  impossible  outTiOrdfs  followers. could  believe
that  he  was  risen  fr^m  the  dead/ if  his  corpse

*  u  And  ttita  saying  (Saint  Matthew  writes)  it  com-
monly reported -amongst  the  lews  until  this  day  ,r*  chap.'
xxvin.  15.  The -evangelist  maybe  thought  good  au-
thority as  to  this  point,  fven  by  those  who  do  not  admit
ht&evidehce,  in  every ^other  point :  and  thtt  point  Is  suf-
'flcient  to  prove  thai  the  body  was  miming.  .
.  It  ha*  been  rightly;  I  think,  observed  by  Dfr.  Towns-
hend,  (Die.  upon  the  lies',  p.  126,)  that  the  story  of  the
guards  carriea~colIu8ion  upon  the  lace  oC  it :— M  HisdiB-
cipies  canie  by  night  and  stole  him  Way,  while  Wo
.  stept»M  Msn  in  thefr  circumstances  would  not  hare  made,
gqcli  an  acknowledgment  of  their  negligence,  without
previous  assurances  ofprotection  and  impunity.

t  ••  £«peciaHy  at  the  full  moon,  the  city  full  of  people,
many  probably  passing  the  whole  night,  as  Jcius  and
hi*  disciples 'had  done,  in  dm  open  air,  the  sStalchre  so
near  the  city  as  to  he  now  enclosed  within  the  wails,"
—Priestley  on  ths  Bekjkrr.>94.


K*


wis  lying  hefete  them*  No
reached  to.  such  a  pitch  of  extravagancy  « thaU
a-  spirit  may  be  an  illusion ;  a  body  ift  a  real  thing,
«n  object  of  sense,  in  which  there  van  be  no  mis-
take. AH  accounts,  of  spectres  leave  the  tad?  in
the  grave.  And,  although  the  "body  of  Christ
-might  be  removed  bj  fraud,  and  for  the  purpose?
of  fraud,  yet,  without  any  each  intention,  apd  by
sincere  but  deluded  men  (which  is  the  representa-
tton  of  the  apostolic  character  we  are  now  e'xa*
minlngj.  no  such  attempt  could  be  made.  The  pre-
sence add  the  absence  of  the  dead  body  are  alike
Inconsistent  with  the  hypothesis  of  enthusiasm ;
for,  if  present,  it  must  have  cured  their  enthusiasm
at  ones;  if  absent,  fraud,  not  enthusiasm,  must
have  carried  it  away.

■  xButiarther.  if  w&admit,  upon  the  conctarent  tes-
timony  of  all  the  histories,  so  much  ©f  the  account  as
^  states  that  the  religion  of  Jesus  was  set  up  at  Jeru*
~  salem.  and-set  up  with  asserting,  in  |he>ery  place
in  which  he  liad*  been  buried,  and  a  lew  days  after
he  had  been  buried,  his  resurrection  out  of  the  grove,
His  evident  that,  if  his  body  could  have  been  found,
the  Jews  would  have  produced  it,  as  the  shortest
and  completes*  answer  possible  to  the  whole  story.
The  attempt  of  the  apostles  could  not  have  sur-
vived this  refutation  a  moment.  .If  we  also  admit,
/upon  the  authority  of  Saint  Matthew,  that  the
Jews  were  advertised  of  the  expectation  of  Christ's
followers,  and  that  they  had  taken  due  precaution
m  consequence  of  this  notice,  and  that  the  body
'was  in  marked  and  public  custody,  the  observa-
Jtairieeeives  moifr  force  etiH.  For,  notwithstand-
ing their  precautien^and  although,  thus'  prepared
and  forewarned ;  when"  the  story  of  {he  resurrec-
tion of  Christ  came  forth,  as  it  immediately  did :
when-  it  was  publicly  asserted  by  his  disciples,  ana
made  the  ground  and  basis  of.  their  preaching  in
his  name,  and  collecting  followers  to  his  religion,
die.  Jews -had  not  the  body  to  produce:  but  were
obhjged  to  meet  the  testimony  of  the  apostles  by  an
answer,  not  containing  indeed  any  impossibility,
in  itself,  but  absolutely  Inconsistent  with  the  sup-
poaiUoxrof  theirintegrity ;  that  is,  in  other  words,
inconsistent  with  the  supposition  which  woulchre-
solve  their  conduct  into  enthusiasm.


CHAPTER  IX,/

77k  Propagation  if  PitisHanity.

In  this  argument,  the  first  consideration  is  the
feet;  in  what  degree, "within  wjiat  time,'  and  to
What  extent*  Christianity  was  actually-propagated. "
■  The  accounts  of  the  matter,  which  tian  be  col- ,
lected  from  our  books,  are  as  follow:  A  few  d^ys
after-  Christ's  disappearance  out  of  the.  world;
we  find  an  assembly  of  ihsciples  at  Jerusalem,  to
thanumber  of  "  about  one  hundred  and  twenty  ;"*
which  hundred  and  twenty  were,  probably,  a  lit-
tle association  of  believers, -met  together,  not
merely  as  believers  in  Christ,  but  as  personally
connected  with  the  apostles,  and  withpne  another.
Whatever  was  the  number  of  believers  then  in
Jerusalem',  we  have  no  reason  to  be  surprised  Hut
so  small  a  company  should  assemble :  lor  there  is
%  no.  proof,  that  the  followers  of  Christ  were  yet
formed  into  a  society ;  that  the  society  was  reduced


EVIDENCES  OP  CHRISTIANITY.


♦Acts  LIS.


into  any  order;  that  it  was  it  this  time  even
understood  that  a  new  religion  (in  the-sense.  which
that  Jenn  conveys  to  us)  was  to  be  set  up  in  the
world,  or  how  the  professors  of  that  retitjnn  were
to  bedistinettished  from  thereat -of  mankind.  The
death  of  Christ  had  left,  we  may  suppose,  the
generality  of  hia  disciples  in  great  doubt,  both  as
te  what  they  were  tp  do,  and-  conceining  what
wat  to  follow:  >  «»  ■  *  "J  \  '-  "  "'  '
•  This  meeting  was  hokfen,  as  we  bjrve  already
said,  a  few  daya  af)er  Christ's  ascension :  fbrt  ten
days  after  that  event  was  die  day  of  Pentecost,
when,  aa  our  history  relates,*  upon  a  signal  dis-
play of  Divine  agency  attending  the  persons  ef
the  apostles,  there  were  added  to  the  society  "about
three  thousand  sods."*  But  here'  it  is  not,  1
think,  to  be  taken,  thatthese  three  thousand  wens
all  converted  by  this  single  miracle^  hut  rather
that  many,  who 'before  were  believers  in  Christ,
became  now  professors  of  Christianity ;  that  is  to
say,  when  they  found  that  a  .religion  waa  tp  be
established,  a"  society  formed  and  set  up  in  tod
name  of  Christ,  governed  by  hie  laws,  avowing
their  belief  in  his  mission,  united  amongst  them-
selves, and  separated  from  the  rest  of ihe  world  hy
visible  distinctions ;  in  pursuance  of  their  former
conviction,  and  by  virtue  of  what  they  had  heard
and  seen  and  known  of  Christ's  history,  they  pub-
licly became  members,  of it*

We  read  in  the  fourth  chapter*  of  the  Acts,
that,  soon  after  this,  ."•'  the  pumber  of  the  men,"
t.  e.  the  society  ^openly  professing  their  belief  in
Christ,  "  was  about  five  thousand!?  So  that  here
is  an-  increase  of  two  thousand  within  a  very  short
time.  And  it  is  probable  that  there  were  many,
both  now  and  afterward,  who,  although'  they  be-
ueyed  in  Christ,  did  not'.think  it  necessary- to
Join  themselves  to.  this  society ;  or  who  waited  to
se&what  was-  likely  to  become  of  it.  .Gamaliel
whose  advice  to 1  the  Jewish  council  is  recorded
Acts  v.  34,  'appears*  to  have  .been  of  .this  descrip-
tion.; perhaps  Nicodemus,  and  perhaps  also  Jo-
seph of  Arimathea.  This  'class;  of  men,  their
character  and  their  rank,  are  likewise  pointed  xwt  .
by  Saint  John,  in  the  twelfUkOdhapter  of  ma  Gos-  ■
pel:  "Nevertheless,  amongthe  chief  rulers  also,
many  believed  on  turn ;  hut  because  of  the  Phari-
sees, they  did  not  confess  him,  lest  they:shonld
be  put  oufof  Che  synagogue,  for  they  loved  the
,  praise  of  men  more  than  the  praise  of  God."  Pet-
sons,  such  as  these,  might  admit  the  miracles  of
Christ,  without  bei^lmtoediately  convince^  that
they  were  under  obligation  to  make  a  public  pro-
fession of  Christianity,  at  the  risk  of  ail  that  was
dear  to  them  in  life,  and  even  of  U/o  ftselC* '

*  Act?  it  i.  ,  f  detail.  41. , t  v>r.  4.

J$  "  Bench;  those  who  professed,  and*thaae  who  reject-
ed and  opposed,  Christianity,  there  were,  in  all  proba-
bility, multitudes  between  both,  neitlfer  perfect  Chris-  -
t»ans,  hoc 'yet  unbelievers.  They  -had  a  favourable
opinion  of  the  Gosper,  Ant  wortdry  co«f  ideration*  mad©
them  unwilling  to  own  it.  There  were  many  ckeura*
Stances  which  uicIIaimI  them  to  thins  that  Christianity
wa*  a' Divine,  revelation,  but  there  were  many  incon*
veniences  which  attended  the  open  profession  of  it :  ajul
they,  could  not  find  in  themselves  eourajpe  enough  to
tear.ttwm.to  disoblige  their  friends  and  family,  to  rain
their  forluues,  to  lose  their  reputation,  their  liberty,  and
their  life,  for  the  sake  of  the  new  religion.  Therefore
they  were  willing  to  hope,  that  if  tbey  endeavoured  to .
observe  the  great/  principles  of  morality,  which  Canst
had  represented  as  the  principal  part,  the  sum  and  sab-
stacce,  of  religion ;  if  tbey  thouglt  honourably  of  the
gospel,  if  they  offered  no  injury  to  the  Christians,  if
tbey  did  them  ail  the  services  that -they  could  «*/W»


EVIDENCES  OF  CHRISTIANITT.


m


Cnristlanjfty;  ljowever,  proceeded  to  increase*  in
Jeroealem  by  *  progress  eqoafly  rapid  with  its
in*  success :  for,  jnMQe  next*  chapter  of  ourJria-
'  lory,  wo  read  fhat  "Aelievers 'were  the  momaaded
to- the  Lord,  maUdiufes  both  of  men  end  Women."
And  thai  eiilargement  of  the  new  society  appear*
}n  Ihe  fiiet  verse>of  the  succeeding  chapter,  wntire-"
in  we  are  told,  that,  "  when  the  number  of  the'
disoiple*  waij  muttifAitd;  there  arose*  inurmuring
jnf  the  Ghrsejene  -against  the  Hebrews,  because
their  widows  were  neglected  :"t  and,  afterward  m
the  ssjne  chapter,  it  »  declared  expressly,  that'.
"'the  number  of  the  disciples  multiplied  in  Jerusa-
lem greatly,  and  that  a  great  company  of  the
priests  were  obedient  to  the  talth."  -
/  This  i  .call  the  first  period  in.  the  propagation
of  Cnrattanity.  It  commences  with  the  ascension
Of  Christ,  and  extends,  as  may  be  collected  from
incidental  notes  of  thne,t  to  somethjng  more  than
one  year  after  that  event  -  During  which  term,
the  preaching  of  Christianity,  so  far  as  oaf  flocu-


i  mmrm  us,  was  confined  to-  the  single-  city
of  Jerusalem,  And  how  did  it  succeed  there  ?
The  first  assembly  winch  we  meet  with  of  Christ's
e^sejplas,  and<ihat  a  few  days  after  his  removal
foot  the1  world,  consisted  of  "one  hundred  and


About  a  week  efter  this, .«'  three  thou-
sand ware  added  in  one  day :"  and*  the  number  of
Christians,  publicly  baptnedY  and  publicly  asso-
ciating together,  was  very  soon  increased  to  "  five
thousand?  "Multitudes  both  oTmen  and  wo-
men rontjnned  to  be  added  3"  n  disciples  muJtipHed
greasy,"  and' (( many  of  the  Jewish  priesthood,  as
wefl  as  others,  became  obedient  to  the.  faith;"  and
this  within  a  space  of -Jess  than  two  years  from
the  commencement  of  the  institution.

By  reason  of  a  persecution  raised  against  the
enuich  at  Jerusalem,  the  converts  were  driven
from  that  aty,  and.  dispersed  throughout  the  re-
gions of  Jodea  and  Samaria.!  "WXteTever  they
came,  they  brought  their  Teligiorf  with  them:  for,
pur  historian  informs  us;il  that  "they,  that *were
scattered  abroad;  went  every  where  preaching  the
word."  The  effect  of  this  preaching  comes/  after-
ward to  he  noticed,  where  toe  historian  is  led,  in
thecouae  of  his  narrative,  to  observe,  that  then
(C.  e.  about  three  years  posterior  to  thk.lt)  "  the
chureheehad  rest  throughout  all  Judos.  and-GaH-
feeand  Samaria,  and  were  edified,,  and  walking
in  the  fear  of  the  Lord,  and  In  the,  comfort  of  the
Holv  Ghost,  were,mukfoHed.'r  This  was  the
work  of  the  second  period,  which  compriseslibout
fear  year*. *  ^  .'


wero  at  liberty  to  j[iwfc  ^baa  4h*  taygMM  tn  — imflwf
at  large.  That «  myafcry,H  as  Saint  fWcaJhwt>«
and  as  it  then  was,'  was  revealed  to  Peter  by  an
especial  miracle.  It  appears  to  havobeent  about
seven  years  after  ChrisTe  ascension,  that  the  (Jos-
pel  was  preached  to  the  Gentiles  of  Cesarea;  A
year  after  this,  a  great  multitude  of  Gentiles  were
.converted  at  Antaochin  Syria.  The  uauussjouo
employed  by  the  historian  are  these  S*-"  A  great
number  bejieved  and  turned  to  the  Lord  j"  "much
people  was  added  unto  the  Lord;"  "the  apostle*
Barnabas  and  Paul  taugmvmuch  people."*  Upon
Herod's  death,  whieh  happened  m  the  next  year,t
it  is  observed,  that  '.'  the  word  of.  God  new  and
multiplied  "II  Three  years  from  this  tnne^  upon
the  preaching  of  PaftJ  at  Ifconium,  the  metrepnli*
of  Lycaonia,  "a  great  multitude  both  of  Jews  and
Greeks  beheveaVTJ  and  afterward,  pi  the  course)
of  this  very  prorressihe  n>  represented  as  "making
.many  dlactpjesr.  at^Derbe^a  princjped  <aty-inthe>


» the  preaching  of  the  Gospel  had  been
I  to  Jews,  to  Jewish  proselytes,  and  to  Sa-
1.  And  I  cannot  forbear  ftpm  setting
down  in  this  piece,  an  observation  of  Mr.  Bryant,
winch  appears  to  me  to  be  perfectly  well  founded :
r-"-the  Jew*  still  remain :  but  how  seldom  is  it
.  tint  we  can  make  a-  single  proselyted  There-  is'
reason  to  think,  that  there  wefe,  more  converted
by  tile  apostles  in  one  day,  than  Save  since  been
Won  over  in  the  last  thousand  years."**

It  wa*  not  yet-known  to  the  apostles,  that  they


perform,  they  were  wilting  to  hqee,  that  God  would  ac-
esot  this,  and  that  He  would  excuse  and  form?©-  the
issL"— Jortin's  Dia.  on  the  Chris:  Rel  p.  91.  edT4.
,  *  Acts  v.  14.  t  Actavi.  1.

}  Vide  Pearson's  Aatiq.  L  xvili.  «.  7.  -  Benson's  His-
tory of  Christ,  book  i-  a*  148.

£Acts  vlii.  1.  _  I  Ver.  4.  m  f  Bfcnsoit,  book  L  p.  207.


Three  years**  after,  this,  ^hicb:
brings  us  to  aucteen  after  the- ascension,  the  apoa*
ties  wrote  a  public  letter  from  Jerusalem  to  the*
Gentile  converts  in  Antioch,  Syria,  and  Cilicia,
with*  winch  letter  Paul  travelled  through,  theao
countries,  and  found  the  churches  **  established  iji
the  faith,  and  increasing  in  number  daily ."tt  From
Asia  the  apostle  preceded  into  Grom  where
soon  after  hm«rrival  in  Macedonia,  wd  and  him
at  Thessakmica  -r  in  which  city,  H  some  of  the  Jews
believed,  and  ofthe  devout  Greeks  a  great  muluV
tude."**  We  meeteJso  here  with  an  accidental
hint  of  the  general  progress  of  the  Christian  ana*
sien,  in  the  exclamation  of  the  tumultuous  Jaws
of  Thessalonictf;  «  that  they^  who  had  turned  the
world  upside  down,  were  come  thither  aho."§§  At
'  Berear  the  next  city  at  which  Paul  arrives,  the
historian,  who  was  present,  informs  us  that "  many
of  the  Jews  beHeyed."HII  The  next  year  andaJiaJf
of  Saint  Paul's  ininistry  wa/ spent  at  Corinth.
Of  bA  success  in  that  city,  we  receive  the  follow^
ing  intimations;  "  that  *many  of  the  Corinthians
believed  and  were  baptized j" -and  "that  it  wa*
revealed  to  the  apostle  by^Christ,  that  he,  had
m«cA  people  in  that  city. "^1T  Within  teas  than  a
year  after/his  departure  from  Corinth,  and  twenty*
five***  jean  after  the  ascension,  Saint  Pantflxed
lus  station  at  Epbesus,  for  the  spa^  .

and  something  more.  The  enestof  Urjniniatry~  '
in  that  qty  and  neighbourhood  drew  from  the
historian  a'  renection»  how  "  mightily  grew  the
word  of  God  and  prewfedT'm  And  at  the  con*
elusion  of  this  period,  we  find  Demetrius  at  the
heajd  of  a  party v  who  were  alarmed  by  the  pfOgress
of  the  religion,  complaining,  that  "jrot  onfy  at
Epheaus,  but  also  threugnout  aO  Asia  (i.  e.  tht
province  of  Lydia^andUhe  country  adjoining  to
Ephestv,)  this  Paul-hath  persuaded  anil- turned
away  much  peo»le."§*l  .Beside  these: accounts^  •
there  occurs,  incidentally^  mention ,of  converts  at
Rome^  Alexandria,  Athens,  Cyprus,  Cyrene,  Ma-
fig^nnia^  Philippi."  .  -

This  is  the  third  period  ih  the  propagation  jo£
Ohristianity',  setting  off  hi  the  seventh  year  after
the  ascension,  and -ending  at  the  twenty-eighth.


ttfesT*^  of  the  Christian  Eel^ioo.p.


*  Eph.  iji.  *-o.

+  Benaon'8  Hlitory  ofChrtst,  book  11.  P-  996.

f  Acta  xi.  SI,  84, 98,  *  Benson,  book  U.  p,  980. .

|ActBxii.24.  VAcUxiV.  1.

**  Benson,  book  Hi .  p.  90.  tt  Acta  ivt.  5. .

U  Acta  xvii.  4. 55  Acta  rvii.  6.  •>  '  M  Acts  xvii.  1A.

tnr  Acts  xvjii.  8—10. *•*  Benson,  book  41.4. 160.

tttAptsxfx.W. m^«»iix*». Sfi Acts xTx.90.


sw


EVIDENCES  OP  CHRISTIANITY.


Now  lay  these  thfl*e  periods  together,  and  observe-

.  how  tip  progress  of  the  religion  by  these  tfceounta
it)  MfiroseiiteuV  The  institution,  which  properiy
hegmgi  only  after  its  author's  removal  from  fJae
world,  before  the  end  of  thirty,  .yean  had  spread
itself  through  Judea,  Galilee,  am*  Samaria.  a1*
moat  all  the  numerous  districts  of  the  Lesser  Asia,
ttanigh  Greece;  and  the  Islands  of.  the  jEgesm
Sea,  the  sea-Coast  of  Africa,  and  had  extended  it-
self to  Rome,  and  into '  Italy/  At  Antioeh  in-  Sy-
ria, at  I oppa,  Ephesus,  Corinth,  Thesaalonica.
Berea,  Iconium,  Derbe,  Antioeh  in  HPisk&a,  at
Lydda,  Baron,  the,  number  of  converts  is  intimated
by  (he  expressions,  "a  great  irtunfcer,"  "great
multitudes,"  "  much  peopled  -  Qonyerts  are  men-
tioned, without  any  designation  of  their  number,*
at  TyreyCesarea,  Troas,  Athens,  Philippi,  Lys-

,  tra,"  Damascus.  During  all  this  time,  Jerusalem
continued  not  onbr  the  centre  of  the  mission,  but
aprincipal  seat  of  the  religion ;  for  wlien  Saint
Paul  turned  thither  at  the  conclusion  of  the  period
of  which  we  nr  now  considering  the.  accounts,
the  other  apostles  .pointed  out  to  pim,  as  a  reason
ft*  his  compliance  with  their  advice, '-'  how  many
thousands  (myriads,  ten  thousands)  there. were  in-
tbatcity  who  belieYed/t
'  Upon'  this,  abstract,  and  the  writing  from  which
It  is  drawn,  the  following  observations  seen*  ma-'
tend 'to  be  made-! ■-

I.  That  the  account  comes  'from  a  person,  who
was  himself  concerned  in  a  portion  of  what  he  re-
lates, and  was  contemporary^  with  the  whole  of  it;
who  visited- Jerusalem,  and  frequented  the  society
of  those  who  bap  acted,  and  were  acting,  the  chief
parts  in  the.  transaction.  '  I  lay  down  this  point
positiyery ;  for  had  the,  ancient  attestations  to  this
Valuable  lecord  been  less  satisfactory'  than  ther
ws^the  unaflbctedness  and  simplicity  with  which
the,  author  notes  his  presence  upon  certain  occa-

s  sioW.  andVthe  entire  absence  or  art  and  design
fiom  these  notices,  woukf  have  been  sufficient  to
persuade  my  minu,  that  whoever  he  was^  he  ac-
tually lived  in  the  times,  and  "occupied  the  situa-
tion, jn  which  he  represents  himself  to  be*  When
I  sav,  "  whoevef  he  was/'  I  do  not  inean  to  cast  a
doubt  upon  the  name  to  which  Antiquity  hath  as-
cribed the  Acts  of  the  Apostles  (for/  there  is  no-
cause  that  I  am  /acquainted  with,  for  questioning
h\)/bnt  to  observe,  that,  in  sueh-a  case  as  this,  the
time  and  situation1  of  (he  author  is  of  ntore  import-
ance than  his  name-  and  that  YA^ss  appeap  from
tp§  work  ilselfj  and  in  the  most  unsuspicious  form.
<  II.  That  tins  account  is  a-  very  incmpkeU  ac-
count of  the  preaching  and, propagation  of  Chris-
tianity; I  mean,  that,  if  what  we  read  m  the  his-

,  tory  be  true,  much-Tpore  'than  what  the  liistor?
contain*  must  be  true- also.  For  although  the
narrative  from  which  our  information  is  derived,
baa  been  entitled  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  k  is


*  *Ponsideriag  the'ratreine  conciseness  of  many  parti
«f  the  hiatoryrthe  silence  abdut  the  ntttpbers  of  converts
is  no  proof  of  tbtir  paucity ;  for  at  Philippi,  no -mention
whatever  is.  made  of  the  number,  yet  Saint  Paul  «d-
dtsssed  ad  epistle  to  that  church.  '  The  eburches.of  Ga


latia,  and  the  aflairs-of  those  churches,  were  consider-
able enough  to  be  the  subject  of  another  letter,  and  of
jnucbof^sint  Paul's  solicitude:  yet  no  account  is  nre-
servcd  in  the'  history  of  hi*  'success,  or  even  of  Tiis
preaching  in  that  country,  except  the  slight  notice  which
these  woils  convey ;— "  When  they  had  gone  throughout
Pterygia,  and  the  region  of  Galatja— they  essayed  to  go
Utoiilhynia.M-iBuxvi.0.  .

tAcu«B\«fe '


t,a  historf  of  the^welve'mposties  only  during
t  time  at  their  continuing  together  at  .  Jeru-


inact,i
a  short  1

salem;  and  even;  of  this  period  the  account  is  very
concisft.  The,  work  afterward  consists  of  a  few
-important  paesagm  of  Peter's  ministry,  of  the
speech  and  death  of  Stephen,  of  the  pipching  of
Philip  the  deacon;  and  the  sequel  of  the  vojume,
that  is,  two  thirds  of  the  whok,  is  taken  up  with
the  conversion,  the  travels,  the  discourses  and  his-
tory of  the  new  apostle  Paul;  in  which  history,
also,  large,  portions  of  time  are' often-  passed  over
with  very  scanty  notice.  .

IH.  That  the  account,'  so  fin*  as  it  goes,  is  for
this  very  reason  more  credible.  Had  it  been  the
authors  design,  to  have  displayed  the  early  pro-
gress of  Christianity^  he  would  undoubtedly  have
collected,  or,  at  least,  have  set  'forth,  accounts  of
the  preaching  ef  the  rest  of  the  apostles,  who  can-
not, without  extreme .  inrerobootfity,  be  supposed
to  nave  remained  silent  and  inactive,  or  not  to
nave  met  with  a  share  of  -that  success  which  at-
tended their  colleagues.  Tj>  which  may  be  addeo\
as  an  observation  of  the  same  kind

IV;  That  the  intimations  of  ^  dumber  of
converts,  and  of  ^he  success  of  the  preaching  of
the  apostles,  come. out  for  the  most  part  ipciaent-
xxlly ;  are  drawn  from  the  historian,  by  the  occa-
sion ;  such  as  the  murmuring  of  the  Grecian, con-
verts >  the  rest  from  persecution  \  Herod's  death;
the  sending  of  Barnabas  to  Antioeh,  and  Barna-
bas calling  Paul  to  his  assistance  -,  PauKcoaung.
to  a  place,  and  finding  there  disciples ;  the  clamour
of  the  Jews ;  the  complaint  of  artificers  interested
in  the  support  of  the  popular  religion ;  the  reason
assigned  to  induce  Paul  to  give,  satisfaction  to  the
Christians  of  Jerusalem..  Had  it 'not  been- for
these  occasions,  it  is  probable  that  no  notice  what-
ever would -have  been  taken  of  the  number  of  con-
verts in  several  of  the  passages  m  which  that  no-
tice now  appears.  All  this  tends  to  remove  .the
suspicion  ofa  design  to  -exaggerate  or  deceiye.

Parallel  testimonies  .with  the  history,  are
the  letters  of  Saint  Paul,  and  of  the  other  apostles,
which  have  come  down  to  us„  Those  or  Saint
Paul  «re  addressed  to  the  churches  of  Corinth,
Philippi,  Thessalonioa,  the  church  of  Galatta,  and,
if  the  inscription,  be  right,  of  Ephesus ;  ,hie  minis-
try at  all  which  piacesK  is -recorded  in  the  history:
to  the  church  V>f  Cotossepor  rather  to  the  churches
of  Colosse  and  Laodicea  jointly,  which  ne  ^adnot
then  visited,  They  recognise-  by  reference  the
churches  o(  Judea,  the  churches  of  A«a,  and  "  all
the  churches  of  the  Gentiles."*  In  the  Epistle  to
the  Romans,t  the  author  is  Jed  to  deliver  a  re-
markable declaration  concerning  the  extent  of  his
preaching,  its  efficacy,  and  the  cause  to  which,  he
ascribes  it,—"  to  make  the  Gentiles  obedient  by
word  and  deed,  through  mighty  signs. and  won-
ders, by  the  power  ofthe  Spirit  of  God;  so  that
from  Jerusalem,  and  round  about  unto  IUyncum>
I  have  fully  preached  the  Gospel  of  Christ."  In
the-EjftsUe  to  the  Colossians,*  we  find  an  oblique
but  very,  strong  signification  of  the  then  general '
state  of  the  Christian  mission^  at. least  as  it  ap-
peared to  Saint  Paul: — "if  ye  continue  in  the
faith,  grounded  and  settled,  and  he  not  moved
away  itojn  the  hope  ofthe  Gospel,  tvhkh  yeJiare
Jieard,  and  which  wax  preached'  toeverp  creature
which  is  unde*  beaaert;"  which.  Gospel,  he  had


tlTbeaiii.14.


}Ool«i.«£


EVIDENCES  OP  GKRISTIANTIX


reminded  them  near  the  he^fttflng»«f  hie  tetter,
"was  present  with  them,  as  U  was  in  afyihe
fixrtcL'l  The  expressions  ate  hyperbolical ;  .but
they  are  hyperboles  which  could  only  be  used  ey-
'  a  writer',  who  entertained  a  strong  flense  of  the
subject  'The  Pint  Epistfe  of- Peter  accosts  tha
^Christians  dispersed  throughout'  Pontus,  Gafetia,
Cffppaddeia,  Asia,  and  Bithynia;-'


"*  It  comes  next  to  be  considered,  tow  faj  these
accounts  .are  confirmed,  or  followed  up  by  other'
evidence.  •  ' ^

•  Tacitus,  In  delivering  a,  relation,  which  has
already,  been-  laid' before,  the  reader,  of  the  fire
which  happened  at  Home  in  the  tenth  year'' of
ffejra  f  which  coincides  with  toe  thirtieth  year
after  Cnfist's  ascension,)  asserts,  that  the  emperor,  -
in  ortfer  to  suppress  the  rumours  of  having  been
'  himself  the  author  of  the  mischief,  procured  the^
"  Christians  (o  be  accused.;  Of  which  Christians,
thus  brought  into  his  narrative,  the  following  ia
to  much  of  the  historian's  account  as  Wongs  to
ohr presentpurpose : ""  They  had4heir denomma-
tion  from  ^Jtuistus,  whoj  in  the  reign  of  Tiberius,
'was  put  to  death  -  a>a  criminal  by  the  procurator

,  -Ponttus -Pilate-.  TJ>is  pernicious  superstition,
though  checked  fee  a  while,,  broke  out  again,-  and

.  spreadnot  only  over  Judea,  but'  reached  the  city
also.  At  first,  they  only  were  apprehended  who
confessed  themselves  of  that  sect ;  afterward  avast
midlitudt'wer*  discovered  by  them."  This  tes-
timony to  the -early  propagation  of  Christianity  is
eTtremely  material.  It  is  from  an  historian.- of .
great  reputation,  living  near  the  time ; '  front  a
stranger  and  an  enemy  to*' the  religion;  and  it
joins  immediately  with  the  period  through  which

'  *  the  Scripture  accounts  extend:  -It  establishes
these  points  rthat  the  religion  began  at  Jerusalem-
that  it  spread  throughoutJudea ;  that  hvhad  reach-
'  ed  Rome,  and  not  only  so,  but  that  it  had  there
ohtainefl'  a  great  number  of  converts.  v  TJhis  was'
about  six  years  after  the  time  that  Sain*  Paul
wrote  his  Epistle  to  the  Romans*  and  something
more  thantwb  years' after  lie  arrived  there  himself.
The.  converts  to  the  religion  Were  then  so  numer-
ous at  Rome,  that,  of  those  Who  were  betrayed  by '
the  information  of  the  persons  first  persecuted;  a
great  multitude  (multitudo  mgens)  were"discover-
ed  and  seized.

It  seems  probable^  that  the.  temporary  check
which  Tacitus  represents  Christianity  to  have  re—

'"  eeived'  (repressa  in  pnesensj  referred  to  the  perse-
'  cation  at  Jerusalem,  which  followed  the  death  of  -
Stephen,  (Acts  vifi ;)  and  which,  by  dispersing  the
'converts,  caused  the  institution,  in  some 'measure.
to  disappear.  Its. second  eruption  at  the x  same
place.*  and  within  a  short  time,  has  much  in  it  of
the  character  of  truth.  It  was  the"  firmness  and
perseverance  of  men,,  who  knew  what  they  relied
upon.'  - ^

Next  in  order  of  time,-and  perhaps  superior  in
importance,  is  Jhe testimony  of Pliny  the  Younger.
PbnJ  was*  the  Roman  governor  of  Pontus  and
JJithynia,  two' considerable  districts  in  the  north*
em  nart  of  Ask  Minor.  The  situation  irk wh|ch
he  found  bis  province;  led  him  to  .apply  to  the
emperor  (Trajan)  for  his  direction  as  to  the  con-
duct he  waa  to  rjold  towards  the  Christians.  The


fetter  in  whico  tab  aT»pttcai%m  b>  contaii*jd,:waa
written  not  quite  eighty  years*  after  Christ's'  as-
cension. The  president,  in  this-  letter,  state*the
measures  he  had  already  pursued, -and  then  adds,
as  his  reason  for  resorting  to  the%mperor*s  coun-
sel and  authority,  the  following  words:— "Sus-
pending all  judicial  proceedings,  I  have  recourse
to  you  Tor  advice ;  for  it  baa  appeared  to  me  a  mat-
ter highly  deserving  consideration,  especially  on
account  of  the  great  number  of  persons  who  saxe
in  danger  of  suffering :  for,  many  of  all  ages,  and.
of  every  rani,  of  both' sexes  likewise,  are  accused,
and.will  be  accused.'  Nor  has  the  contagion  of
this  superstition  seized  cities 'only,  but  the  lesser
tpwns  also,  and, the  open  country.  Nevertheless
it  seemed  to,' me,  that*  i*  may  be  restrained  and
ceirec,ted.  It  is-certairi  (hat  the  temple*,  Which
wfere  almost  forsaken,  begin  to  he  more  frequent-
ed; and  the  sacred  solemnities,  after  a  fang  inter-
mission, are  reviver!.  *  Victims,  likewise,  are  every
where  (passim)  tough!  up;  whereas,  for  some
time,  there  were  ffew  to  purchase  them.  '  Whence
it  is  easy  to  imagine,  that  numbers  of  men-might
be reclaarned.ffBejrdon  were  granted  to  those  that  '
shall  repent.''* »  •

at  is  obviorja  to  observe,  that  the  passage  of
Pliny's,  letter,  here  quoted,  provev,  riot  only  that
the  Christians-in  Poritus  and  Bithynia  were  now
numerous,  but  that  they  had  subsisted  there  for
some  considerable  time.  '<  It  is  certain/'  he  say*,
"  that  the  temples,  which  were  almost  forsaken
(plainly ,  ascribing  this  desertion  of  the  popular
■worship  to  the'-prevalency  of  Christianity,)  begin
to  be  more  frequented^  and  the  sacred  solemnities,
after  a  long  mtetmission,  are  revived."  There
are  also  two  clauses  in  thex(brmer  part  oJ«  the  lek
tor  Which  indicate  thfe  same  thing;  one,  in  which
"he  declares  that  he  had  "never  been  present  at
any  trials  of  Christians,  apd  therefore  knew  not
what  was  the  ustfajlsubject^  inquiry  and  punish-  '
ment,  'or  how  far  either  was  wont  to  be  urged."
The  second'  clause  is  the  following:,  "Others
were  named  by  an  informer,  who,  at  hrstrconicss-
ed  themselvjea  Christians,  and  afterward  denied
it  5  the  rest  said,  they  had  been  Christians,  some
three  .years  ago.  some  longer,  and  some  about
twenty  years.  It  is  also,  apparent,  that  Pfiny
speaks  of  the  Christians  as.  a  description  oC  men
weO  known  to. the  person  to  whom,  he*  writes.
Hia -first  sentence  concerning  them  is,  "I  have
never  been  present  at  the  trials  of  Christians." N

This  mention  of  the*  name  of  Christians;  with-
out  any  preparatory  explanation,  shows  that  it
was  a  term  familiar  both  to  the  writer  of  the  let-
ter, and  the  person  to  whom  it  .was  addressed.
Had  it  not  been  so,  Pliny  would  naturally  have
Iwgun.  his  letter  by' informing  the.  emperor,  that
lie  nad  met  with  a  certain  set  of  men  in,  dp  pro-
vincefcalled,  Christiana. *  , ^

Here  then,  is  a  very  singular  evidence  of  the
progress  -of  the  Christian  religion  in  a  short  space.
It-was  not  fourscore  years  after  the  crucifixion  of
Jesus,. when-  Pfiny  wrote  this  letter;  nor  seventy
years  since  the  apostles  of  Jesus  began  to  mention
his  name  to  the  Gentile  world..  Bithynia  vand
Pontus- were  at  a  great  distance  from  Judea,  the
centre  from  which  the  religion  spread;  yet  in
these  provinces,  Christianity  had  long  subsisted,
and  Christians  Were  now  in  such  numbers  as  to
lead  the  Roman  governor  to  reportto  theemperox,


+CbkL&


*  C.  PUm.  Trajano  Ima,  lib.  x.  ee.  xwrtt.


M>


EVIDENCES  OP  CHRISTIANITY.


Hart  mey  were  found  notjotijyjn  eftftavbui  in  vi-
lages'and  in  crfeYi  countries ;  -of  ail  ages,  of  every
rank  and  condition ;  tyat  they  abounded  ao  much,
as  to*  hare  produced  a  visible  desertion  of  the
temples  ;~that  beasts  brought  to  market  for  victims, .
had  few  purchaser*;  that  the  sacred  solemnities
were  much  neglected  :-^rcumstances  noted  by
Plihy,  for  the  ef  press  purpose  of  showing  to  the
emperor  the  eflect  and  prevalency  of  the  new  in-
stitution. v

.  No  evidence  rena*itis,tywfc«A
thai  the  Christians  were  inOre  numerous  in
Pontuaand  Btthynia  than  in  other  parts  of  the
Roman  empire ;  nor  has  anj  reason  been  offered
to  show  why  they  should  be  ao.  Christianity  did
Hot  begin  in  these  countries,  nor  near'  them.  I  do
not  know;  therefore,  that  we  ought  to  confine  the
description  In  Pliny's  letter  to  the  state  of  Chris-
tianity In  these  provinces,  even  if  no -other  ^ae-
'  count  of  the  same  subject  had  come  dawn  farue^
but  certainly,  this  letter  may  aurJy  be  applied  in
aid  and  confirmation  of  .the  representations  given
of  the  general  state  of  Christianity  in  the  world,
by  Chfistian  writers  of  that  and  the  next  succeed-
ing age.

Justin  Marti*,  who  wrote  about  thirty  years
•after  Pliny,  and  one  hundred  and  six  after  the
Ascension,  baa  these  remarkable  words ;  "  There
is  not  fcjutioo,' either'  of  -Gtaeek  or-  Barbarian,  or
-of  any  other  name^eVen  of  those  who  wandef'in
tribes,  and  live  In  tents,-  amongst  whom  prapen
end  thanksgivings  are  not  offered  to  the  Father
and  Creator  of  the  Universe  by  the  name  of  the/
crucified  Jesus."  *  Tertufliari,  who  eomea  about
fifty- jeari  after  Justin,  appeals  to  the  governors
of  the  Roman  empire  in  these  terms :  u  We<were
but  of  yesterday,  and' we  have  filled  your  cities,
islands,  towns,  and  borough*,  the  camp,  the  senate,
«nd  the  forum.  They  (the  heathen  adversaries
of  Christianity)  lament,  that  every  sex,  age, /and
condition,  and  person*  of  every  rankeJsoy  are  con-
verts to  that  name."  t  I  do  allow,  that  these  ex
ppassionsare  loose,  and  may  be  called  declamatory.
But  even  declamation  hath  its  bounds :  this  public
boasting  upon  a  subject  which  must  be  known  to
every  reader  was  net  only  useless  but  unnatural,
unless  the  truth  of  the  case,  in  a  considerable  do-,
gree,  correspond  with  the  description;  at  least,
unless  it  had  been  both  true  and  notorious,  that,
great  multitudes  of  Christiana,  of  all  ranks!  and
Aiders,  were  to  be  found  in  moat  parte  of  the
'Roman  empire.  The -same  Teitullian.in  another
passage,  by  way  of  setting  forth  the  extensive  <h£
fusion  of  Christianity,  enumerates  as  belonging
to  Ghriai,-  beside  many  other  countries,  the
•j  Moore  and  Ga*ufiane  of  Africa,  the  borders  of
Spain,  several  nations  of  France,  and  parts  of
Britain,  inaccessible  to  the  Remans,  the  Sama-
ritan*/ E^aci;  Germans,  end  Scythiamv,"  t  and,
which  is  more  material  than  the  extent  of  the  in-.
etitution,  the  number  of  Christiana  in  the  several
countries  in  which  it  prevailed,  is  thus  expressed
bv  him :  "  Although  so  great  a'  multitude,  that 'in
almost' every  city  we  form  the  greater  part,  we
•  pass  due  time  modestly  and  in  silence. 4  -  Cletnena
Alexandrines,  who  preceded  Tertullian  by  a  few
years,  introduces  a  comparison  between  the  success
•  .of  Christianity  end  that  of  The  .most  celebrated
^milosophical institutions  r-  "  The philosophers.


were  confined  to  Gfeefia^jnoVtp  thek  ,

retainers;  but  the  doctrine  oftke  Master  of  Chrie-
-tiankydid  not-reno>in  in  Judea,  as  philosophy
did  in  Greece,  but  it  apeead  throughout  the  whofe
world,  in  every  nation,  and  viHage?  and  city,  both
^of  Greek*  and  Barbarians,  converting  both  whole
houses  and  separate  individuals,  having  already  -,
brought  over' to  the  truth  net  a  lew  of  the  philoso-
phers themselves.  If  the  Greek  philosophy  be
prohibited,  it  immediaMy  .vanishes;  wherea*)
from  the  first  preaching  of  our  doctrine,  kings
and  tyrants,  governors  end  preeidentir,  with  then-
whole  train,  anal  with  the  populace  on  their  aide,
have  endeavoured  wtth  then*  whole*  might  to  ex-
tenninate  it,  yet  doth  it  nourish  more  and  more.*
Origan,  who  allows  Tertullian  at  the  distance  of
only  thirty  years,  delivers  nearly  the  eatne  ac-
eottnt:  "  hi  every  put  e/  the  world  (says  he;)
throughout  all  Gjeece,  and  in. all  other  nations,
there  are  innumerable  and  imnwnae  multitudes,
who,  having  left  the  laws  nf  their  country,  and
those  whom  they  esteemed  gods,  have  given
themselves-  up  to  the  law  of  Moses,  and  the  reli-
gion .of  Christ:  and  this  not  without  the  bitterest
resentment  from  the  idolaters,  by  whom  they
were  frequently -put  to  torture,  and  sometime^  to
death :  and  it  is  wonderful  to  observe,  how,  in  st>
abort  e  time,  .the  religion  has  increased,  amidst
DUTushment  and  death,  and  every  kindof  toituie.nt
in  another  passage,  Origan  draws  the  following
candid  comparison  between  the  state  of  Christt-
vnity  in  his  time,  and  the*  condition  of  ita  mom
primitive  ages:  "By  the' good  providence  of  God,
the  Christian  religion  has  so  nourished  and  in-
creased continually,  thai  it  is  now  preached  freely
without  molestation,  although  then  were  a  thou-
sand obstacles  to  the  spreading  of  the  doctrine  oX
Jesus  m  the  world.  But  aa  it  wee  the  will  of
God  that  the  Geittjlea  abouty  have  the  benefit  ee?
it,  all  the  counsels  of  men  .against  thez-Chnetiane
were  defeated :  and  by  how  much  the  more  em-
perors and  governors  of  provinces,  and' the*  peoto&e
'every  where,  strove  to  depress  them;  ao  mnch  the
more  have  they  increased,  *nd  prevailed  exceedr

Iti*  weU  kn


.  that  within  less  then  eighty
yean  after  this,  the  Roman  emqfoe  became  Chris-
tian under  Constantino:  and  it  ie  probable  that
Constantino  declared  himself  on  the  aide  of  the
Christians,  because  they  were  the  powerful  party ;
for  Amobius,  who  wrote  immediately  before  Con-
stantine'e  accession,  speaks,  of  the  Whole  world
aa  filled  with  Christ's  jloctrine,  of  ita  dififoafcn
throughout  all  countriear  of  an  innumerable  body
of  Christiana  in-distant  provinces,  of  the  strange
revolution  of  opinion  of  men  of  the  greatest  ge-
nius,  oratora,  grammarians,  rhetoricjans,  lawyers,
physicians,  having  come  over  to  the  institution,
and  that  also  in  the  free  p£  >hreata)  executions,
and  torture*.  S,  And  not  more  than  twenty  yeara
after  Consiantine's  entire  possession  of  the  em»
pire;  Julius  Firmicus  Maternus  calls  upon  the
emperorsJConstantius  and  Cjonatana  to  extirpate
the  relics  of  the  ancient  religion;. the  reduced  and
fajlejijcondition  of  which  is  described  bv  our  an-
ther in  the  following  wards:  " Licet  adhuc  in
quihumjam  regionibua  idololatrias  morfcntia  pajpi-


*  dial,  cum  TrvplL
t  Ad.lttd.c.7.


t  Tertull.  Apol.  c.  37.


•  Olem.  M.  Strom,  lib.  vi.  ad  fin.

\  Oris;,  ia  Ceta.  lib^L-  ^  {  Oris.  coat.  Gala.  p>  vii,

$  Arnob.  ia  Gentesj  I  ivfc,87. 9.  9*.  43.  44.  edit.  Lag.


EVIDENCES  OP  CHRISTIANITY.


m


tent  membra;  tamen  in  eo  reo  est,  ut  aChristianis
omnibus  terns  pestiferum  hoc  malum  funditus
axnpute£ur :"  and  in  another  place,,  "Modicum
tantum  superest,  ut  legibus  vestris — extincta  ido-
lolatris  pereat  funesta  eontagio."*  It  will  not  be
thought  that  we  -quote  this  writer  in  order  lo  re-
commend his  temper  or  his  judgment,  but  to  show
the  comparative  state  of  Christianity  and  of  Hea-
thenism at  this  period.  Fifty  years  afterward,
Jerome  represents  tbe  decline  of  Paganism  in
language  which  conveys  the  same  idea  of  its  ap-
proaching extinction :  "  Solitudinem  palttur  et  in
urbe  gentilitas.  Dii  quondam  nationam,  cum  bu-
bonibus  et  noctuis,  in  solis  culminibus  remanse*
xont"t  Jerome  here  indulges  a  triumph,  natural
and  allowable  in  a  zealous  friend  of  the  cause,  but
which  could  only  be  suggested  lo  his  mind  by  the
consent  and  'universality  with  which  he  saw  the
religion  received.  "  But  now  (says  he)  the  passion
and  resurrection  of  Christ  are  celebrated  in  the
discourses  and  writings  of  all  nations.  I  need  not
mention,  Jews,  Greeks,  and  Latins.  The  Indians,
Persians,  Goths,  and  Egyptians,  philosophize,  and
firmly  believe  the  immortality  of  the  soul,  and  fu-
ture recompenses,  which,  before,  the  greatest  phi-
losophers had  denied,  or  doubted  of,  or  perplexed
with  their  disputes.  The  fierceness  of  Thracians
and  Scythians  is  now  softened  by  the  gentle  sound
of  the  Gospel;  and. every  where  Christ  is  all  in
all."*  Were  therefore  the  motives  of  Constan-
tine's  conversion  ever  so  problematical,  the  easy
establishment  of  Christianity,  and  the  ruin  of
Heathenism,  under  him  and  his  immediate  suc-
cessors, is  of  itself  a  proof  of  the  progress  which
Christianity  had  made  in  the  preceding  period.  It
may  be  added  also,  "  that  Maxentius,  the  rival  of
Constantino,  had  shown  himself  friendly  to  the '
Christians,  Therefore  of  those  who  were  con-
tending for  worldly  power  and  empire,  one  actual-
ly favoured  and  nattered  them,  and -another  may
be  suspected  to  have  joined  himself  to  them,  part-
ly from  consideration  of  interest:  so  considerable
were  they  become,  under  external  disadvantages
of  all  sorts."!  This  at  least  is  certain,  that  through-
out the  whole  transaction  hitherto,  the  jgreat  seem-
ed to  follow,  not  to  lead,  the  public  opinion. .

It  may  help  to  convey  to  us  some  notion  of  the
extent  and  progress  of  Christianity,  or  rather  of
the  character  and  quality  of  many  early  Chris-
tians, of  their  learning  and  their  labours,  to  notice
the  number  of  Christian  miters  who  flourished
in  these  ages/  Saint  Jerome's  catalogue  contains
aixty-*ix  writers  within  the  first  three  centuries,
and  the  first  six  years  of  the  fourth;  and  fifty-
four  between  that  time  and  his  own,  viz.  A.  D.
393.  Jerome  introduces  his  catalogue  with  the
following  just  remonstrance: — "Let  those  who
aay  the  church  has  had  no  philosophers,  nor  elo-
quent and  learned  men,  observe  who  and  what
they  were  who  founded,  established,  and  adorned
it:  let  them  cease  to  accuse  our  faith  of  rusticity,
and  confess  their  mistake."ll  Of  these  writers,  se-
veral, as  Justin,  Irensus,  Clement  of  Alexandria,
Tertullian^  Origen,  Bardesanes,  Hippolitus,  Eu-
sebius,  were  voluminous  writers.  Christian  wri-
ters abounded  particularly  about  the  year  178.


+  De  Error.  Prolan.  ReHf.  c  xxi.  p.  179,  quoted  by
Larrfner,  vol.  viii.  p.  S02.

(Jar.  ad  Leet.  ep.  5, 7.  f  Jer.  ep.  8.  ad  HelioaV

Lankier,  Cred.  vol.  vii.  p.  380.  A

Jer.  ProL  In  Lib.  <fe  Scr.  fttlr


Alexander,  bishop  of  Jerusalem,  founded  a  tibial?
in  that  city,  A.  D.  213.  Pamphilus,  the  friend  of
Origen,  founded  a  library  at  Cesaree,  A.  D.  294;
Public  defences  were  also  set  forth,  by  various' ad*
vocates  of  the  religion,  in  the  course  of  its  first
three  centuries. '  Within  one  hundred  years  af-
ter Christ  s  ascension,  Quadrates  and  Aristides,
-whose  works^  except  some  few  fragments  of  the
first,  are  lost ;.  and,  about  twenty  years  afterward.
Justin  Martyr,  whose  works  remain,  presented
apologies  for  the  Christian  religion  to  the  Roman
emperorsj  Gluadratus  and  Aristides  to  Adriany
Justin  to  Antoninus  Pius,  and  a  second  to  Mar-
cus Antoninus.  Melito,  bishop  of  Sardis.  and
Apollinaris,  bishop  of  Hierapohs,  and  Miltiades,
men  of  great  reputation,  did  the  same  to  Marcus
Antoninus,  twenty  years  afterward:*  and  ten
years  after  this,  Apollonius,  who  suffered  martyr-
dom upder  the  emperor  Commodus,  composed  an
apology  for  his  faith,  which  he  read  in  the  senate,
and  which  was  afterward  published/!*  Fourteen
years  after  the  apology  of  Apollonius,  Tertullian
addressed  the  work  "Which  now  remains  under
that  name  to  the  governors  of  provinces  in  the
Roman  empire;  and,  about  the  same  time,  Minu-
cius  Felix  composed  a  defence  of  the  Christian
religion,  which  is  still  extant;  and  shortly  after
the  conclusion  of  this  century,  copious  defences
of  Christianity  were  published  by  Arnobius  and
Lactantiua.


SECTION  II.
Reflections  upon  the  preceding  account.

In  viewing  the  progress  of  Christianity,  our
firs£  attention  is  due  to  the  number  of  converts  at
Jerusalem,  immediately  after  its  Founder's  death:
because  this  success  was  a  success  at  the  time,  ana
upon  the  spot,-  when  and  where  the  chief  part  of
the  history  had  been  transacted.

We  are,  in  the  next  place,  called  upon  to  attend
to  the  early  establishment  of  numerous  Christian
societies  in  Judea  and  Galilee;  which  countries
had  been  the  scene  of  Christ's  miracles  and  minis-
try, and  where  the  memory  of  what  had  passed,
and  the  knowledge  of  what '  was  alleged,  must
have  yet  been  fresh  and  certain.

We  are,  thirdly,  invited  to  recollect  the  success
of  the  apostles  and  of  their  companions,  at  the
several  places  to  which  they  came,  both  within
and  without  Judea;  because  it  was  the  credit
given  to  original  witnesses,  appealing  for  the  truth
of  their  accounts  to  what  themselves  had  seen  and
heard.  The  effect  also  of  their  preaching  strongly
confirms  the  truth  of  what  our  history  positively
and  circumstantially  relates,  that  they  were  able '
to  exhibit  to  their  hearess* supernatural  attestations
of  their  mission.

We  are,  lastly,  to  consider  the  subsequent  growth
and  spread  of  the  religion,  of  which  we  receive
successive  intimations,  and  satisfactory,  though
general  and  occasional,  accounts,  until  its  full  and
final  establishment.

In  all  these  severaf  stages,  the  hwtory  is  without
a  parallel:  for  it  must  be  observed,  that  we  have


*  Euseb.  Hist  lib.  iv.  c  96.  See  also  Lardner,  voL  II.
p.  666.
J t  Gardner,  vol.  tip- 697*


EVIDENCES  OP  CHRISTIANITY.


not  now  bee*  treeing  the  progress,  and  describing
the  aawrsJencYf  of  an  opinion,  fpunded  opon  philo-
^pphKf1  or  cnbcal  amunenta,  upon  mere  deduc-
tion of  reason,  or  the  construction  of  ancient
ratings?  (of  which  kind  are  the  several  theories
wnfcanave,  at  different  times,  gained  possession
of  too  public  mind'  in  various  deparUnents  of
asiwnoc  and  literature;  and  of  one  or  other  of
which  kind  are  the  tenets  also  which  divide  the
various  sects  of  Christianity ;)  but  that  we  speak
•f  a  system,  the  very  basis  and  poatulatum  of
which  was  a  supernatural  character  ascribed  to  a
ptrlamhir  person;  of  a  doctrine,  the  truth  whereof
eVpend*  entirely  upon  the  truth  of  a  matter  of  fiact
them  recent.  "  Tc-estaelish  a  new  religion,  even
amungst  a  few  people,  or  in  one  single  nation,  is
a  thing  in  itself  exceedingly  difficult.  To  reform
some  corruptions  which  may  have  spread  in  a  re-
ligion, or  to  make  new  regulations  in  it,  is  not
perhaps  so  hard,  when  the  main  and  principal
■nit  of  that  religion  is  preserved  entire  and  un-
shaken ;  and  yet  this  very  often  cannot  be  accom-
plished without  an  extraordinary  concurrence  of
circumstances,  and  may  be  attempted  a  thousand
bs  without  success.  But  to  introduce  a  new
a,  a  new  way  of  thinking  and  acting;  and  to
many,  nations  to  quit  the  religion  in


which  their  ancestors  have  lived  and  died,  which
had  been  delivered  down  to  them  from  time  im-
memorial, to  make  them  forsake  and  despise  the
deities  which  they  had  been  accustomed  to  reve-
rence and  worship;  this  is  a  work  of  still  greater
difficulty.*  The  resistance  of  education,  worldly
policy,  and  superstition,  is  almost  invincible."

If  men,  in  these  days,  be  Christians  in  conse-
quence of  their  education,  in  submission  to  autho-
rity, or  in  compliance  with  fashion,  let  us  recollect
this  the  very  contrary  of  this,  at  the  beginning,
««s  the  case.  The  first  race  of  Christians,  as
well  as  millions  who  succeeded  them,  became
such  in  formal  opposition  to  all  these  motives,  to
*  the  whole  power  and  strength  of  this  influence.
Every  argument,  therefore,  and  every  instance,
which  sets  forth  the  prejudice  of  education,  and
the  almost  irresistible  effects  of  that  prejudice.
(and  no  persons  are  more  fond  of  expatiating  upon
sms  subject  than  deistical  writers,)  in  feet  confirms
the  evidence  of  Christianity.

But,  in  order  to  judge  of  the  argument  which  is
drawn  from  the  early  propagation  of  Christianity,
I  Joow  no  fairer  way  of  proceeding,  than  to  com-
pare what  we  have  seen  on  the  subject,  with  the
success  of  Christian  missions  in.  modern  ages.
in  the  East  India  mission,  supported  by  the  Bo-
-ciety  for  promoting  Christian  Knowledge,  we
■ear  sonsBtunes  of  thirty,  sometimes  of  forty,  being
baptised  in  the  course  of  a  year,  and  these  princi-

lly  children.  Of  converts  properly  so  called,
lat  is,  of  adults  voluntarily  embracing  Christian-
ity, the  number  is  extremely  small.  "  Notwith-
standing the  labour  of  missionaries  for  upwards  of
two  hundred  years,  and  the  establishments  of
different  Christian  nations  who  support  them,
there  are  not  twelve  thousand  Indian  Christians,
and  those  almost  entirely  outcasts,  "t -

I  lament*  as  much  as  any  man,  the  little  pro-
gress which  Christianity  "has  made  in  these  coun-
tries, and  the  inconsiderable  effect  that  has  followed

*  Jortin's  Dis.  on  the  Christ.  Rcl.  p.  107.  ed.  iv.

t  Baetehfis  relating  to  the  history,  learning,  and  man-
ners of  the  Hindoos,  p.  48;  quoted  by  Dr.  Robertson,
Hist,  Dis.  concerning  ancient  India,  p.  230.


the  labours  of  its  missionaries :  but  I  see  in  it  a
strong  proof  of  the  Divine  origin  of  the  religion.
What  had  the  apostles  to  assist  them  in  propagat-
ing Christianity  which  the  missionaries  have  not  1
If  piety  and  zeal  had  been  sufficient,  I  doubt  not
but  that  our  missionaries  possess  these  qualities  in
a  high  degree :  for,^hothing  except  piety  and  seal
could  engage  them  in  the  undertaking,  if  sanc-
tity of  life  and  manners  was  the  allurement,  the
conduct  of  these  men  is  unblamable.  If  the  r  ad-
vantage of  education  and  learning  be  looked  to,
there  is  not  one  of  the  modern  missionaries,  who
is  not,  in  this  respect,  superior  to  all  the  apostles;-
and  that  not  only  absolutely,  but,  what  is  of  more
importance,  relatively,  in  comparison,  that  is,
with  those  amongst  whom  -they  exercise  their
office.  If  the-intrinsic  excellency  of  the  religion,
the  perfection  of  its  morality,  the  purity  of  its  pre-
cepts, the  eloquence  or  tenderness  or  sublimity  of
various  parts  of  its  writings,  were  the  recommend-
ations by  which  it  made  its  way,  these  remain  the  '
same.  If  the  character  and  circumstances,  under
which  the  preachers  were  introduced  to  the  coun-
tries in  which'  they  taught,  be  accounted  of  im-
portance, this  advantage  is  all  on  the  side  of  the
modern  missionaries.  They  come  from  a  country
and  a  people  to  which  the  Indian  world  look  up
with  sentiments  of  deference.  The  apostles  cams)
forth  amongst  the  Gentiles  under  no  other  name
than  that  of  Jews,  which  was  precisely  the  charac-
ter they  despised  and  derided.  If  it  bediagracefei
in  India  to  become  a  Christian,  it  could  not  be
much  less  so  to  be  enrolled  amongst  those,  "que*
per  flagitia  inviaos.  valgus  Christianos  ar^Ilabat.''
If  the  religion  which  they  had  to  encounter  be
considered,  the  difference,  I  apprehend,  will  not
be  greatr  The  theology  of  both  was  nearly  the
same:  "  what  is  supposed  to  be  performed  by  the
power  of  Jupiter,  of  Neptune,  of  j£olus,  of  Mars,
of  Venus,  according  to  the  mythology  of  the  West,
is  ascribed,  in  the  East,  to  the  agency  of  Agrio  the
god  of  fire,  Varoon  the  god  of  oceans,  Vayoo  the
god  of  wind,  Cama  the  god  of  Jove."*  The  sa-
cred rites  of  the  Western  Polytheism  were  gay,
festive,  and  licentious ;  the  rites  of  the  public  re-
ligion in  the  East  partake  of  the  same  character,
with  a  more  avowed  indecency.  "  In  every  func-
tion performed  in  the  pagodas,  as  well  as  in  every
public  procession,  it  is  the  office  of  these  women
(i  e.  of  women  prepared  by  the  Brahmins  for  the
purpose,)  to  dance  before  the  idol,  and  to  sing
aymns  in  his  praise ;  and  it  is  difficult  to  say  whe-
ther they  trespass  most  against  decency  by  the
gestures  they  exhibit,  or  by  the  verses  which  they
recite-  The  walls  of  the  pagodas  were  covered
with  paintings  in  a  style  no  less  indeucate.''t •

On  both  sides  of  the  comparison,  the  popular
religion  had  a  strong  establishment  In  ancient
Greece  and  Rome,  it  was  strictly  incorporated
with  the  state.  The  magistrate  was  the  priest.
The  highest  officers  of  government  bore  the  most
distinguished  part  in  the  celebration  of  the  public
rites.  .  In  India,  a  powerful  and  numerous  cast
possess  exclusively  the  administration  of  the  esta-

*  Hachvat  Geetn,  p.  94,  quoted  oy  Dr.  Robertson,  Ind.
Dis.  p.  HOti.  j,

t  Oilier*  of  tho  deities  of  the  East  are  of  an  austere
and  pinnniy  character,  "to  tx>  propitiated  by  victims,
somcliuu  9  by  tiuman  sacrifices,  and  by  voluntary  tor-
ments of  the  most  excrucintiuff  kind.—Vuyage  de  Gen-
til,  vol.  i.  p.  244—200.  Preface  to  Code  of  Gentop  Laws,
p.  57,  quoted  by  Dr.  Robertson,  p.  390.


EVIDENCES  OP  CHRISTIANITY.


ttiehed  worship;  and  gw.  of  consequence,  devoted
to  the  service,  and  attached  to  its  interest.  In
both,  the  prevailing  mythology  we>  destitute  of
any  proper  evidence :  or  rather,  in  both,  the  origin
of  the  tradition  is  ran  up  into  ages  long  anterior
to  the  existence  of  credible  history,  or  of  written
language.  The  Indian  chronology  computes  eras
by  millions  of  years',  and  the  life  of  man  by  thou-
sands ;*  and  in  these,  or  prior  to  these,  is  placed
the  history  of  their  divinities.  In  both,  the  esta-
blished superstition  held  the  same  place  in  the  pub-
,hc  opinion ;  that  is  to  say,  in  both  it  was  credited
by  the  bulk  of  the  people  ,t  but  by  the  learned  and
philosophical  part  of  the  community,  either  derid-
ed, or  regarded  by  them  as  only  fit  to  be  upholder
Jer  the  sake  of  its  political  uses?
,  Or  if  it  should  be  allowed,  that  the  ancient  hea-
thens believed  in  their  religion  less  generally  than
the  present  Indians  do,  I  am  far  from  thinking
thai  this  circumstance  would  afford  any  facility  to
the  work  of  the  apostle*,  above  that  of  the  modern
missionaries.  To  me  it  appears,  and  1  think  it
material  to  be  remarked,  that  a  disbelief  of  the  es-
tablished religion  of  their  country  has  no  tendency
to  dispose  men'  for  the  reception  of  another ;  but
thai,  on  the  contrary,  it  generates  a  settled  con-
tempt of  all  religious  pretensions  whatever.  Gene-
ral infidelity  is  tne  hardest  soil  which  the  propa-
gators of  a  new  religion  can  have  to  work  upon.
Could  a  Methodist  or  Moravian  promise  himself
fl  better  chance  of  success  with  a  French  esprit
fort,  who  had  been  accustomed  to  laugh  at  the
popery  of  his  country  than  with  a  believing  Ma-
hometan or  Hindoo  f  Or  are  our  modern  unbe-
lievers in  Christianity,  for  that  reason,  in  danger
of  becoming  Mahometans  or  Hindoos  1  h  does
not  appear  that  the  Jews,  who  had  a  body  of  his-
torieal  evidence  to  offer  for  their  religion,  and  who
■ft  that  time  undoubtedly  entertained  and  held


•  '« The  Buffec  Jogtic,  or  age  of  purity,  is  said  to  have
fasted  three  million!  two  hundred  thou*  ;nd  yenra  ;  and
tbey  bold  that  the  life  of  man  was"  extended  in  that  age
to  one  hundred  thousand  years  ;  but  there  is  a  difference
amongst  the  Indian  writers,  of  six  millions  of  years  in
the  computation  of  this  era."— Preface  to  Code  of  Gen-
too  Laws,  p.  57,  quoted  by  Dr.  Robertson,  p.  330.

t  u  How  absurd  soever  the  articles  of  faith  may  be,
Which,  superstition  has  adopted,  or  how  unhallowud  the
rites  which  it  prescribes,  the  former  are  received,  in
every  age  aqd  country,  with  unhesitating  assont,  by
the  great  body  of  the  people,  and  the  latter  observed
..With  scrupulous  exactness.  In  our  rcasoni  ng*  concern-
ing opinions  and  practices  which  differ  widely  from  our
swn,  we  are  extremely  apt  to  err.  Having  been*  in-
structed ourselves  in  the  principles  of  a  religion,  worthy
in  every  respect  of  that  Divine  wisdom  by  which  they
were  dictated,  we  frequently  express  wonder  at  the  cre-
dulity of  nations,  in  embracing  systems  of  belief  which
appear  to  us  so  directly  repugnant  to  right  reason  ;  and
sometimes  suspect,  that  tenets  so  wild  and  extravagant
do  not  really  gain  credit  with  them.  But  experience  may
satisfy  as,  that  neither  our  wonder  nor  suspicions  are
-well  founded.  No  article  of  the  public  religion  was
called  la  question  by  those  people  of  ancient  Europe
with  whose  history  we  are  best  acquainted;  and  no
practice,  which  it  enjoined,  appeared  improper  to  them.
On  the  other  hand,  every  opiniou  thaitpndod  to  dimi-
nish the  reverenoe  of  men  for  the  god*  of  their  country,
or  to  alienate  thpm  from  their  worship,  excited,  nmong
the  Greeks  and  Romans,  that  indignant  zeal  which  is
natural  to  every  people  attached  to  their  religion  by  a
firm  persuasion  of  its  truth."— Ind,  Di*.  p.  3*Jl.

{.That  the  learned  Brahmins  of  the  East  are  rational
Twists, -and  secretly  reject  the  established  theory,  and
contemn  the  rites  that  were  founded  upon  them,  or  ra-
ther consider  them  as  contrivances  tq  be  supported  for
their  political  uses,  see  Dr.  Robertson's  Ind.  Dis.  p.  3*4,


forth  the  expectation  of  a  future  state;  derived  any
great  advantage,  as  to  the  extension  of  their  sys-
tem, from-  the  discredit  into'  which  the  popular
religion  had  fallen  with  many  of  their  heathen
neighbours.

We  have  particularly-  directed  our  observations)
to  the  state  and  progress  of  Christianity  amongst
the  inhabitants  of  India:  but  the  history  of  the
Christian  mission  in  other  countries,- where  the
efficacy  of  the  mission  is  left  solely  to  the  convic-
tion wrought  by  the  preaching  of  Btrangers,  pre-
sents the  same  idea,  as  the  Indian  mission  does,
of  the  feebleness  and  inadequacy  of  human  means.
About  twenty-five  years  ago,  was- published  in
England  a  translation  from  the  Dutch,  of  a  His-
tory of  Greenland,  and  a  relation  of  the  mv**m
for  above  thirty,  years  carried  on  in  that  country
by  the  Unitas  Fratrum,  or  Moravians.  Every
part  of  that  relation  confirms  the  opinion  we  have
stated.  -Nothing  could  surpass,  or  hardly  equal,
the  zeal  and  patience  of  the  missionaries.  Yet
their  historian,  in  the  conclusion  of  his  narrative,
could  find  place  for  no  reflections  more  encouraging
than  the  following :— '*  A  person  that  had  known
the  heathen,  that  had  seen  the  little  benefit  from
the  great  pains  hitherto  taken  with  them,  ana*
considered  that  one  after  another  had  abandoned
all  hopes  of  the  conversion  of  those  infidels  (and
some  thought  they  would  never  be  converted,  till
they* saw  njiracles  wrought  as  in  the  apostles'  days,
and  this  the  Greenlanders  expected  and  demanded
of  their  instructors;)  one  that  considered  this,  I
say,  would  not  so  much  wonder  at  the  pest  un-
fruitfulness  of  these  young  beginners,  as  at  then?
steadfast  perseverance  in  the  midst  of  nothing  but
distress,  difficulties,  and  impedimenta)  internal^
and  externally;  and  that  they  never  desponded  of
the  conversion  of  those  poor  creatures  amidst  aU
seeming  impossibilities.'  *

From  the^widely  disproportionate  effectswhich
attend  the  preaching  of  modern  missionaries  of
Christianity,  compared  with  what  followed  the
ministry  of  Christ,  and  his  apostles  under  circum-
stances either  alike,  or  not  so  unlike  as  to  account
for  the  difference,  a  conclusion  is  fairly  drawn,  in
support  of  what  our  histories  deliver  concerning
them,  viz.  that  they  possessed  means  of  conviction,
which  we  have  not ;  that  they  had  proofs  to  appeal
to,  which  we  want. .


SECTION  III.
Qf  the  Religion  of  Mahomet

The  only  event  in  the  history  of  the  human
species  which  admits  of  comparison  with  the  pro-
pagation of  Christianity,  is  the  success  of  Maho-
metanism.  The  Mahometan  institution  was  rapid
in  its  progress,  was  recent  in  its  history,  and  was
founded  upon  a  supernatural  or  prophetic  charac-
ter assumed  by  its  author.  In  these  articles,  the
resemblance  with  Christianity  is  confessed.  But
there  are  points  of  difference,  which  separate,  we
apprehend,  the  two  cases  entirely.

I.  Mahomet  did  not  found  his  pretensions  upon
miracles,  properly  so  called ;  tliat  is,  upon  proofs
of,  supernatural^agency,  capable  of  being  known
and  sAfcsted  l>y  others.  Christians  are  warranted
in  this  assertion  by  the  evidence  of  the  Koran,  in


•  History  of  Greenland,  voL  ii.  p.  376.


M4


EVIDENCES  OP  CHRISTIANITY.


Which  Mahomet  notonlydoa  not  afiect  the  power
of  working  miracles,  but  expressly  dischums  jt.
The  following  passages  of  that  book  furnish  direct
proofs  of  the  truth  of  what  we  allege : — "  The  in-
fidels' say,-  Unless  a  sign  be  sent  down  unto  him
from  his  lord,  we  will  not  believe;  thou  art  a
preacher  only."*  Again ;  "  Nothing  hindered  us
from  sending  thee  with  miracles,  except  that  the
former  nations  have  charged  them  with  impos-

^ture."t  And  lastly;  "  They  say,  unless  a  sign
be  sent  dpwn  unto  him  from  his  lord,  wo  will  not
believe:  Answer;  Signs  are  in  the  power  of  God
alone,  and  I  am  no  more  than  a  public  preacher.
Ik  it  not  sufficient  for  them,  that  we  have  sent
down  unto  them  the  book  of  the  Koran  to  be  read
»nto  them  T't  Besides  these  acknowledgments,  I
h»w  observed  thirteen  distinct  places*,  in  which
Mahomet  puts  the  objection  (unless  a'  sign,  &c.)
into  the  mouth  of  the  unbeliever,  in  not  one  of
which  does  he  allege  g  miracle  in  reply.  His  an-
swer is,  "  that  God  giveth  the  power  of  working
miracles,  when  and  to  whom  he  pleaseth  ;"§  ".that
If  he  should  work  miracles*,  they  would  not  be-
lieve ;"ll  "  that  they  had  before  rejected  Moses,  and
the  Prophets,  who  wrought  miracles  ;"1F  "  that  the
Koran  itself  was  a  miracle.''**

.The  only  place  in  the  Koran  in  which  it  can
be  pretendfjd  that  a  sensible  miracle  is  referred  to
(for  I  do  not  allow  the  secret  visitations  of  Gabriel,
the  night  journey  of  Mahomet  to  heaisen,  or  the
presence  in  battle  of  invisible  hosts  of  angels,  to
deserve  the  name  of  sensible  miracles,)  is  the  be-

"  ginning  of  the  fifty-fourth  chapter.  The  words
are  these: — "  The  hour  of  judgment  approacheth,
&nd  the  moon  -hath  been  split  in  sunder ;  but  if
the  unbelievers  see  a  sign,  they  turn  aside  saying,
This  is  a  powerful  charm."  The  Mahometan
expositors  disagree  in  their  interpretation  of  this
passage;  some  explaining  it -to  be  a  mention  of
the  splitting  of  the  moon,  as  one  of  the  futuVe
signs  of  the  approach  of  the  day  of  judgment ;
others  referring  it  to  a  miraculous  appearance
which  had  then  taken  place.tt  ft  seems  to  me  not
Improbable,  that  Mahomet  might  have  taken  ad-
vantage of  some  extraordinary  halo,  or  other  un-
usual appearance  of  the  moon, '  which  had  hap-
pened about  this  time;  and  waicfi  supplied  a
foundation  both  for  this  passage,  and  for  the  story
which  in  after  times  had  been  raised  out  4>f  it.  ^
After  this  more  than  silence,  after  these  authen-
tic confessions  of  the  Koran,  we  are  "not  to  be
moved  with  "miraculous  stories  related  of  Maho-

#nfet  by  Abulfeda,  who  wrote  his  life,  about  six
hundred  years  after  his  death ;  or  which  are  found
in  the  legend  of  Al-Janabi,  who  came  two  hun-

-  dred  years  later.?*  On  the  -contrary,  from  com-
paring what  Mahomet  himself  wrote  and  said,
with  what  was  afterwards  reported  of  him  by  lus
foHowers,  the  plain  and  fair  conclusion  is,  that
when  the.  religion 'was  established  Jay  conquest,

*  Sale**  Koran,  c  xiii.  p.  SOI.  ed.  quarto.

ICh.  Xvii.  p.  933. N I  Ch.  xxix.  p.  328.
Ch.  v.  x.  xiii.  twice.  BCJi.  vi.

CbT.  iii.  xxi  xsgjii.'  **Ch.  xvi.

ft  Vide  Sale,  in  loc.

tt  It  does  not,  I  think,  appear,  that  these  historians
had  any  written  accounts  to  appeal  to,  more  ancient
than  the  Sonnahf;  which  was  a  collection  of  traditions
made  by  order  of  the  caliphs  two  hundred  xeai*  after
Mahomet's  death.  Mahomet  died  AD  (>32 ;  Al  buchari,
one  Of  the  six  doctors  who  compiled  the  Sonnah,  was
born  A.  D.  609;  died  in  8».— Prideaax's  Life  of  Maho-
met, p.  192.  ed.  7th.  [


then,  and  not  till  then,  came  out  the  stories  of  his
miracles.

Now  this  difference  alone  constitutes,  in  my
opinion,  a  bar  to  all  reasoning  from  one  case  to
the  other.  The  success  of  a  religion  founded
upon  a  miraculous  history,  shows  the  credit  which
was  given  to  the  hbtory ;  and  this  credit,  under
the  circumstances  in  which  it  was  given,  i.  e.  by
persons  capable  of  knowing  the  truth,  and  inter-
ested to  inquire  after  it,  is  evidence  of  the  reality
of  the  history,  and,  by  consequence,  of  the  truth
of  the  religion.  Where  a  miraculous  history  is
not  alleged,  no  part  of  this  argument  can  be  ap-
plied. Wc  admit,  that  multitudes  acknowledge
the  pretensions  of  Mahomet ;  but,  these  preten-
sions being  destitute  of  miraculous  evidence,  wo
know  that  the  grounds  upon  which  they  were
acknowledged,  could  net  be  secure  grounds  of  per-
suasion to  his  followers,  nor  their  example  any
authority  to  us.  Admit  the  whole  okMahoniet*
authentic  history,  so  far  as  it  was  of  a  mature,
capable  of  being  known  or  witnessed  by  others,
to  be  true  (which  is  certainly  to  admit  all  that. the
reception  of  the  religion  can  be  brought  to  prove,)
and  Mahomet  might  still  be  an  impostor,  or  en-
thusiast, or  a  union  of  both.  Admit  to  be  true
almost  any  part  of  Christ's  history,  of  that  I  mean,
which  was  public,  and  within  the  cognisance  of
his  followers,  and  he  must  have  come  from  God.
Where  matter  of  fact  is  not  in  question,  where
miracles  are  not  alleged,  I  do  not  see  that  the  pro-
gress of  a  religion  is  a  better  argument  of  its  truth,
than  the  prevalency  of  any  system  of  opinions  in
natural  religion,  morality,  or  physics,  is  a  proof  of
the  "truth  ot  those  opinions,  __  And  we  know  that
this  sort  of  argument  is  inadmissible  in  any  branch
of  philosophy  whatever.

But  it  will  l»  said,  If  one  religion  could  make
its  way  without  miracles,  why  might  not  another?
To  which  I  reply,  first-,  that  this  is  not  the  ques-
tion ;  the  proper  questiop  is  not,  whether  a  reli-
gious institution  could  be  set  up  without  miracles,
but  whether  a  religion  or  a  change  of  -religion,
founding  itself  in  miracles,  could  succeed  without
any  reality  to  rest  upon?  t  apprehend  these  two
cases  to  be  very  different;  and  I  apprehend  Ma-
homet's not  taking  this  course,  to  oe  one  proof,
amongst  others,  that  the  thing  is  difficult,  if  not
impossible,  to  be  accomplished;  certainly  it  wag
not  from  an  unconsciousness  of  the  value  and  im-
portance of  miraculous  evidence :  for  it  is  very  ob-
servable, that  in  the  same  volume,  and  sometimes
in  the  same  chapters,  in  which  Mahomet  so  re-
peatedly disclaims  the  power  of  working  miracles
himself,  he  is  incessantly  referring  to  the  miracles
of  preceding  prophets.  One  would  imagine,  to
hear  some  men  talk,  or  to  read,  some"  books,  that
the  setting  up  of  a  religion  by  dint  of  miraculous
pretences  was  a  thing  of  every  day's  experience:
whereas  I  believe,  that,  except  tne  Jewish  and
Christian  religion,  there  is  no  tolerably  well  au-
thenticated account  of  any  such  thing  having  been
accomplished.

II.  The -establishment  of  Mahomet's  religion
was  effected  by  causes  which  in  no  degree  apper-
tained to  the  origin  of  Christianity.

During  the  first  twelve  years,  of  his  mission,
Mahomet  had  recourse  only  to  persuasion.  This
is  allowed.  And  there  is  sufficient  reason  from
vthe  effect  to  believe,  that,  if  he  .had  confined  him-
self to  this  mode  of  prorogating  his  religion,  we
of  the  present  day  should  never  have  heard  either


EVIDENCES  OP  CHRISTIANITY.


3»


of  him  or  it  (C  Three  yean  were  silently  em-
ployed in  the  conversion  of  fourte&n  proselytes.
For  ten  years,  the  religion  advanced  with  a.  slow
and  painful  progress,  within  the  walls  of  Mecca.
The  number  of  proselytes  in  the  seventh  year  of
his  mission  may  be  estimated  by  the  absence  of
eighty-three  men  and  eighteen  women,  who  re-
tired to  Ethiopia."*  Yet  this-  progress,  such  as  it
was,  appears  to  have  been  aided  by  some  very  im-
portant advantages  which  Mahomet  found  in  his
situation,  in  his  mode  of  conducting  his  design,
and  in  his  doctrine.

1.  Mahomet  was  the  grandson  of  the  most
powerful  and  honourable  family  in  Mecca  r  and
although  the  early  death  of  his  father  had  not  left
him  a  patrimony  suitable  to  his  birth,  he  had,  long
before  the  commencement  of  his  mission,  repair-
ed this  deficiency  by  an  opulent  marriage.  A
person  considerable  by  his  wealth,  of  high  de-
scent, and  Marly  allied  to  the  chiefs  of  his  country,
taking  upon  himself  the  character  of  a  religious
teacher,  would  not  fail  of  attracting  attention  and
followers.

2.  Mahomet  conducted  his  design,  in  the  outset
especially,  with  great  art  and  prudence.  He  con-
ducted it  as  a  politician  would^conduct  a  plot*.  His
first  application  was  to  his  own  family.  This
gained  him  his  wife's  uncle,  a  considerable  person
in  Mecca,  together  with  his  cousin  Ali,  afterward
the  celebrated  Caliph,  then  a  youth  of  great  ex-
pectation, and  even  already  distinguished  by  his
attachment,  impetuosity,  and  courage,  t  He  next
expressed  himself  to  Abu  Beer,  a  man  amongst
the  first  of  the  Koreish  in  wealth  and  influence.
The  interest  and  example  of  Abu  Beer,  drew  in
five  other  principal  persons  in  Mecca :  whose  so-
licitations prevailed  upon  five  more  of  the  same

,  rank.  This  was  the  work  of  three  years' ;  during
which  time,  every  thing  was  transacted  in  secret.
Upon  the  strength  of  these  allies,  and  under  the
powerful  protection  of  his  family,  who,  however
some  of 'them  might  disapprove  his  enterprise,  or
deride  his  pretensions,  would  not  suffer  the  orphan
•f  their  house,  the  relic  of  their  -favourite  brother
to  be  insulted;  Mahomet  now  commenced  his
jmbfio  preaching.  And  the  advance  which  he
made  during  the  nine  or  ten  remaining  years  of
his  peaceable  ministry,  was  by  no  means  greater
than  what,  with  these  advantages,  and  with  the
additional  and  singular  circumstance  of  their  being
no  established  religion  at  Mecca  at  that  time  to
contend  with,  might  reasonably  have  been  ex-
pected. How  soon  his  primitive  adherents  were
let  into  the  secret  of  his  views  of  empire,  or  uvwhat
stage  of  his  undertaking  these  views  first  opened
themselves  to  his  own  mind,  it  is  not  now  easy  to
determine.  The  event  however  was,  that  these
his  first  proselytes  all  ultimately  attained  to  riches
and  honours,  to  the  command  of  armies,  and  the
government  of  kingdoms.*

3.  The  Arabs  deduced  their  descent  from
Abraham  through  the  tine  of  Ishmael. The  in-

•  Gibbon's  Hist.  vol.  ix.  p.  244,  Ac./ed.  Dub.

t  Of  which  Mr.  Gibbon  has  preserved  the  following
specimen—"  When  Mahomet  called  out  in  an  araembly
of  his  family.  Who  among  you  will  be  my  companion
and  my  vizir  7  Ali,  then  only  in  the  fourteenth  year. of
his  age,  suddenly  replied,  O  prophet  1  I  am  the  man  ;—
Whosoever  rises  against  thee,  I  will  dash  out  his  teeth,
tear  out  bis  eyes,  Break  his  legs,  rip  up  hi*  belly.  O  pso-
pfcetl  I  will  be  thy  vizir  over  them."— Vol.  ii.  p.  245.

J  Gibbon,  vol.  ix.  p.  244.


habitants  of  Mecca,  in  arnunon  probably  witkthe
other  Arabian  tribes,  acknowledged,  as,  1  think,
may  dearly  be  collected  from  the  Koran,' one
supreme  Deity,  but  had  associated  with  him  many
objects  of  idolatrous  worship.  The  great  doctrine
with  which  Mahomet  set  out,  was  the  strict  a&d
exclusive  unity  of  God.  Abraham,  he  told  them,
Xheir  illustrious  ancestor;  Ishmael,  the  father  of
their  nation ;  Moses,  the  lawgiver  of  the  Jews ;
and  Jesus,  the  author  of  Christianity :  had  ill  as-
serted the  same  thing:  that  their  followers  had
universally  corrupted  the  truth,  and  that  he  waa
now  commissioned  to  restore  it  to  the  world.  -Was
H  to  be  wondered  at,  that  a  doctrine  so  specious;
and  authorized  by  names,  some  or  other  of  which
were  holden  in  the  highest  veneration  by  every
•description  of  his  hearers,  should  invthe  handa  a/
a  popular  missionary,  prevail  to  the  extent  m
which  Mahomet  succeeded  by  his  pacific  ministry  %
4.  Of  the  institution  which  Mahomet  joined
with  this  fundamental  doctrine,  and  of  the  Koran
in  which  that  institution  is  delivered,  we  discover,
I  think,  two  purposes  that  pervade  the  whole,  viz.
to  make  converts,  and  to  make  his  converts  sol-
diers. The  following  particulars,  amongst  others,
may  be  considered  as  pretty  evident  indications  of
these  designs : '

1.  When  Mahomet  began  to  preaah,  his  ad-
dress to  the  Jews,  to  the  Christians,  and  to  the
Pagan  Arabs,  was,  that  the  religion  which  he
taught,  was  no  otnef  than  what  had  been  origi-
nally their  own. — "  We  believe  in  God,  and  that
which  hath  been  sent  down  unto  us,  and  that  *
which  hath  been  sent  down  unto  Abraham,  and
Ishmael,  and  Isaac,  and.  Jacob,  and  the  Tribes,
and  that  which  was  delivered  unto  Moses  ana
Jesus,  and  that  which  was  delivered  unto  Che  pro-
phets from  their  Lord :  we  make  no  distinction
between  any  of  them."*  "  He  hath  ordained  you
the  religion  which  he  commanded  Noah,  and
which  we  have  revealed  unto  thee,  O  Mohammed ;
and  which  we  commanded  Abraham,  and  Moses,
and  Jesus,  saying,  Observe  this  teligion,  and  be
not  divided  therein,  "t  "  He  hath  chosen  you,  and
hath  not  imposed  on  you  any  difficulty  in  the  re-
ligion which  he  hath  given  you,  the  religion  of
your  lather  Abraham."*

2.  The  author  of  the  Koran  never  ceases  from
describing  the  future  anguish  of  unbelievers?  their
despair,  regret,  penitence,  and  torment  It  is  the  ■
point  which  he  labours  above  all  others.  And*
these  descriptions  are  conceived  in  terms,  which
will  appear  in  no  small  degree  impressive,  even
to  the  modern  reader  of  an  English  translation.
Doubtless  they  would  operate  with,  much  greater
force  upon  the  minds  of  those  to  whom  they  went
immediately,  directed.  The  terror  which  they
seem  "well  calculated  to  inspire,  would  be  to  many
tempers  a  powerful  application.  *

3.  On  the  other  hand}  his  voluptuous  para-
dise ;  his  robes  of  silk,  his  palaces  of  marble,  his
rivers  and  shades,  his  groves  and  couches,  his
wines,  his  dainties ;  and  above*all,  his  seventy-two
virgins  assigned  to  each  of  the  faithful,  of  resplend-
ent, beauty  and  eternal  youth*:"  intoxicated  the
imaginations,  and  seized  the  passions  of  his  East-
ern followers.

4!  But  Mahomet's  highest  heaven-was  reserved
for  those  who  fought  nis  battles,  or  'expended


•  Sale's  Koran,  c.  ii.  p.  17.  t  D*  «.  xUi.  p.  283.

. 1  lb.  c  xxii.  p.  $Bt
81*


K6


EVIDENCES  OF  CHRISTIANITY.


their  fortunes  in  his  caase.—"  Those  beltnere
who  sit  still  at  home,  not  having  any  hurt,  and
those  who  employ  their  fortunes  and  their  per-
sons for  the  religion  of  God,  shall  not  be  held
equal.  God  hath  preferred  those  who  .employ
their  fortunes-  and  their  persons  in  that  cause,  to
a  degree  shave  those  who  sit  at  home.  God  hath
indeed  promised  every  one  Paradise;  but  God
hath  ©referred  those  who  Jtght  for  the  faWt  be-
fore those  who-  sit  still,  by  adding  unto  them  a
great  reward;  by  degree  of  honour  conferred  upon
them  from  him,  and  by  granting  them  forgiveness
and  mercy.'*  Again ;  "  Do  ye  reckon  the  giving
drink  to  the  pilgrims,  and  the  visiting  of  the  holy
temple,  to  be  actions  as  meritorious  as  those  per-
formed by  him  who  believeth  in  God  and  the  last
day,  undjightethforthe  religion  of  God?  They
shall  not  be  held  equal  with  God.— They  who
have  believed  and  fled  their  country,  and  employ-
ed their  substance  and  their  persons  in  the  defence
of  God's  true  religion,  shall  be  in  the  highest  de-
gree of  honour  with  God  f  and  these  are  they
who  shall  be  happy.  The  Lord  sendeth  them
good  tidings  of  mercy  from  him,  and  good  will,
and  of  gardens  wherein  they  shall  enjoy  lasting
pleasures.  They  shall  continue  therein  for  ever ;
lor  with  God  is  a  great  reward.'^  And  once
more;  "Verily  God  hath  purchased  of  the  true
believers  their  souls  and  their  substance,  promis-
ing them  the  enjoyment  of  Paradise,  oar  condition
that  they  Jight  for  the  cautetfGod;  whether
they  slay  or  be  slain,  the  promise  for  the  same  is
assuredly  due  by  the  Law  and  the  Gospel  and  the
Koran."*  § .

5.  His  doctrine  of  predestination  was  applica-
ble, and  was  applied  by  him,  to  the  same  purpose
of  fortifying  and  of  exalting  the  courage  or  bis
adherents. — "  If  any  thing  of  the  matter  had  hap-
pened unto  us,  we  had  not  been  slain  here.  An-
swer :  If  ye  had  been  in  your  houses,  verily  they
would  have  gone  forth  to  fight,  whose  slaughter
was  decreed  to  the  places  where  they  died."U

6.  In  warm  regions,  the  appetite  of  the  sexes
is  ardent,  the  passion  for  inebriating  liquors  mode-
rale.'  In  compliance  with  .this  distinction,  although
Mahomet  laid  a  restraint  upon  the  drinking  of
wine,  in  the  use  of  women  he  allowed  an  almost
■abounded  indulgence.  Four  wives,  with  the
liberty  of  changing  them  at  pleasure,^  together
with  the  persons  of  all  his  captives,**  was  an  irre-
sistible bribe  to  on  Arabian  warrior.  "  God  is
minded  (says  he,  speaking  of  this  very  subject)
to  make  his  religion  light  unto  you  ;*  for  man  was
created  weak."  How  different  this  from  the  un-
accommodating purity  of  the  Gospel!  How
would  Mahomet  nave  succeeded  with  the  Chris-
tian lesson  in  his  mouth,—"  Whosoever  looketh
upon  a  woman  to  lust  after  her,  hath  committed
adultery  with  her  already  in  his  heart  1"  It  must
be  added,  that  Mahomet  did  not  enter  upon  the


•  Bale's  Koran,  e.  iv.  p.  73.  t  H>«  c  ii.  p.  151.

1  lb.  *  ix  p.  164.

§  •*  The  sword  (sailh  Mahomet)  is  the  key  of  heaven
and  of  hells  a  drop  of  blood  shed  in  lln-.causo  of  Cod,  a
night  spent  in  anus,  is  of  mon;  avail  than  two  months'
lasting  or  prayer.  Whowvnvr  falls  in  haitlc,  his  ninx
are  forgiven  at  the  day  of  judgment ;  his  wounds  shall
be  resplendent  as  vermillion,  and  odoriferous  as  musk  ;
and  the  loss  ot  his  limbs  shall  be  supplied  by  the  wings
of  angels  and  cherubim.'V-Giboon.  vol.  ix.  p.  250.

.  I  Sale's  Koran,  ciii.  p.  54.  IT  lb.  c  iv.  p.  63.

**Oibboa,voiix.p.aa5.


Drehibitian  of  wine,  till  the  fourth  year  of  the
Hegira,  or  seventeenth  of  his  mission,*  when  hi*
military  successes  (tad  completely  established  his
authority.  The  same  observation  holds  of  the
fast  of  the  Ramadan,t  and  of  the  moat  labo-
rious part  of  his.  institution,  the  pilgrimage  to
Mecca.*

What  has  hitherto  been  coDeeted  from  the  re-
cords of  the  Mussulman  history,  relates  to  the
twelve  or  thirteen  years  of  Mahomet's  peaceable
preaching ;  which  part  alone  of  hie  life  and  enter-
prise admits  of  the  smallest  comparison  with  the
origin  of  Christianity.  A  new  scene  is  now  un-
folded. The  chy  of  Medina,  distant  about  ten
days'  journey  from  Mecca,  was  at  that  time  dis-
tracted by  the  hereditary  contentions  oftwo  hostile
tribes.  These  feuds  were  exasperated  by  the
mutual  persecutions  of  the  Jews  and  Christians,
and  of  the  different  Christian  sects  by  which  the-
city  was  inhabited.!  The  religion  of  Mahomet
presented,  in  some  measure,  a  point  of  union  or
compromise  to  these  divided  opinions.  It  em-
braced the  principles  which  were  common  to  then
all.  Each  party  saw  in  it  an  honourable  acknow-
ledgment of  the  fundamental  truth  of  their  own
system.  To  the  Pagan  Arab,  eomewhat  imbued
with  the  sentiments  and  knowledge  of' bis  Jew-
ish or  Christian  fellow-citizens.  h\  offered  ne>
offensive,  or  very  improbable  theology.  This,
recommendation  procured  to  Mahxmietaniem.  a
more  favourable  reception  at  Medina,,  than  its
author  had  been  able,  by  twelve  years1  painful
endeavours,  to  obtain  for  it  at  Mecca.  Yet,  after
all,  the  progress  of  the  religion  was  incoiiaiderahle.
His  missionary  could  only  collect  a  congregation
of  forty  persons.ll It  waa  not  a  religious,  but  a

Kriitical  association,  which  ultimately  introduced
lahomet  into  Medina. '  Harassed,  as  it  should
seem,  and  disgusted  by.  the  long  continuance  of
factions  and  disputes,  the  inhabitants  of  that  city
saw  in  the  admission  of  the  prophet's  authority,  a
rest  from  the  miseries  which  they  had  suffered,
and  a  suppression  of  the  violence  and  fury  whioo.
they  had  learned  to  condemn.  After  an  embassy,
therefore,  composed  of  believers  and  unbelievers^
and-  of  persons  of  both  tribes,  with  whom  a  treaty
was  coneluded  of  strict  alliance  and  support,  Ma-
homet madejiis  public  entry,  and  was  received  a*
the  sovereign  of  Medina

From  .this  time,  or  soon  after  this  time,  the  im-
postor changed  his  language  and  his  conduct.
Having  now  a  town  at  his  command,  where  to
ami  his  party,  and  to  head  them  with  security,  he
enters  upon  new  counsels.  He  how  pretends
that  a  divine  commission  is  given  him  to  attack
the  infidels,  to  destroy  idolatry,  and  to  set  op  the
true  faith  by  the  sword.**  An  early  victory  over
a  very  superior  force,  achieved  by  conduct  and
bravery,  established  the  renown  of  his  armsvand
of  his  personal  charactcr.tt  Every  year  after  this
was  marked  by  battles  or  assassinations.  The
nature  and  activity  of  Mahomet's  future  exertions
may  be  estimated  from  the  computation,  that,  in
the  nine  following  years  of  his  life,  he  commanded


*  Mod.  Tniv.  Hist.  vol.  i.jj.  !2flL  f  f».  p,  113.

{This  latter,  however,  already  prevailed  amongst
the  Arab*,  and  had  grown  out  of  their  excessive  venera-
tion fhr  the  Caaba.  Mahomet's  law,  in  Ibis  respect,
wns  rather  a  compliance  than  an  innovation.— sale's
Prelim.  Disc.  p.  123.

§  Mod  Univ.  Hist.  VOL  i.  p.  100. |  lb.  p.  85. T  Ibid.

•♦  lb.  vol.  i.  p.  88.  ftVkuofBedr,ia>10a


EVIDENCES  OP  CHRISTIANITY.


m


and  undertook,


eutenants,


i  this  time  we  have  nothing  left  to  account
for,  but  that  Mahomet  should  collect  an  army,
'that  his  army  should  conquer,  and  that  his  religion
fchould  proceed  together' with  his  conquests.  The
etdinary  experience  of  human-  affairs,  leaves  us
little  to.wonder  at,  in  any  of  these  effects:  and
they  were  likewise  each  assisted  by  peculiar  faci-
lities. From  all  sides,  the  roving  Arabs  crowded
mind  the  standard  of  religion  and  plunder,  of
freedom  and  victory,  of  arms  and  rapine.  Beside
the  highly  painted  Joys  of  a  carnal  paradise,  Ma-
homet rewarded  his  followers  in  thjs  world  with
a  liberal  division'  of  the  spoils,  and  with  the  per-
sons of  their  female  captives.?-  The  condition  of
Arabia,  occupied  by  small  independent  tribes,
exposed  it  to  the  impression,  and  yielded  to  the
yrogress,  of  a  firm  and  resolute  army.  After  the
reduction  of  his  native  peninsula',  the  weakness
also  of  the  Roman  provinces  on  the  north  and
the  west  as  well  as  the  distract


distracted  state  of  the
Persian  empire  on  the  east,  facilitated  the  suc-
eesstul  invasion-  of  neighbouring  countries.  That
Mahomet's  conquests  should  carry  his  religion
along  with  them,  will  excite  little  surprise,  when
we  know  the  conditions  which  he  proposed  to  the
vanquished.  Death  or  conversion  was  the  only
chaise  offered  to  idolaters.  "  Strike  off  their
heads  1  strike  off  all  the  ends  of  their  fingers  !t
kill  the  idolaters-  wheresoever  ye  shall  find
them  !"§  To  the  Jews  and  Christians  was  lea
the  somewhat  milder  alternative  of  subjection  and
tribute,  if  they  persisted  in  their  own  religion^  or
of  an  equal  participation  in  the  rights  and  liberties,
the  honours  and  privileges,  of  the  faithful,  if  they
embraced  the  religion  of  their  conquerors.  "  Ye
Christian  dogs*  you  knowyour  option,  the  Koran,
the  tribute,  or  the  sword."ll  The  corrupted
state  of  Christianity  in  the  seventh  century,
and  the  contentions  of  its  sects,  unhappily  so
.fell  in  with  men's  care  of  their,  safety,  or  their
fiostunes,  as  to  induce  many  to  forsake  its  pro-
fession. -Add  to  all  which,  thai  Mahomet's
victories  not  only  operated  by  the  natural  effect  of
conquest,  but  that  they  were  constantly  repre-
sented, both  to  his  friends  and  enemies,  as  divine
nWiarations  in  his  favour.  Success  was  evidence.
Prosperity  carried  with  it*. not  only  influence,  but
proof.  "  Ye  have  already  (says  he,  after  the  bat-
tle of  Beat)  had  a  miracle  shown  you,  in  two
armies  which  attacked  each  other;  one  army
faurht  for  God's  true  religion,  but  the  other  were
infidels."*  Again;  "  Ye  slew  not  those  who
were  slain,  at  Bedr,  but  God  slew  them.— If  ye
^desire  a  decision  of  the  matter  between  us,  now
hath  a  decinon  come  unto  you."**

Many  more  passages  might  be  collected  out  of
the  Koran  to  the  same  effect.  But  they,  are  unne-
cessary. The  success  of  Mahometanism  during
tins,  and  indeed,  every  future  period  of  its  history,
bean  so  little  resemblance  to  tne  early  propagation
of  Christianity,  that  no  .inference  whatever  can
Justly  be  drawn  from  it  to  the  prejudice  of  the
Christian  argument  For,  what  are  we  compar-
ing! A  Galilean  peasant  accompanied  by  a  few


(•  Mod.  Univ.  Hist.  vol.  I.  p.  955.
Gibson,  vol.  ix.  p.  355.
Sale's  Koran,  c,  viii.  p.  140. 8  lb.  c  ix.  p.  149.
Gibbon,  vol.  ix.  p.  337. IT  Sale's  Koran,  c  iii.  p.  36.
♦♦Ifc*viii.p,14JL


fishermen,  with  a  conqneror  at  the  head  of  hi*
army.  Wee  compare  Jesus  without  fores)  without
power,  without  support,  without  one- external  cir-
cumstance of  attraction  or  influence,  prevailing
against  the  prejudices,  the  learning,  the  hierarchy,
of  his  country ;  against  the  ancient  religious  opi-
nions, the  pompous  religious  rites,- the  philosophy,
the  wisdom,' the  authority  of  the  Roman  empire,
in  the  most  polished  and  enlightened  period '  of  its
existence.;  with  Mahomet  making  his  way  amongst
Arabs;  collecting  followers  in  the  midst  of  con-
quests and  triumphs,  in  the  darkest  ages  ah$l'coun-
tries  of  ihe  world,  and  when  success  in  arms  not
only  operated  by  that  command  of  men's  wills  and
persons  which  attends  prosperous  undertakings,
but  was  considered  as  a  sure  testimony  of  divine
approbation.  That  multitudes,  persuaded  by  this
argument,  should  join  the  train  of  a  victorious
chief;  that  still  greater  multitudes  should,  without
any  argument,  bow  down  before  irresistible  power;
is  a  conduct  in  which  we  cannot  see  much  to  sur-
prise us ;  in  which  we  can  see  nothing  that  re-
sembles the  causes  by  which  the  eetRbhshment  of
Christianity  was  effected.

The  success,  therefore,  of  ^Mahometanism,
stands  not  in  the  way  of  this  important  conclusion;
that  the  propagation  of  Christianity,  in  the  man-
ner and  under  the  circumstances  in  which  it  was
propagated,  is  a  unique  in  the  history  of  the  spe-
cies. A  Jewish  peasant  overthrew  the  religion  of
the  world.

I  have,  nevertheless,  placed  the  prevalency  of
the  religion  amongst  the  auxiliary  arguffi*n!s  of
its  truth ;  because,  whether  it  had  prevailed  or  not,
or  whether  its  prevalency  can  or  cannot  be-  ac-
counted for,  the  direct  argument  remains  still.  It
id  still  true  that  a  great  number  of  men  upon  the
spot,  personally  connected  with  the  history  and  with
the  author  of  the  religion-,  were>  induced  by  what
they  heard,  and  saw,  and  knew,  not  only  to  change
their  former  opinions,  but  to  give  up  their  tune;
and  sacrifice  their  ease,  to  traverse,  seas  and  king-
doms without  rest  and  without  weariness,  to  com-
mit themselves  to  extreme  dangers,  to  undertake
incessant  toils,  to  undergo  grievous  sufferings,  and
all  this-,  solely  in  consequence,  and  in  support,  of
their  belief  of  facts,  whicji,  if  true,  establish  the
truth  of  the  religion,  which,  if  false,  they  must
have  known  to  be  sq.  -


PART  III.

A  BRIEF  CONSIDERATION OP SOME  POPULAR
OBJECTIONS.


CHAPTER  I.


The  Diacrepancie*  between  the  several  Gospel*.

I  know  not  a  more  rash  or  unphilosophical  con-
duct of  the  understanding,  than  to  reject  the  sub-
stance of  a  story,  by  reason  of  some  diversity  in
the  circumstances  with  which  it  is  related.  '-The
usual  character  of  human  testimony  is  substantial
truth  under  circumstantial  variety.  This  is  what
the  daily  experience  of  courts  of  justice  teaches.
When  accounts  of  a  transaction  come  from  the
mouths  of  ditlerent  witnesses,  it  is  seldom  that  it


368


EVIDENCES  OP  CHRISTIANITY.


.  «is  not  possible  to  pick  out  apparent  or  real  in-
consistencies  between  them.  These  inconsisten-
cies are  studiously  displayed  by  ati  adverse
pleader,  but  oftentimes  with  little  impression
upon  the  minds  of  the  judges.  On  the  contrary,
a  close  and  minute  agreement  induces  the  suspi-
cion of  confederacy  and  fraud.  When  written
historic*  touch  upon  the  same  scenes  of  action,  the
comparison  almost  always  affords  ground  for  a
like  reflection.  Numerous,  and  sometimes  import-
ant, variations  present  themselves;  not  seldom
also,  absolute  an*  final  contradictions;  yet  neither
one  nor  the  other,  are  deemed  sufficient  to  shake
the  credibility  of  the  main  fact.  The  embassy  of
the  Jews  to  deprecate  the  execution  of  Glaudian's
order  to  place  his  statue  in  their  temple;  Philo
places  in  harvest,  Josephus  in  seed-time »  both
contemporary  writers:  No  reader  is  led  by  this
inconsistency  to  doubt,  whether  such  an  embassy
was  sent,  or  whether  such  an  order  was  given.
Our  own  history  supplies  examples  of  the  same
kind.  In  the  account  of  the  Marquis  of  Arjjyle's
death,  in  the  reign  of  Charles  the  Second,  we  have
a  very  remarkable  contradiction.  Lord  Claren-
don relates  that  he  was  condemned  to  be  hanged,
which  was  performed  the  same  day ;  on  the  con-
trary, Burnet,  "Woodrow,  Heath,  fichard,  concur
in  stating  that  he  was  beheaded ;  and  tha|  he  was
condemned  upon  the  Saturday,  and  executed  upon
the  Monday.*  Was  any  reader  of  English  his-
tory ever  sceptic  enough  to  raise  from  hence  a
question,  whether  the  Marquis  of  Afgyle  was
executed  or  Jwt  1  Yet  this  ought  to  be  left  in  un-
certainty, according  to  the  principles  upon  which
the  Christian  history  has  sometimes  been  attacked.
Dr.  Middleton  contended,  that  the  different  hours"
of  the  day  assigned  to  the  crucifixion  oL  Christ,
by  John  and  by  the  other  evangelists,  did  not  ad-
mit of  the  reconcilement  which  learned  men  had
proposed;  and  then  concludes  the  discussion  with-
this  hard  remark :  "  We  must  be  forced,  with  seve-
ral of  the  critics,  to  leave  the  difficulty  just  as  we
found  it,  chargeable  with  all  the  consequences  of
Manifest  inconsistency. "t  But  what  are  these  con-
sequences 1  By  no  means  the  discrediting  of  the
history  as  to  the  principal  fact,  by  a  repugnancy
(even  supposing  that  repugnancy  be  not  resolva-
ble into  different  modes  of  computation)  in  the
time  of  the  day  in  which  it  is.  said  to  have  taken
place.

A  great  deal  of  the  discrepancy  observable  in
the  Gospel,  arises  from  omission  ;  from  a  fact  or
a  passage  of  Christ's  life  being  noticed  by  one
writer,  which  is  unnoticed  by  another.  Now,
omission  is  at  all  times  a  very  uncertain  ground
of  objection.  .  We  perceive  it," not  only  in  the  com-
parison of  different  writers,  but  even  in  the  same
writer  when  compared  with  himself.  There  are
a  great  many  particulars,  and  some  of  them  of  im-
portance, mentioned  by  Josephus  in  his  Antiqui-
ties, which,  as  we  should  have  supposed,  ought  to
have  been  put  down  by' him  in  their  place  in  the
Jewish  ware.*  Suetonius,  Tacitus,  Dio  Cassius,
have,  all  three,  written  of  the  reign  of  Tiberius.
Each  has  mentioned  many  things  omitted  by  the
rest,«  yet  no  objection  is  from  thence  taken  to  the


*  See  Biop.  Britann.  .  *

t  Middlemen's  Reflection!  answered  by  Benson.  Hist.
Christ,  vol.  iH.  p.  50.
i  Lardner,  Cred.  part  i.  vol.  iivp»  735, 4c.
J  Ibid,  p.  743,


respective  credit  of  their  histories.  We  have  in
our  own  times,  if  there  were  not  something  inde-
corous in  the  comparison,  the  life  of  an  eminent
person,  written  by  three  of  his  friends,  in  which
there  is  very  great  variety  in  the. incidents  selected
by  them]  some  apparent,  and  perhaps  some  real
contradictions ;  yet  without  any  impeachment  of
the  substantial  truth  of  their  account*, of  the  an*
thenticity  of  the  books,  of  the  competent  inmrm-
ation  or  general  fidelity  of  the  writers.

But  these  discrepancies  will  be  still  more  nu-
merous, -  when  men  do  not  write  histories,  but
memoirs ;  which  is  perhaps  the  true  name  and
proper  description  of  out  Gospels:  that  is,  when
they  do  not  undertake,  or  ever  meant,  to  deli-
ver,  in  order  of  time,  a  regular  and  complete  ac-
count of  all  the  things  of  importance,  which  the
person,  who  is  the  aunject  of  their  history,  did  or
said ;  but  only,  out  of  many  similar  ones,  to  give
such  passages,  or  such  actions  and  discourses,  as
offered  thctiwelves  more  immediately  to  their  at-
tention, came  in  the  way  of  their  inquiries,  oc-
curred to  their  recollection,  or  were  suggested  by
their  particular  design  at  the  time  of  writing.

This  particular  design  may  appear  BonietuneSj
but  not  always,  nor  often.  Thus  I  think  that  the
particular  design  which  Saint  Matthew  had  in
view  whilst  he  was  writing  the  history  of  the  re-
surrection, was  to  attest  the  faithful  performance
of  Christ'rpromise  to  bis  disciples  to  go  before
them  into  Galilee ;  because  he  alone,  except  Mark,
who  seems  to  have  taken  it  from  him,  has  record-
ed this  promise,  and  he  alone  has  confined  his
narrative  to  that  single  appearance  to  the  disciples
which  fulfilled  it.  Ft  was  the  preconcerted,  the
great  and  meat  public  manifestation  of  our  lord's
person.  It  was  the  thing  which  dwelt  upon  Saint
Matthew'smind,  and  he  adapted  his  narrative  to  it
But,  that  there  js  nothing  in  Saint  Matthew's  lan-
guage, which  negatives  other  appearances,  or  which
imports  that  this  bis  appearance  to  his  disciples  in
Galilee  in  pursuance  of  his  promise,  was  his  first
or  only  appearance,  is  made  pretty  .evident  by
Saint  Mark's  Gospel,  which  uses  the  same  terms
concerning  the  appearance  in  Galilee  as-  Saint
Matthew  uses,  yet  itself  records  two  other  appear-
ances prior  to  this :  "  Go  your  way,  tell  his  disci-
ples and  Peter,  that  he  goeth' before  you  into  Ga-
lilee :  there  shall  ye  see  nim  as  he  said  unto  you."
-{xvi.  7.)  We  might  be  apt  to  infer  from  these
words,  that  this  was  the  Jirst  time  they  were  to
see  him :  at  least,  we  might  infer  it,  with  as  much
reason  as  we  draw  the  inference  from  the  same
words  in  Matthew :  yet  the  historian  himself  did
not  perceive  that  he  was  leading  his  readers  to
any  such  conclusion ;  for  in  the  twelfth  and  two
following  verses  of  this  chapter,  he  informs  us  -of
two  appearances,  which,  byl comparing  the  order
of  events,  are  shown  to  have  been  prior  to  the  ap-
pearance in  Galilee.  "  He  appeared'  in  another
form  unto  two  of  them,  as  they  walked,  and  went
into  the  country :  and  they  went  and  told  it  unto
the  residue,  neither  believed  they  them :  afterward
he  appeared  unto  the  eleven,  as  they  sat  at  meat,
and  upbraided  them  with  their  unbelief,  because
they  believed  not  them  that  had  seen  him  after  he
was  risen."

Probably  the  same  observation,  concerning  the
particular  design  which  guided  the  historian,
may  be  of  use  in  comparing  many  other  passages
of  the  Gospels.


EVIDENCES  OP  CHRISTIANITY.


CHAPTER  H.
.Erroneous  Opinions  imputed  to  the  Apostles.

A  species  of  candour  which  is  shown  towards
every  other  book,  is  sometimes  refused  to  the
Scriptures ;  and  that  is,  the  placing  of  a  distinction
between  judgment  and  testimony.  We  do  not
usually  question  the  credit  of  a  writer,  by  reason
of  an  opinion  he  may  have  delivered  upon  subjects
unconnected  with  his  evidence :  and  evei\  upon
subjects  connected  with  his  account,  or  mixed
with  it  in  the  same  discourse  or  writing,  we  natu-
rally separate  tacts  from  opinions,  testimony  from
observation,  narrative  from  argument

To  apply  this  equitable  consideration  to  the
Christian  records,  much  controversy  and  much
objection  has  been  raised  ^concerning  the  quota-
tions of  the  Old  Testament  found  in  the  New;
some  of  which  quotations,  it  is  said,  are  applied  in
a  sense,  and  to  events,  apparently  different  from
that  which  they  bear,  ah<jt  from  those  to  which
they  belong,  in  the  original.  It  is  probable  to  my
apprehension,  that  many  of  those  quotations  were
intended  by  the  writers  of  the  New  Testament  as
nothing  more  than  accommodations.  They  quoted
passages  of  their  Scripture,  which  suited,  and  fell
m  with,  the  occasion  before  them,  without  always
undertaking  to  assert,  that  the  occasion  was  in
the  view  of  the  author  of  the  words.  Such  ac-
eonunodations  of  passages  from  old  authors,  from
books  especially  which  are  in  every  one's  hands,
are  common  with' writers  of  all  countries;  but
in  none,  perhaps,  were  more  to  be  expected
than  in  the  writings  of  the  Jews,  whose  litera-
ture was  almost  entirely  confined  to  their  Scrip-
tores.  Those  prophecies  which  are  alleged  with
more  solemnity,  and  which  are  accompanied
with  a  precise  declaration,  that  they  originally
respected  the  event  then  related,  are,  I  think,  truly
alleged;  But  were  it  otherwise;  is  the  judg-
ment of  the  writers  of  the  New  Testament,  m  in-
terpreting passages  of  the  Old,  or  sometimes,  per-
haps, in  receiving  established  interpretations,  so
connected  either  with  their  veracity,  or  with  their
means  of  information  concerning  what  was  passing
in  their  own  times,  as  that  a  critical  mistake,  even
were  it  dearly  made  out,  should  overthrow  their
historical  credit  ?— Does  it  diminish  it?  Has  it
any  thing  to-do  with  it  1

Another  error  imputed  to  the  first  Christians,
was  the  expected  approach  of  the  day  of  judgment.
I  would  introduce  this  objection  by  a  remark  upon
what  appears  to  me  a  somewhat  similar  example.
Our  Saviour,  speaking  to  Peter  of  John,  said,
"If  I  will  that  be  tarry  till  I  come,  what  is  that  to
thee  T**  These  words,  we  find,  had  been  so  mis-
eonBtrued,  as  that  a  report  from  thence  "  went
abroad  among  the  brethren^  that  that-  disciple
should  net  die."  Suppose  that  this  had  come  down
to  us  amongst'the  prevailing  opinions  of  the  early
Christians,  and  that  the  particular  circumstance,
from  which  the  mistake  sprang,  had  been  lost
(which,  humanly  speaking,  was  most  likely  to
have  been  the  case,)  some,  at  this  day,  would  have
been  ready  to  regard  and  quote  the  error,  as  an
impeachment  of  the  whole  Christian  system.  Yet
with  how  little  justice  such  a  conclusion  would
have  been  drawn,  or  rather  such  a  presumption
taken  up,  the  information  which  we  happen  to

•Jobiixxi.W.
3A


8*9


possess  enables  us  now  to  perceive.  To  those"
who  think  that  the  Scriptures  lead  us  to  Delicts,
that  the  early  Christians,  and  even  the  apostles,
expected  the  approach  of  the  day  of  judgment  in
their  own  times,  the  same  reflection  will  occur,  aa
that  which  we  have  made  with  respect  to  the  more
partial,  perhaps,  and  temporary,  but  still  no  less
ancient  error  concerning  the  duration  ofSt.  John's
life.  It  was  an  error,  it  may  be  likewise  said,
which  would  effectually  hinder  those  who  enter-
tained it  from  acting  the  part  of  impostors.

The  difficulty  which  attends  fhe  subject  of  the
present  chapter,  is  contained  in  this  question^  If
we  once  admit  the  fallibility  of  the  apostolic  judg-
ment, where  are  we  to  stop,  or  in  what  can  we
rely  upon  it?  To  which  question,  as  arguing  with
unbelievers,  and  as  arguing  for  the  substantial
truth  of  the  Christian  history,  and  for  that  alone,
it  is  competent  to  the  advocate  of  Christianity  to

ply,  Give  me  the  apostles'  testimony^  and  I  do.


not  stand  in  need  of  their  judgment:  give  me  the
facts,  and  I  have  complete  security  for  every  con-
clusion I  want.

Hut  although  I  think  that  it  is  competent  to  the
Christian  apologist  to  return  this  answer;  I  do
not  think  that  it  is  the  only  answer  which  the  ob-
jection is  capable  of  receiving.  The  two  following
cautions,  founded,  I  apprehend,  in  the  most -rea-
sonable distinctions,  will  exclude  all  uncertainty
upon  this  head  which  can  be  attended  with  dan-
ger.

First,  to  separate  what  was  the  object  of  the
apostolic  mission,  and  declared  by  them  to  be  so,
from  what  was  extraneous  to  it,  or  only  incident-
ally connected  with  it.  Of  points  clearfy  extra-
neous to  the  religion,  nothing  need  be  said.  Of
points  incidentally  connectedf  with  it,  something
may  be  added.  Demoniacal  possession  is  one  of
these  points :  concerning  the  reality  of  which,  aa
this  place  will  not  admit  the  examination,  or  even
the  production  of  the  argument  on  either  side  of
the  question,  it  would  be  arrogance  in  me  to  deli-
ver any  judgment:  And  it  is  unnecessary.  For
what  I  am  concerned  to  observe  is,  that  even  they
who  think  it  was  a  general,  but  erroneous  opinion,
of  those  times;  and  that  the  writers  of  the  New
Testament,  in  common  with  other  Jewish  writers
of  that  age,  fell  into  the  manner  of  speaking  and
of  thinking  upon  the  subject, -which  then  univer-
sally prevailed,  need  not  be  alarmed  by  the  con-
cession, as  though  they  had  any  tiling  to  fear  from
it,  for  the  truth  of  Christianity.  The  doctrine
was  not  what  Christ  brought  into  the  world.  It
appears  in  the. Christian  records,  incidentally  and
accidentally,  as  being  the  subsisting  opinion  of  the
age  and  country  in  which  his  ministry  was  exer-
cised. It  was  no  part  of  the  object  of  his  revela-
tion, to  regulate  men's  opinions  concerning  the
action  of  spiritual  substances  upon  animal  bodies.
At  any  rate  it  is  unconnected  with  testimony.  If
a  dumb  person  was  by  a  word  restored  to  the  use
-of  his  speech,  it  signifies  tittle  to  what  cause  the
dumbness  was  ascribed;  and  the  like  of  every
other  cure  wrought  upon  those  who  are  said  to
have  been  possessed.  The  malady  was  real,  the
cure  was  real,  whether  the  popular  explication  of
the  cause  was  well  founded,  or  not.  The  matter
of  fact,  the  change,  so  far  as  it  was  an  object  of
sense,  or  oLtestimony,  was  in  either  case  the  same.

Secondlf,  that,  in  reading  the  auostolic  writ-
ings, we  distinguish  between  their  doctrines  and
their  arguments. Their  doctrines  came  to  then


870


EVIDENCES  OF  CHRISTIANITY.


Iry  imfatlab  properly  to  called  K  yet  in  propound-
ing then  doctrine*  in  their  writings  or  discourses,
they  were  wont  to  illustrate,  rapport,  and  enforce
them,  by  such  analogies,  anjuments,  and  consider-
ations, as  their  own  thoughts  suggested..  Thus
the  call  of  the'Gentilea,  that  is,  the  admission  of
the  Gentiles  to  the  Christian  profession  without  a
previous  subjection  to  the  law  of  Moses,  was  im-
parted to  the  apostles  by  revelation,  and  was  at-
tested by  the  miracles  which  attended  the  Chris-
tian ministry  among  them.  The  apostles'  own
assurance  of  the  matter  tested  upon  this  founda-
tion. Nevertheless,  Saint  Paul,  when  treating
of  the  subject,  offers  a  great  variety  of  topics  in  its
proof  and  ▼indication.  The  doctrine  itself  must
Be  received:  but  it  is  not  necessary,  in  order  to
defend  Christianity,  to  defend  the  propriety  of
every  comparison,  or  the  validity  of  every  argu-
ment, which  the  apostle  has  brought  into  the  dis-
cussionu  The  same  observation  applies  to  some
other  instances;  and  is,  in  my  opinion,  very  well
founded ;  "  When  divine  writers  argue  upon  any
point,  we  are  always  bound  to  believe  the  conclu-
aione  that  their  reasonings  end  in,  as  parte  of  di-
vine revelation:  but  we  are  not  bound  to  be  able
to  make  out,  or  even  to  assent  to,  all  the  premises
made  use  of  by  them,  in  their  whole  extent,  un-
less it  appear  plainly,  that  they  affirm  the  pre-
mises as  expressly  as  they  do  the  conclusions
proved  by  them.'*


CHAPTER  III.

Th*  Connexion  o/  Christianity  with  th*  Jetmh
Hutory.

Undoubtedly  our  Saviour  assumes  the  divine
origin  of  the  Mosaic  institution:  and.  independ-
ently of  bis  authority.  I  conceive  it  to  be  very  dif-
ficult to  assign  any  other  cause  for  the  commence-


-  or  existence  of  that  institution;  especially
for  the  singular  circumstance  of  the  Jews'  ad-
hering to  the  unity,  when  every  other  people  slid
into  polytheism;  for  their  being  men  in  religion,
children  in  every  thing  else ;  behind  other  nations
in  the  arte  of  peace  and  war,  superior  to  the  most
improved  in  their  sentiments  and  doctrines  re-
lating to  the  Dekv.t  Undoubtedly,  also,  our  Sa-
viour recognises  the  prophetic  character  of  many
of  their  ancient  writers.  So  far,  therefore,  we
are  bound  as  Christians  to  go. But  to  make


+ Burnet's  Expos,  art.  6.

t  uLn  the  doctrine,  for  example,  of  the  unity,  the
eternity,  the  omnipotence,  the  omniscience,  the  omni-
presence, the  wisdom,  and  the  goodness,  of  God  ;  in
their  opinions  concerning  Providence,  and  the  creation,
preservation,  and  government  of  the  world."  Campbell
on  Mir.  p.  907.  To  which  we  may  add,  in  the  act*  of
their  religion  not  being  accompanied  either  with  cruel-,
ties  or  imparities :  in  the  religion  itself  being  free  from
a  species  of  superstition  whicorprcvailed  universally  in
the  popular  religions  of  the  sneient  world,  and  which  is
to  be  found  perhaps  in  all  religions  that  have  their  ori-
gin in  human  artifice  and  credulity,  viz.  fanciful  con-
nexions between  certain  appearances  and  actions,  and
the  destiny  of  nations  or  individuals.  Upon  these  con-
ceits rested  the  whole  train  of  auguries  and  auspices,
which  formed  so  much  even  of  the  serious  part  of  the
religions  of  Greece  and  Borne,  and  of  the  charms  and
incantations  which  were  practised  in  those  'countries
by  the  common  people.  Prom  every  thing  of  this  sort
the  religion  of  the  Jews,  and  the  Jews  alone,  was  free.
—Vide  Priestley's  Lectures  on  the  Troth  of  the  Jewish
,1794


(^mstisnitysnswe*abiewith  its  fife,  for  the  cir-
cumstantial truth  of  each  separate  passage  of  the
Old  Testament,  the  genuineness  of  every  book,
the  mfonnataon,  fidelity,  and  judgment  of  every
writer  in  it,  is  to  bring,  I  will  not  say  great,  but
unnecessary  difficulties,  into  the  whole  system.
These  boohs  were  universally  lead  and  received
by  the  Jews  of  our  Saviour's  time.  He  and  his
in  common  with  all  other  Jews,  referred


to  them,  alluded  to  them,  used  them.  Yet,  except
where  he  expressly  ascribes  a  divine  authooty  to
particular  predictions,  I  do  not  know  that  wer  can
strictly  draw  any  conclusion  from  the  books  be-
ing so  used  and  applied,  beside  the  proof,  which
it  unquestionably  is,  of  their  notoriety,  and  recep-
tion at  that  time.  In  this  view,  our  Scriptures
aflbrd  a  valuable  testimony  to  those  of  the  Jews,
But  the  nature  of  this  testimony  ought  to  be  un-
derstood. It  is  surely  very  different  from  what  it
is  sometimes  represented  to  be.  a  specific  ratifica-
tion of  each  particular  met  ana  opinion ;  and  net
only  of  each  particular  met,  but  of  the  i


signed  for  every  action,  together  with  the  judg-
ment of  praise  or  dispraise  bestowed  upon  them.
Saint  James,  in  his  Epistle,*  save,  *" *
heard  of  the  patience  of  Job,  and  have


end  of  the  Lord."  Notwithstanding  this  text,  the
reality  of  Job's  history,  and  even  the  existence  of
such  a  person,  has  been  always  deemed  a  fair
subject  of  inquiry  and  dienissinn  amongst  Chris-
tian divines.  Saint  James's  authority  hi  consider-
ed as  good  evidence  of  the  existence  of  the  book


11  Now.  as  Jannes  and  Jambres  withstood  Moses,
so  do  these  also  resist  the  truth."  These  names
are  not  found  in  the  Old  Testament  And  H  is
uncertain,  whether  Saint  Vvanl  took  them  from
some  apocryphal  writing  then  extant,  or  from  tra-
dition.*But  no  one  ever  unarmed,  that  Saint  Paul
is  here  asserting  the  authority  of  the  writing,  if  it
was  a  written  account  which  he  quoted,  or  making
himself  answerable  for  the  authenticity  of  the  tra-
dition ;  much  less,  that  he  so  involves  himself  with
either  of  these  questions,  as  that  the  credit  of  his
own  history  and  mission  should  depend  upon  the
feet,  whether  Jannes  and  Jambres  withstood  Mo-
ses, or  not  For  what  reason  a  more  rigorous  in-
terpretation should  be  put  upon  other  references,
it  is  difficult  to  know.  I  do  not  mean,  that  other
passages  of  the  Jewish  history  stand  upon  no  bett
ter  evidence  than  the  history  of  Job,  or  of  Jannes
and  Jambres,  (I  think  much  otherwise;)  but  I
mean,  that  a  reference  in  the.  New  Testament  to
a  passage  in  the  Old,  does  not  so  fix  its  authority,
as  to  exclude  all  inquiry  into  its  credibility,  or  in-
to the  separate  reasons  upon  which  that  credibili-
ty is  founded;  and  that  it  is  an  unwarrantable,  as
well  as  unsafe  rule  to  lay  down  r*wiftftraiqg  the
Jewish  history,  what  was  never  laid  down  con-
cerning any  other,  that  either  every  particular  of
it  must  be  true,  or  the  whole  false.

I  have  thoughtit  necessary  to  state  this  point  ex-
plicitly, .because  a  oshion,  revived  by  Voltaire,  and
pursued  by  the  disciples  of  his  school,  seems  to  nave
much  prevailed  of  late,  of  attacking  Christianity
throng n  the  sides  of  Judaism.  •  Some  objections  of
this  class  are  founded  in  misconstruction,  some  in
exaggeration ;  but  all  proceed  upon  a  supposition,


v.a


t  Chap.  ill.  &


EVIDENCES  OP  CHRISTIANITY.


171


which  hat  not  ben  made  out  by  argument,  viz
that  the  attestation,  which  the  Author  and  fin*
teachers  of  Christianity  gave  to  the  divine  mission
of  Moses  and  the  prophets,  extends  to  every  point


and  portion  of  the  Jewish  J


and  so  extends


as  to  make  Christianity  responsible  in  its  own
credibility,  for  the  circumstantial  troth  (I  had  al-
most said  for  the  critical  exactness)  of  every  nar-
rative contained  in  the  Old  Testament.


CHAPTER  IV.  ~

Refection  0/  Christianity.

Wb  acknowledge  that  the  Christian  religion,
although  it  converted  great  numbers,  did  not  pro-
duce a  universal,  or  even  a  general  conviction  in
tile  minds  of  men,  of  the  age  and  countries  in
which  it  appeared.  And  this  want  of  a  more  com-
plete and  extensive  success,  is  Allied  the  rejection
of  the  Christian  history  aixf  miracles;  and  has
been  thought  by  some  to  form  a  strong  objection
to  the  reality  of  the  fects  which  the  history  con-


The  matter  of  the  objection  divides  itself  into
two  parts;  as  it  relates  to  the  Jews,  and  as  it  re-
lates to  Heathen  nations:  because  the  minds  of
these  two  inscriptions  of  men  may  have  been,
with  respect  to  Christianity,  under  the  influence
ef  very  different  causes.  The  case  of  the  Jews,
inasmuch  as  our  Saviour's  ministry  was  original-
ly addressed  to  them,  offers  itself  first  to  our  con-


"  Now,  upon  the  subject  of  the  trulh  of  the
Christian  religion ;  with  tis,  there  is  but  one  ques-
tion, viz.  whether  the  miracles  were  actually
wrought  1  Fron\  acknowledging  the  miracles,
we  pass  instantaneously  to  the  acknowledgment
of  the  whole.  No  doubt  lies  between  the  premises
and  the  conclusion.  If  we  believe  the  works,  or
any  one  of  them,  we  believe  in  Jesus.  And  this
order  of  reasoning  is  become  so  universal  and  fa-
ininar,  that  we  do  not  readily  apprehend  how  it
could  -ever  have  been  otherwise.  Yet  it  appears
to  me  perfectly  certain,  that  the  state  of  thought,
in  the  mind  of  a  Jew  of  our  Saviour's  age,  was
totally  different  from  this.  After  allowing  the
reality  of  the  miracle,  he  had  a  great  deal  to  do  to
persuade  himself  that  Jesus  Was  the  Messiah.
This  is  clearly  intimated  by  various  passages  of
tile  Gospel  history,  h  appears  that,  m  the  ap-
prehension of  the  writers  or  the  New  Testament,
the  miracles  did  not  irresistibly  carry,  even  those
who  saw  them,  to  the  conclusion  intended  to  be
drawn  from  them;  or  so  compel  assent,  as  to  leave
no  room  for  suspense,  for  the  exercise  of  candour,
or  the  effects  or  prejudice.  And  to  this  point,  at
least,  the  evangelists  may  be  allowed  to  be  good
witnesses;  because  it  is  a  point,  in  which  exag-
geration or  disguise  would  have  been  the  other
way.  Their  accounts,  if  they  could  be
of  falsehood,  would  rather  have  magi '
diminished,  the  effects  of  the  miracles.

John  viL  91—31.  "  Jevus  answered,  and  said
onto  them,  I  have  done'  one  work,  and  ye  all  mar-
vel— If  a  man  on  the  sabbath-day  receive  circum-
cising that  the  kw  of  Moses  should  not  be  broken ;
ye  angry  at  me,  because  I  have  made  a  man
ry  whit  whole  on  the  sabbath-day  V  Judge
to  the  appearance,  but  judge  righte-
Then  said  some  of  them  of  Jeru-


salem, Is  not  this  he  whom  they  seek  to  kill  1
Butj  k>,  he  speaketh  boldly,  and  they  say  nothing
to  him :  do  the  rulers  know  indeed  mat  this  is  the
very  Christ?  Hbwbcii  toe  know  this  man,  whence
he  is,  but  when  Christ  eometh,  no  man  knoweth
whence  he  is.  .Then  cried  Jesus  in  the  temple  as
he  taught,  saying,  Ye  both  know  me,  and  ye
know  whence  I  am':  and  I  am  not  come  of  my-
self, but  he  that  sent  me  is  true,  whom  ye  know
not.  But  I  know  him,  for  I  am  from  him,  and
he  hath  sent  me.  Then  they  sought  to  take  him:
but  no  man  hud  hands  on  him,  because  bis  hour
was  not  yet  come. '  And  many  of  the  people  be-
lieved on  hivy,  andr&id,  Wlien  Christ  eometh,
will  he  do  more  miracle*  than  those  which  thU
man  hath  done?*'

This  passage  is  very  observable.  It  exhibits
tile  reasoning  of  different  sorts  of  persons  upon
the  occasion  of  a  miracle,  which  persons  or  all
sorts  are  represented  to  have  acknowledged  as
real.  One  sort  of  men  thought,  that  there  was
thing  very  extraordinary  in  all  this ;  but  tfiat
still  Jesus  could  not  be  the  Christ,  because  there
was  a  circumstance  in  his  appearance  which  mili-
tated with  an  opinion  concerning  Christ,  in  which,
they  had  been  brought  up,  and  of  the  truth  of
which,  it  is  probable,  they  had  never  entertained
a  particle  of  doubt,  viz.  that  "  When  Christ
eometh,  no  man  knoweth  whence  he  is."  Another
sort  were  inclined  to  believe  him  to  be  the  Mes-
But  even  these  did  not  argue  as  we  should  j
did  not  consider  the  miracle  as  of  itself  decisive  or
the  question;  as  what,  if  once  allowed,  excluded
all  farther  debate  upon  the  subject ;  but  founded
their  opinion  upon  a  kind  of  comparative  reason-
ing, "When  Christ  eometh,  will  he  do  more
miracles  than  those  which  this  man  hath  done  V

Another  passage  in  the  same  evangelist,  and
observable  for  the  same  purpose,  is  that  in  which  >
he  relates  the  resurrection  of  Lazarus :  "  Jesus,"
he  tells  us  (xi.  43, 44,)  "  when  he  had  thus  spoken,
cried  with  a  loud  voice,  Lazarus:  come  forth :  ana
he  that  was  dead  came  forth,  bound  hand  and
foot  with  grave-clothes,  and  his  fece  was  bound
about  with  a  napkin.  Jesus  said  unto  them,
Loose  him.  and  let  him  go."  One  might  have
suspected,  that  at  least  all  those  who  stood  by  the
sepulchre,  when  Lazarus  was  raised,  would  have
believed  in  Jesus.  Yet  the  evangelist  does  not  so
represent  it :— "  Then  many  of  the  Jews  which
came  to  Mary,  and  had  seen  tpe  things  which
Jesus  did,  believed  on  him :  but  some  of  them
went  their  ways  to  the  Pharisees,  and  told  them
what  things  Jesus  had  done.'*  We  cannot  sup-
pose that  the  evangelist  meant  by  this  account,  to
leave  his  readers  to  imagine,  that  any  of  the  spec-
tators doubted  about  the  truth  of  the  miracle.  Far
from  it  Unquestionably  he  states  the  miracle  to
have  been  fully  allowed  :  yet -the  persons  who
allowed'it,  were,  according  to  his  representation,
capable  of  retaining  hostile  sentiments  towards
Jesus.  "Believing  in  Jesus"  was  not  only  to  b*.
Heve  that  he  wrought  miracles,  but  that  he  was
the  Messiah.  With  us  there  is  no  difference
between  these  two  things :  with  them,  there  was
the  greatest ;  and  the  difference  is  apparent  in
this  transaction.  If  Saint  John  has  represented
the  conduct  of  the  Jews,  upon  this  occasion  truly
(and  why  he  should  not  I  cannot  tell,  for  it  rather
makes  against  him  than  for  him),  it  shows  clearly  -
the  principles  upon  which  their  judgment  pro-
ceeded, Whether,  he  Jiae  lelated  tfc  inattet  trolr


379


EVIDENCES  OF  CHRISTLANITT.


or  not,  the  relation  itself  discovers  the  writer's
own  opinion  of  those  principles:  and  that  alone
possesses  considerable  authority.  In  the  next
chapter,  we  have  a  rejection  of  the  evangelist,
entirely  suited  to  this  state  of  the  case:  "but
though  he  had  done  so  many  miracles  before  them,
yet  believed  they  not  on  him.*'*  The  evangelist
does  not  mean  to  impute  the  defect  of  their  belief
to  any  doubt  about  the  miracles ;  but  to  their  not
perceiving,  what  all  now  sufficiently  perceive,  and
what  they  would  have  perceived,  had  not  their
understandings  been  governed  by  strong  preju-
dices, the  infallible  attestation  which  the  works
of  Jesus  bore  to  the  truth  of  his  pretensions.

Tlje  ninth  chapter  of  Saint  John's  Grospel  con-
tains a  very  circumstantial  account  of  the  cure  of
a  blind  man :  a  miracle  submitted  to  all  the  scru-
tiny and  examination  which  a  sceptic  could  pro-
pose. If  a  modern  unbeliever  had  drawn  up  the
interrogatories,  they  could  hardly  have  been  more
critical  or  searching.  The  account  contains  also
a  'very  curious  conference  between  the  Jewish
rulers  and  the  patient,  in  Which  the  point  for  our
present  nogce  is  their  resistance  of  the  force  of
the  miracle,  and  of  the  conclusion  to  which  it  led,
after  they  had  failed  in  discrediting  its  evidence.
"  We  know  that  God  spake  unto  Moses;  but  as
for  this  fellow,  we  know  not  whence  he  is."  That
was  the  answer  which  set  their  minds  at  rest.  And
by  the  help  of  much  prejudice,  and  great  unwil-
lingness to  yield,  it  might  do  so.  In  the  mind  of
the  poor  man  restored  to  sight,  which  was  under
no  such  bias,  and  felt  no  such  reluctance,  the
miracle  had  its  natural  operation.  "  Herein,*'
says/he,  "'is  a  marvellous  thing  that  ye  know  not
from  whence  he  is,  yet  he  hath  opened  mine
eyes.  •  Now  we  know,  that  God  heareth  not  Bin-
new  :  but  if  any  man  be  a  worshipper  of  God,
add  doeth  hjs  will,  him  he  heareth.  Since  the
world  began,  was  it  not  heard,  that  any  man

red  the  eyes  of  one  that  was  bora  blind.  If
man  were~not  of  God,  he  could  do  nothing/'
We  do  not  find  that  the  Jewish  rulers  had  any
other  reply  to  make  to  this  defence,  than  that
which  authority  is  sometimes  apt  to  make  to  ar-
gument, "  Dost  thou  teach  us  V

If  it  shall  be  inquired,  how  a  turn  of  thought.
so  different  from  what  prevails  at  present,  should
obtain  currency  with  the  ancient  Jews ;  the  an-
swer is  found  in  two  opinions  which  are  proved  to
have  subsisted  in  that  age  and  country.  The  one-
was,  their  expectation  ofa  Messiah  of  a  kind  totally
contrary  to  what  the  appearance  of  Jesus  bespoke
him  to  be :  the  other,  their  persuasion  of  the
agency  of  demons  in  the  production  of  supernatu-
ral effects.  These  opinions  are  not  supposed  by
us  for  the  purpose  of  argument,  but  are  evidently
recognised  in  Jewish  writings,  as  well  as  in  ours.
Ana  it  ought  moreover  to  be  considered,  that  in
these  opinions  the  Jews  of  that  age  had  been  from
their  infancy  brought  up;  that  they  were  opi-
nions, the  grounds  of  which  they  had  probably  few
of  them  inquired  into,  and  of  the  truth  of  which
they  entertained  no  doubt..  And  I  think  that
these  two  opinions,  conjointly  afford  an  explana-
tion of  their  conduct.  The  first  put  them  upon
seeking  out  some  excuse  to  themselves  for  not
receiving  Jesus  in  the  character  in  which  he  claim-
ed to  be  received;  and  the  second  supplied  them
with  just  such  an,  excuse  as  they  wanted. Let

mm i  ■ ■ ■  —  ■ —

•Cnaivxii.  37.


Jesus  work  what  nriractes  he  would,  still  the  an*
Bwerwasin  readiness,  "that  he  wrought  them  by
the  assistance  of  Beelzebub."  And  to  this  answer
no  reply  could  be  made,  but  thatyhich  oar  Savi-
our did  make,  by  showing  that  the  tendency  of
his  mission  Was  so  adverse  to  the  views  with
which  this  being  was,  by  the  objectors  themselves,
supposed  to  act,  that  it  could  not  reasonably  bs
supposed  that  he  would  assist  in  carrying  it  on.
Trie  power  displayed  in  the  miracles  did  not  alone
refute  the  Jewish  solution,  because  the  interposi-
tion of  invisible  agents  being  once  admitted,  it  is
impossible  to  ascertain  the  writs  by  which  their
efficiency  is  circumscribed.  We  of  this  day  may
be  disposed,  possibly,  to  think  such  opinions  too
absurd  to  have  been  ever^seriously  entertained.
I  am  not  bound  to  contend  for  the  credibility  of
the  opinions.  They  were  at  least  as  reasonable
as  the  belief  in  witchcraft.  They  were  opinions
in  which  the  Jew*  of  that  age  \»d  from  their  in-
fancy been  instructed ;  and  those  who  cannot  see
enough  in  the  force  of  this  reason,  to  account  for
their  conduct  towards  our  Saviour,  do  not  suffi-
ciently consider  how  such  opinions  may  sometimes
become  very  general  in  a  country,  and  with  what
pertinacity,  when  once  become  so,  they  are,,  for
that  reason  alone,  adhered  to.  In  the  suspense
which  these  notions,  and  the  prejudices  insulting
from  them,  might  occasion,  the  candid  and  docile
and  humble  minded  would  probably  decide  in
Christ's  favour ;  the  proud  and  obstinate,  together
with  the  giddy  and  the  thoughtless,  almost  uni-
versally against  him.

This  state  of  opinion  discovers  to  us  also  the
reason  of  what  some  choose  to  wonder  at,  why  the
Jews  should  reject  miracles  when  they  saw  them,
yet  rely  so  much  upon  the  tradition  of  them  in
their  own  history*  It  does  not  appear,  that  it  bad
ever  entered  into  the  minds  of  those  who  lived  in
the  time  of  Moses  and  the  prophets,  to  ascribe
their  miracles  to  the  supernatural  agency  of  evil
beings.  The  solution  was  not  then  invented.
The  authority  of  Moses  and  the  prophets  being
established,  and  become  the  foundation  of  the
national  polity  and  religion,  it  was  not  probable
that  the  later  Jews,  brought  up  in  a  reverence  for
that  religion  and  the  subjects  of  that  polity,
should  apply  to  their  history .«  reasoning  which
tended  to  overthrow  the  foundation  of  Ixftn.

II.  The  infidelity  of  the  Gentile  world,  and  that
more  especially  of  men  of  rank  and  learning  in  it,
is  resolved  into  a  principle  which,  in  my  judgment,
will  account  for  the  inefficacy  of  any  argument,
or  any  evidence  whatever,  viz.  contempt  prior  to
examination.  The  state  of  religion  amongst  the
Greeks  and  Romans,  had  a  natural  tendency  to
induce  this  disposition.  Dionysius  Hancarnas-
sensis  remarks,  that  there  were  six  hundred  dif-
ferent kinds  of  religions  or  sacred  rites  exercised
at  Rome.  *  The  superior  classes  of  the  commu-
nity treated  them  all  as  fables.  Can  we  wonder
then,  that  Christianity  was  included  in  the
number,  without  inquiry  into  its  separate  merits,
or  the  particular  grounds  of  its  pretensions?  It
might  be  either  true  or  false  for  any  thing  they
knew  about  it.  The  religion  had  nothing  in  its
character  which  immediately  engaged  then*  notice-
It  mixed  with  no  ^  politics.  It  #  produced  no  fine
writers.  It  contained  no  curious  speculations.
When  it  did  reach  their  knowledge,  I  doubt  not

*  Jortin'g  Remarks  onEcd.  HjfC  voh  1.  n.  37L


EVIDENCES  OP  CHRISTIANITY.


973


fat  that  it  appeared  to  them  a  very  strange  system,
—90  unplrijDsopbical,--deaiuig  so  little  in  argu-
ment and  discussion,  in  such  arguments  however
and  discussions  as  they  were  accustomed  to  en-
tertain. '  What  is  said  of  Jesus  Christ,  of  his
nature,  office,  and  ministry,  would  be,  in  the
highest  degree,  alien  from  the  conceptions  of  their
theology.  The  Redeemer  and  the  destined  Judge
of  the  numan  face,  a  poor  young  man,  executed
at  Jerusalem  with  two  thieves  upon  a  cross !  Still
more  would  the  language  in  which  the  Christian
doctrine  was  delivered,  be  dissonant  and  barbarous
to  t^aeir  ears.  What  knew  they  of  grace,  of  re-,
demotion,  of  justification,  of  the  blood  of  Christ
shed  for  the  sins  of  men,  of  ^reconcilement,  of  me-
diation 1  Christianity  was  made  up  of  points
they  had  never  thought  of;  of  terms  which  they
had  never  heard.

It  was  presented  also  to  the  imagination  of  the
learned  Heathen  under  additional  disadvantage,
by  reason  of  its  real,  and  still  more  of  its  nominal,
connexion  with  Judaism.  It  shared  in  the  oblo-
quy and  ridicule  with  which  that  people  and  their
rehgkm  were  treated  by 'the  Greeks  and  Romans.
They  regarded  Jehovah  himself,  only  as  the  idol  of
the  Jewwh  nation,  and  what  was  rented  of  him,  as
of  a  piece  with  what  was  told  of  the  tutelar
deities  of  other  countries:  nay,  the  Jews  were,  in
a  particular  manner  ridiculed  for  -being  a  credu-
lous race;  so  that  whatever  reports  of  a  miraculous
nature  came  out  of  that  country,  were  looked
upon  by  the  heathen  world  as  false  and  frivolous.
When  they  heard  of  Christianity,  they  heard  of
it  as  a  quarrel  amongst  this  people,  about  some
articles  of  their  own  superstition.  Despising,
therefore,  as  they  did,  the  whole  system,  it  was
not  probable  that  they  would  enter,  with  any  de-
fies of  eefkrasneM  or  attention,  into  the  detail  of
its  disputes,  or  the  merits  of  either  side.  How
little  they  knew,  and  with  what  carelessness  they
Judged,  of  these  mattes*,  appears,  I  think,  pretty
.plainly  from  an  example  of  no  less  weight  than  that
of  Tacitus,  who,  in  a  grave  and  professed  discourse


wan  the  history  of  the  Jews,  states^  that  they
worshipped  the  effigy  of  an  ass.  *  The  passage
is  a  proof,  how,  prone  the  learned  men  of  those
times  were,  and  upon  how  little  evidence,  to  heap
together  stories  which  might  increase  the  contempt
and  odium  in  which  that  people  was  holden.  The
same  foolish  charge  is  also  confidently  repeated  by
Plutarch,  t

It  is  observable,  that  all  these  considerations
tie  of  a  nature  to  operate  with  the  greatest  force
VJpon  the  highest  ranks;  upon  men  of  education,
and  that  order  of  the  public  from  which  writer*
are  principally  taken :  I  may  add  also,  .upon  the
philosophical  as  well'  as  the  libertine  character;
anon  the  Antonines  or  Julian,  not  less  than  upon
Nero  or  Domitian ;  and  more  particularly,  upon
that  large  and  polished  class  of  men,  who  acqui-
esced in  the  general  persuasion,  that  all  they  had
to  do  waa  to  practice  the  duties  of  morality,  and
to  worship  the  deity  more  patriot*  habit  of  think-
ing, liberal  as  it  may  appear,  which  shuts  the
door  against  every  argument  for  a  new  religion.
The  considerations  above-mentioned,  would  ac-
quire also  strength  from  the  prejudice  which  men
ef  rank  and  learning  universally  entertain-  against
any  thing  that  originates  with  the  vulgar  and


•  Tacit.  Hist,  lib.  v.  e.  2.
f  Sympoa.  lib.  iv.  quest.  5.


nnterate;  winch  prejudice  is  known  to  be  as  ob-
stinate as  any  prejudice  whatever.

Yet  Christianity  was  still  making  its  way.  and,
amidst  so  many  impediments  to  its  progress,  so
much  difficulty  in  procuring'  audience  and  atten-
tion, its  actual  success  is  more  to  be  wondered  atj
than  that  it  should  not  have  universally  conquer-
ed scorn<and  indifference,  fixed  the  levity  of  a  vo-
luptuous age,  or,  through  a  cloud  of  adverse  nre-
iudicationa,  opened  for  itself  a  passage  to  the
hearts  and  understandings  of  the  scholars  of  the
age.

And  the  cause,  which  Is  here  assignee?  for  the
rejection  of  Christianity  by  men  of  rank  and  learn-
ing among  the  Heathens,  namely,  a  strong  ante-
cedent contempt,  accounts  also  for  their  eitenoc
concerning  it.  If  they  had  rejected  it  upon  ex*
amination,  they  would  nave  written  about  it ;  they
would  have  given  their  reasons.  Whereas,
what  men  repudiate  upon  the  strength  of  some
prefixed  persuasion,  or  from  a  settled  contempt  of
the  subject,  of  the  persons  who  propose  it,  or  of
the  manner  in  which  it  is  proposed,  they  do  not
naturally  write  books  about,  or  notice  much  in
what  they  wtite  upon  other  subjects.

The  letters  of  the  Younger  Pliny  furnish  an
example  of  the  silence,  and  let  us,  in  some  mea-
sure, into  the  cause  of  it*  From  his  celebrated
correspondence  :with  Trajan,  we  know  that  the
Christian  religion  prevailed  in  a  very  considerable
degree  in  the  province  over  which  he  presided;
that  it  had  excited  his  attention ;  that  he  had  in-
quired into  the  matter,  just  so  much  as  a  Roman
magistrate  might  be  expected  to  inquire,  viz,
whether  the  religion  contained  any  opinions  dan-
gerous to  government ;  but  that  of  its  doctrines,  i
its  evidences,  or  its  books,  he  had  not  taken  the
trouble  to  inform  nimself  with  any  degree  of  care
or  correctness.  But  although  Puny  had  viewed
Christianity  in  a  nearer  position  than  most  of  his
learned  countrymen  saw  it  m ;  yet  he  had  regard-
ed the  whole  with  such  negligence  and  disdain
(farther  than  as  it  seemed  to  concern  his  adminis-
tration,) that,  in  more  than  two  hundred  and  forty
letters  of  his  which  have  come  down  to  us,  the
subject  is  never  once  again  mentioned.  If,  out
of  this  number,  the  two  fetters  between  him  and
Trajan  had  been  lost;  with  what  confidence
would  the  obscurity  of  the  Christian  religion  have
been  argued  from  Pliny's*  silence  about  it,  and
with  how  little  truth  1

The  name  and  character  which  Tacitus  has
given  to  Christianity, ."  exitiabitis  superstitio,"  (a
pernicious  superstition,)  and  by  which  two  words
<be  disposes  or  the  whole  question  of  the  merits  or
dements  of  the  religion,  afford  a  strong  proof  iiqw
little  he  knew,  or  concerned  himself  to  know,
about  the  matter.  I  apprehend  that-I  shall  not
be  contradicted,  when  I  .take  upon  me  to-  assert,
that  no  unbeliever  of  the  present  age  would  apply
this  epithet  to  the  Christianity  of  the  New  Tes-
tament, or  not  allow  that  it  was  entirely  unmerited.
Read  the  instructions  given  by  a  great  teacher  of
the  religion,  to  those  very  Roman  converts  of  whom
Tacitus  speaks ;  and  given  also  a  very  few  years
before  the  time  of  which  he  is  speaking;  and
which  are  not,  let  it  be  observed,  a  collection  of
fine  sayings  brought  together  from  different  parts
of  a  large  work,  but  stand  in  one  entire  passage
of  a  public  letter,  without  the  intermixture  ofa
single  thought  which  is  frivolous  or  exceptionable:  *
— ^Abhorthat  which  is  evil,  cleave  to  that  which


374


EVIDENCES  OP  CHRISTIANITY,


n  good.  Be  kindly  auctioned  one  to  another,
with  brotherly  love;  In  honour  preferring  one
another :  not  slothful  in  business:  fervent  in  spirit;
serving  the  Lord:  rejoicing  in  nope;  patient  in
tribulation :  continuing  instant  in  prayer:  distri-
butingto  the  necessity  of  saints ;  given- to  hospita-
lity. Bless  them  which  persecute  you;  bless,  and
cane  not.  Rejoice  with  them  that  do  rejoice,  and
weep  with  them  thai  weep.  Be  of  the  same  mind
one  towavds  another.  Mind  not  high  things,  but
condescend  to  men  of  low  estate.  Be  not  wise  in
your  own  conceits.  Recompense  to  no  man  evil
foreviL  Provide  things  honest  in  the  sight  of  all
men.  If  it  be  possible,  as  much  as  tieth  in  yon,
five  peaceably  with  all  men.  Avenge  not  your-
selves, bat  rather  give  place  onto  wrath :  for  it  is
written,  Vengeance  is  mine:  I  will  repay,  saith
the  Lord :  therefore,  if  thine  enemy  hunger,  feed
him:  if  he  thirst,  give  him  drink:  for,  in  so  doing,
thou  shalt  heap  coals  of  fire  on  his  head.  Be  not
overcome  of  evil,  but  overcome  evil  with  good.

"  Let  every  soul  be  subject  unto  the  higher
powers.  For  there  is  no  .power  bat  of  God:  the
powers  that  be,  are  ordained  of  God.  Whosoever
therefore  resisteth  the  power,  resisteth  the  ordi-
nance of  God :  and  they  that  resist,  shall  receive
to  themselves  damnation.  For  rulers  are  not  a
terror  to  good  works,  but  to  the  evil.  Wilt  thou
then  not  be  afraid  of  the  power?  Do  that  which  is
good,  and  thou  shalt  have  praise  of  the  same:  for
he  is  the  minister  of  God  to  thee  for  good.  But
if  thou  do  that  which  is  evil,  be  afraid ;  for  he
beareth  not  the  sword  in  vain :  for  he  is  the  mi-
nster of  God.  a  revenger  to  execute  wrath. upon
him  that  dostn  eviL  Wherefore  ye  must  needs
•  be  subject,  not  only  for  wrath,  but  jriso  for^  con-
science5 sake.  For.  for  this  cause  pay  ye  tribute
also:  for  they  are  God's  ministers,  attending  con-
tinually upon  this  very  thing.  Render  therefore
to  aH  their  does:  tribute,  to  whom  tribute  is  due;
custom,  to  whom  custom;  fear,  to  whom  fear;
honour,  to  whom  honour.

"  Owe  no  man  any  thing,  but  to  love  one  an-
other:  for  he  that  loveth  another,  hath  fulfilled  the
law.  For  this,  Thou  shalt  not  commit  adultery,
Thou  ahalt  not  kill,  Thou  shalt  not  steal,  Thou
ahak  not  bear  false  witness,  Thou  shalt  not  covet;
and  if  there  be  any  other  commandment,  it  is
briefly  comprehended  in  this  saying,  Thou  ahalt
love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself.  Love  worketh  no
ill  to  his  neighbour;  therefore  love  is  the  fulfilling
of  the  law..

"  And  that,  knowing  the  time,  that  now  it  is
high  time  to  awake  out  of  sleep:  for  now  is  our
salvation  nearer  than  When  we  believed.  The
night  is  far  spent,  the  day  is  at  band ;  let  us  there-
fore east  off  the  works  of  darkness,  and  let  us  put
on  the  armour  of  light.  Let  us  walk  honestly,  as
in  the  day,  not  in  noting  and  drunkenness,  not  in
chambering  and  wantonness,  not  in  strife  and  en-
vying."*

Read  this,  and  then  think  of  "  exitiabifis  snper-
■titio ! !"— Or  if  we  be  not  allowed  in  contending
with  heathen  authorities,  to  produce  our  boob
against  theirs,  we  may  at  least  be  permitted  to
confront  their*  with  one  another.  Of  this  "  per-
nicious superstition,"  what  could  Pliny  find  to
blame,  when  he  was  led,  by  Ins  office,  to  institute
eometning  like  an  examination  into  the  conduct
and  principles  of  the  sect  1  He  discovered  nothing,


xit »  >xiii.  13.


but  that  they  were  wont  to  meet  together  on  a
stated  day  before  it  was  light,  and  amg  among
themselves  a  hymn  to  Christ  as  a  God,  and  to  bind
themselves  by  an  oath,  not  to  the  commission  of
any  wickedness,  but,  not  to  be  guilty  of  theft  rob-
bery, or  adultery ;  never  to  falsuy.  their- woro,  nor
to  deny  a  pledge  committed  to  them,  when  called
upon  to  return  iL

Upon  the  words  of  Tacitus  we  may  build  the
following  observations :~-

First;  That  we  are  well  warranted  in  calling
the  view  under'  whichthe  learned  men  of  that  age
beheld  Christianity,  an  obscure  and  distant  view.
Had  Tacitus  known  more  of  Christianity,  of  its

r septa,  duties,  constitution,  or  design,  however
had  discredited  the  atory,  he  would  have  re-
spected the  principle.  He  would  have  described
toe  religion  differently,  though  he  had  rejected  it.
It  has  been  satisfactorily  shown,  that  the  "  super-
stition*  of  the  Christians  consisted  in  worship-
ping a  person  unknown  to  the  Roman,  calendar;
and  that  the  "perniaousneas,"  with  which  they
were  reproachea,  was  nothing  else  but  their  oppo-
sition to  the  established  polytheism;  and  this  new
of  the  matter  was  just  such  a  one  as  might  be  ex-
pected to  occur  to  a  mind,  which  held  the  sect  in
too  much  contempt  to  concern  itself  about  the
grounds  and  reasons  of  their  conduct.

Secondly ;  We  may  from  hence  remark,  how
little  reliance  can*  be  placed  upon  the  most  acute,
judgments,  in  subjects  which  they  are  pleased  to
despise;  and  which,  of  course,  they  from  the  first
consider  as  unworthy  to  be  inouised  into.  Had
not  Christianity  survived  to  toll  its  own  story,  it
must  have  gone  down  to  posterity  as  a  "  perni-
cious superstition;"  and  that  upon  the  credit  of
Tacitua's  account;  much,  I  doubt  not,  strengthen*
ed-by  the  name  of  the  writer,  and  the  reputation
of  his  sagacity.

Thirdly;  That  this  contempt  prior  to  exami-
nation, is  an '  intellectual  vice,  from  which  the
greatest  faculties  of  mind  are  not  free.  I  know
not,  indeed,  whether  men  of  the  greatest  faculties
of  mind,  are  not  the  most  subject  to  it.  Such  men
feel  themselves  seated  upon  an  eminence.  Look-
ing down  from  their  height  upon  the  follies  of
mankind,  they  behold  contending  tenets  wasting
their  idle  strength  upon  one  another,  with  the
common  disdain  of  the  absurdity  of  them  aH  This
habit  of  thought,  however  comfortable  to  the  mind
which  entertains  it,  or  however  natural  to  great
parts,  is  extremely  dangerous ;  and  more  apt,  than
almost  any  other  disposition,  to  produce  .hasty  and
contemptuous,  and,  by  consequence,  erroneous
judgments,  both  of  persons  and  opinions.

Fourthly ;  We  need  not  be  surprised  at  many
writers  of*  that  age  not  mentioning  Christianity  at
all;  when  they  who  did  mention  it,  appear  to
have  entirely  misconceived  its  nature  and  cha-
racter ;  and  m  consequence  of  this  misconception,
to  have  regarded  it  with  negligence  and  contempt

To  the  knowledge  of  the  greatest  part  of  the
learned  Heathens,  the  facts  of  the  Christian  his-
tory could  only  come  by  report.  The  books,  pro-
bably, they  never  looked  into.  The  settled  habit
of  their  minds  was,  and  long  had  been,  an  indis-
criminate rejection  of  all  reports  of  the  kind.  With
these  sweeping  conclusions,  truth  hath  no  chance.
It  depends  upon  distinction.  If  they  would  not
inquire,  how  should  they  be  convinced  1  It  might
be  founded  in  truth,  though  they!  who  ]  "
search,  might  not  discover  it.


EVIDENCES  OP  CHRISTIANITY.


875


N  Men  Of  rank  a*d  ibrtnne,  of  wit  and  abilities,
ttie  often  found,  even  in  Christian  countries,  to  be
surprisingly  ignorant  of  religion,  and  of  every
thing  that  relates  to  it.  Such  were  many  of  the
Heathens.  Their  thoughts  were  ail  fixed  upon
other  Jhinfls ;  upon  reputation  and  dory,  upon
wealth  and.  power,  upon  luxury  and  pleasure,
upon  bminess  or  learning.  They  thought,  and
they  had  reason  to  think,  that  the  religion  of  their
country  was  fiible  and  forgery,  a  heap  of  incon-
sistent lies ;  which  inclined  them  to  suppose  that
other  religions  were  no  better.  Hence  it  came
to  pass,  that  when  the  apostles  preached  the
Gospel,  and  wrought  miracles  in  confirmation
of  a  doctrine  every  way  worthy  of  God,  many
Gentiles  knew  little  or  nothing  of  it,  and  would
not  take  the  least  pains  to  inform  themselves. about
it. This  appears  plainly  from  ancient  history.'1*

I  think  it  by  no  means  unreasonable  to  suppose,
that  the  Heathen  public,  especially  that  part  which
is  made  up  of  men  of  rank  and  education,  were
divided  into  two  classes;  those  who  despised
Christianity  beforehand,  and  those  who  received
it.  In  correspondency  with  which  division  of  cha-
racter,  the  writers  of  that  age  would  also  be  of  two
classes;  those  who  were  silent  shout  Christianity,
and  those  who  were  Christians.  "  A  good  man,
who  attended  sufficiently  to  the  Christian  aflairs,
would  become  a  Christian;  after  which  his  testi-
mony censed  to  be  Pagan,  and  became  Christian. "t

I  mus*  also  add,  that  I  think  it  sufficiently
moved,  that  the  notion  of  magic  was  resorted  to
tw  the  Heathen  adversaries  of  Christianity,  in
like  manner  as  that  of  diabolical  agency  had  be-
fore been  by  the  Jews.  Justin  Martyr  alleges  this
as  his  reason  for  arguing  from  prophecy,  rather
than  from  miracles.  Ongen  imputes  this  evasion
to  Cebus;  Jerome  to  Porphyry;  and  Lactantius
to  the  Heathen  in  general.  The  several  passages,
whieh  contain  these  testimonies,  will  be  produced
in.  the  next  chanter.  It  being  difficult  Jiowever
to  ascertain  in  what  degree  this  notion  prevailed,
especially  amongst  the  superior  ranks  of  the
Heathen  communities,  another,  and  I  think  an
adequate,  cause  has  been  assigned  for  their  infi-
delity. It  ie  probable,  that  in  many  cases  the  two
as  would  operate  together.


CHAPTER  V.

Thai  the  Christian  Miracle*  art  not  recited,  or
appealed  to,  by  early  Christian  Writers  them-
selves, so  fully  or  frequently  as  might  have  been
expected.

I  shall  consider  this  objection,  first,  as  it  ap-
ftties  to  the  letters  of  the  apostles,  preserved  in  the
New  Testament ;  and  secondly,  as  it  applies  to
the  remaining  writings  of  other  early  Christians.

The  epistles  of  the  apostles  are  either  hortatory
or  argumentative.  So  for  as  they  were  occupied
in  delivering  lessons  of  duty,  inks  of  public  order,
admonitions  against  certain  prevailing  corruptions,
•gainst  vice,  or  any  particular  species  of  it,  or  in
fortifying  and  encouraging  the  constancy  of  the
disomies  under  the  trials  to  which  they  were  ex-
posed, there  appears  to  be  no  place  or  occasion  for
more  of  these  references  than  we  actually  find.

.  * Joraa*siMsc.oatl» Christ. BeLp.60. ed. 4th.
f  Hartley,  Obs.  p.  119.


So  for  as  the  epistles  an  argumentative,  the  na-
ture of  the  argument  winch  they  handle  accounts
for  the  infrequency  of  these  allusions.  These
epistles  were  not  written  to  prove  the  truth  of
Christianity.  The  subject  under  consideration
was  not  that  which  the  miracles  decided,  the  reali-
ty of  our  Lord's  mission ;  but  it  was  that  which
the  miracles  did  not  decide,  the  nature  of  his  per-
son or  power,  the  design  of  his  advent,  its  effects,
and  of  those  effects  the  value,  kind,  and  extent.
Still  I  maintain,  that  miraculous  evidence  lies  at
the  bottom  of  the  argument.  For  nothing  could
be  so  preposterous  as  for  the  disciples  of  Jesus  to
dispute  amongst  themselves,  or  with  others,  con-
cerning his  orljce  or  character,  unless  they  be*
lieved  that  he  had  shown,  by  supernatural  proofs,
that  there  was  something  extraordinary  in  both.
Miraculous  evidence,  therefore,  forming  not  the
texture  of  these  arguments,  but  the  ground  and
substratum,  if  it  be  occasionally  discerned,  if  it  be
incidentally  appealed  to,  it  is  exactly  so  much  as
ought  to  take  place,  supposing  the  history  to  be
true.

As  a  farther  answer  to  the  objection,  that  the
apostolic  epistles  do  not  contain  so  frequent,  or
such  direct  and  circumstantial  recitals  of  mirades
as  might  be  expected,  I  would  add,  that  the  apos-
tolic epistles  resemble  in  this  respect  the  apostolic
speeches ;  which  speeches  are  given  by  a  writer
who  distinctly  records  numerousmiraeles  wrought
by  these  apostles  themselves,  and  by  the  Founder
of  the  institution  in  their  presence:  that  it  is  un-
warrantable to  contend,  that  the  omission,  or  in-
frequency, of  such  recitals -in  the  speeches  of  the
apostles,  negatives'  the  existence  of  the  miracles,
when  the  speeches  are  given  in  immediate  con-
junction with  the  history  of  those  miracles:  and
that  a  conclusion  which  cannot  be  inferred  from
the  speeches,  without  contradicting  the  whole
tenor  of  the  book  which  contains  them,  cannot  be
inferred  from  letters,  which,  in  this  respect,  are
similar  only  to  the  speeches.

.To  prove  the  similitude  which  we  allege,  it  may
be  remarked,  that  although  in  Saint  Luke's  Gos-
pel the  apostle  Peter  is  represented  to  have  been
present  at  many  decisive  miracles  wrought  by
Christ ;  and  although  the  second  part  of  the  same
history  ascribes  other  decisive  miracles  to  Peter
himself,  particularly  the  cure  of  the  lame  man  at
the  gate  of  the  temple,  (Acts  til  1,)  the  death  of
Ananias  and  Satohira,  (Acts  v.  1,)  the  cure  of
JEneas,  (Acts  ix.  34,)  the  resurrection  of  Dorcas  j
(Acts  ix.  40,)  yet  out  of  six  speeches  of  Peter,
preserved. in  the  Acts,  I  know  but  two  in  Which
reference  is  made  to  the  miracles  wrought  by
Christ,  and  only  one  in  which  he  refers  to  mira-
culous powers  possessed  by  himself.  In  his  speech
Upon  the  day  of  Pentecost,  Peter  addressed  his
audience  with  great  solemnity,  thus :  "  Ye  men
of  Israel,  hear  these  words :  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  a
man  approved  of  God  among  you,  by,  miracles,
and  wonders,  and  signs,  which  God  did  by  him
in  the  midst  of  you,  as  ye  yourselves  also  know,"»
&&  In  his  speech  upon  the  conversion  of  Corne-
lius, he  delivers  his  testimony  to  the  miracles  per-
formed by  Christ,  in  these  words:  n  we  are  wit-
nesses of  all  things  which  he  did,  both  in  the  land
of  the  Jews,  and  m  Jerusalem,  "t  But  in  this  lat-
ter speech,  no  allusion  appears  to  the  miracles
wrought  by  himself,  notwithstanding  that  the


♦Acts  U.S.


tx.39.


378


EVIDENCES  OF  CHRISTIANITY.


miracles  above  enumerated  all  preceded  the  time
in  which  it  was  delivered.  In  his  speech  upon
the  election  of  Matthias,*  no  distinct  reference  is
made  to  any  of  the  miracles  of  Christ's  history,
except  his  resurrection. The  same  also  may  be

'  observed  of  his  speech  upon  the  cure  of  (he  fame
man  at  the  gate  of  the  temple  :t  the  same  in  his
speech  before  the  Sanhedrim ;  t  the  same  in, his
second  apology  in  the  presence  .of  that  assembly.
Stephen  s  long  speech  contains  no  reference  what-
ever to  miracles,  though  it  be  expressly  related  of
him,  in  the-  book  which  preserves  the  speech,  and
almost  immediately  before  the  speech,  "that  he

JM  great  wonders  and  miracles  among  the  peo-

g?.  §  Again,  although  miracles  be  expressly  at-
bnted  to  Saint  Paul  in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,
first  generally,  as  at  Iconium,  (Acts  xiv.  3 ,)  during
the  whole  tour  through  the  tipper  Asia,  {xiv.  27;
zv.  12,)  at  Ephesus:  (xix.  11,  12:)  secondly,  in
specific  instances,  4ts  the  blindness  of  Elymas  at
Faphos.ll  the  cure  of  the  cripple  at  Lystra.1T  of
the  Pythoness  at  Philippi,**  the  miraculous  liber-
ation from  prison  in  the  same  city,tt  the  restora-
tion of  Eutyahus,&  the  predictions  of  his  ship-
wreck,H  the  viper  at  MeGta,llll  the  cure  of  Puo-
lius's  father,inr  at  all  which  miracles,  except  the
first  two,  the. historian  himself  was  present:  not-
withstanding, I  say,  this  positive  ascription  of  mi-
racles to  Saint  Paul,  yet  m  the  speeches  delivered
by  him,  and  given  as  delivered  by  him,  in  the
same  book  in  which  the  miracles  are  related,  and
the  miraculous  powers  asserted,  the  appeals  to  his
own'  miracles,  or  indeed  to  any  miracles  at  all,  are
rare  and  incidental  In  his  speech  at  Antkxh  in
pSflidia***  there  U  no  allusion  but  to  the  resurrec-
tion, hi  his  discourse  at  Miletus,ttt  none  to  any
miracle;  none  in  his  speech  before  Felix \Xtt
none  in  his  speech  before  Festus ;  Iff  except  to
-  Christ's  resurrection,  and  his  own  conversion.

Agreeably  hereunto,  in  thirteen  letters  ascribed
to  Saint  Paul,  we  have  incessant  references  to
Christ's  resurrection,  frequent  references  to  his
own  conversion,  three  indubitable  references  to
the  miracles  which  he  wrought;  II II II  four  other
references  \o  the  same,  less  direct,  yet  highly  pro-
bable jinnr  but  more  copious  or  circumstantial
recitals  we  have  not  The  consent,  therefore,  be-
tween-Saint  Paul's  speeches  and  letters,  is  in  this
respect  sufficiently  exact :  and  the  reason  in  both
is  the  same;-  namely,  that  the  miraculous  history
was' all  along  presupposed,  and  that  the  question,
which  occupied  the  speaker's  and  the  writer's
thoughts,  was  this :  whether,  allowing  the  history
of  Jesus  to  be  true,  he  was,  upon  the  strength  of
it  to  be  received  as  the  promised  Messiah;  and,
if  he  was,  what  were  the  consequences,  what  was.
the  object  and  benefit  of  his  mission  1

The  general  observation  which  has  been  made
Upon  the  apostolic  writings,  namely,,  that  the  sub-
ject of  which  they  treated,  did  not  lead  them  to
any  direct  recital  of  the  Christian  history,  belongs
also  to  the  writings  of  the*  apostolic  fathers.  The
epistle  of  8arnaba»  is?  in  its  subject  and  general
composition,  much  hke  the  epistle  to.  the  He-
brews ;  an  allegorical  application  of  divers  passages
of  the  Jewish  history,  of  their  law  and  ritual,  to

•Acta  i.  15. tilt  IS.  liv.a

1alll.il.. IT  xiv.  a *•»»
txs.10. ttxxrii.j.
**xiii.W. mxx.17.

UOal.Jil.-S. koBi.xv.l8>l£ 2Cor.


§vi.&
ftxvi.86.


xvi.  18. „

— --- H Bxxviii.e. irirxxviu.8.

**?£*}  iK^l**-17' mrxiv.10. Wfxxv.a
moal-iil.^. kom.xv.18.lft. 2Cor.xirk
lfriCOT.ii.4,5.  Snh.iii.7.  Galu.8.  lTlamUL


those  partrof  the  Christian  dtspenntkm  in  winch
the  author  perceived  a  resemblance.  The  epasne
of  Clement  was  written  for  the  sole  purpose  of
quieting  certain  dissensions  that  bad  arisen
amongst  the  members  of  Jthe  church  of  Corinth-
and  of  reviving  in  their  minds  that  .temper  and
spirit  of  which  their  predecessors  in  the  Gospel
had  left  them  an  example.  The  work  of  Hennas
is  a  vision:  quotes  neither  the  Old  Testament
nor  the  New ;  and  merely  fells  now  and  then  into
the  language,  and  the  mode  of  speech,  which  the
author  nad  read  in  our  Gospels.  The  epistles  of
Polycarp  and  Ignatius  had  for  their  principal  ob-
ject the  order  ana  discipline  of  the  churches  which
they  addressed.  Yet,  under  all  these  circum-
stances of  disadvantage,  the  great  points  ef  the
Christian  history  are  Fully  recognised.  Tina  hath
been  shown  in  its  proper  place.*

There  is,  however,  another  class  of  writer^  to
whom  the  answer  above  given,  viz.  the  unsuita-
hleness  of  any  such  appeals  or  references  as  the
objection  demands,  to  the  subjects  of  which  the
writings  treated,  does  not  -apply ;  and  that  is,  the
class  of  ancient  apologists  y  whose  declared  design
it  was  to  defend  Christianity,  and  to  give  the  rea-
sons o/  their  adherence  to  it  It  is  necessary,
therefore,  to  inouire  how  the  matter  of  the  objec-
tion stands  in  these.

The  most  ancient  apologist,  of  whose  works
we  have  'the  smallest  knowledge,  is  Gluadratas,
QrUadratus  lived  about  seventy  years  after  the  as-
cension, and  presented  his  apology  to  the  emperor
Adrian.  From  a  passage  of  this  work,  prewar  tid
in  Eusebiu*,  it  appears  that  the  author  did  directly
and  formally  appeal  to  the  miracles  of  Christ,  and
in  terms  as  express  and  confident  as  we  could  de-
sire. The  passage  (which  has  been  once  already
stated)  is  as  follows:  "  The  works  of  our  Saviour
were  always  conspicuous,  for  they  were  real ;  both
they  that  were'healed,  and  they  mat  were  raised
from  the  dead,  were  seen,  not  only  >when  they
were  healed,  or  raised,  but  for  a  long  time  after-
ward: not  only  whilst  he  dwelled  on  this  earth,
but  also  after  his  departure,  and  for  a  good  while
after  it;  insomuch  as  that  some  of  mem  have
reached  to  our  times. "t  Nothing  can  be  more
rational  or  satisfactory  than  this!

Justin  Martyr,  the  next  of  the  Christian  apolo-
gists whose  work  is  not  lost,  and  who  followed
Q.uadratu8  at  the.  distance  of  about  thirty  years,
has  touched  upon  passages  of  Christ's  history  in
so  many  places,  that  a  tolerably  complete  account
of  Christ  s  life  might  be  collected  out  of  his  works.
In  the  following  quotation,  he  asserts  the  perform-
ance of  miracles  by  Christ  in  words  as  strong  and
positive  as  the  language  possesses :  "  Christ  healed
those  who  from  their  birth  were  blind,  and  deaf;
and  lame;  causing  by  ms  word,  one  to  leap,  an-
other to  hear,  and  a  third  to  see:  and  having  raised
the  -dead,  and  caused  them  to  live,  he,  by  his
works-,  excited  attention,  and  induced  the  men  of
that  age  to  know  him  Who,  however,  seeing
these  wings  done,  said  that  it  was  a  magical  ap-
pearance, and  dared  to  call  him  a  magician,  and  a
deceiver  of  the  people."*

In  his  first  apology ,§  Justin  expressly  assigns
the  reason  for  his  having  recourse  to  the  argument
from  prophecy,  rather  wan  alleging  the  mimries
of  the  Christian  history:  -which  reason  was,  that

♦Bee  page*  297,298,**. f  Eustb.  Hist  I.  iv.  c.  X
t  Just.  Dial.  p.  358.  ed.  Tbirlby.
§  Apotaf .  prim.  p.  48L  ed.  Thirlby.


EVIDENCES^OP  CHRISTIANITY.


m


the  persons  with  whom  he  contended  would  ascrilie
these  miracle*  to  magic;  "  Lest  any  of  our  oppo-
.  Dents  should  say, 'What  hinders,  but  that  he  who
4s  called  Christ  by  us,  being  a  man-  sprang  from
men,  -perfosned  the  miracles  which  we  attribute
to  him,  by  magical  art  1"  The  'suggestion  of  this
Teases  me&s,  as  I  apprehend,  the  very  point  of
'the -present objection;  more  especially  when  we
find  Justin  followed  in  it  by  other  writers  of  that
age.  '  Irencus,  who  came  about  forty  years  after
him,  notices  the  same  evasion  in  the  adversaries
of  Christianity,  and  replies  to  it  by  the  same  ar-
gument :  "  But  if  they  .shall  say,  that  the  Lord
-performed  these  things  by  an  illusory  appearance,
($«r-r «*■!•*»?,)  leading  these  objectors  to'  the  pro-
phecies, we  will  show  from  them,  that  all  things
were  thus  predicted  concerning  him,  and  strictly
quae  to  pase."*  Lactantius,  who  lived  a  century
lower,  delivers  the  same  sentiment,  upon  the  same
occasion-;  "He  performed  miracles; — we  might
have  supposed  him  to^have  been  a  magician,  as  ye
say,  and  as  the  Jews  then  supposed,  if  all  the  pro-
phets had  net  with  one  spirit  foretold  that  Christ
should  perform  these  very  things/'t

'  But  to  return  to  the  Christian  apologists  in  their
order.  Tertulliari  : — "  That  person  whom  the
Jews  had  vainly  imagined,  from  the  meanness  of
his  appearance,  to  be  a  mere  man,  they  afterward,
in  consequence  of  the  power  he  exerted,  considered
as  a  magician,  when  he,  with  one  word,  ejected
devils  out  of  the -bodies  of  men,  gave  sight  to  the
Mind,  cleansed  the  leprous,  strengthened  the  nerves
of  those' that  had  the  palsy,  and, -lastly,  with  one
command,  restored  the  dead  to  life ;  when  he,  I
say,  made  the  very  elements  obey  him,  assuaged
the  storms,-waIked  upon  the  seas,  demonstrating
himself  to  be  the  Word  of  God."t

Nest  in  thecatalogue  of  professed  apologists  we
may  place  Origen,  who,  it  is  well  known,  published
a  formal  defence  of  Christianity,  in  answer  to  Ccl-
sus,  a  Heathen,  who  had  written  a  discourse
against  it  I  know  no  expressions,  by  which  a
plainer  or  mote  positive  appeal  to  the  Christian
mimctes  can  be  made,  than  the  expressions  used
by  Origen ;  "  Undoubtedly  we  do  think  hhn  to  be
the  Christ,  and  the  Sono£God,  because  he  healed
the  lame  and  the  blind ;  and  we  ere  the  more  con-
firmed in  this  persuasion,  by  what  is  written  in
the  prophecies :  '  Then  shall  the  eyes  of  the  blind
be  opened,  and  the  ears  of  the  deaf  shall  hear,  and
the  lame  man  shall  leap  as  a  hart.'  But  that  he
also  raised  the  dead  :  and  that  it  is  not  a  fiction  of
those  who  wrote  the-  Gospels,  is  evident  from
hence,  that,  if  it  had  been -a  fiction,  there  would
iwve  been  many  recorded  to  be  raised  -  up,  and
such  as  had  been  a  long  time  in  their  graves.
But,  it  not  being  a  fiction,  few  have  been  recorded  :
far  instance,  the  daughter  of  the  ruler  of  a  syna-
gogue, of  whom  1  do  not  know  why  he  said,  She
bb  not  dead  but  sleepeth,  expressing  something
peculiar  to  her,  not  common  to  all  (lead  persons :
and  the  only  son  of  a  widow,  on  whom  he  had
compassion,  and  raised  him  to  life,  after  he  had
bid  the  bearers  of  the 'corpse  to  stop ;  and  the  third,
Lazarus,  who  had  been  buried  four  days."  This
is  positively  to  assert  the  miracles  of  Christ,  and
it  is  also  to  comment  upon  them,  and  that  with  a
considerable  degree  of  accuracy  and  candour:
In  another  passage  of  the  same  author;  we  meet


wh\h  the  old  solutidh  of  magic  applied  to  the  mira-
cles of  Christ  by  the  adversaries  of  the  religion.
"Celsus,"  saith  Origen,  "well  knowing,  what
great  works  may  be  alleged  to  have  been-  done  by
Jesus,  pretends  to  grant  that  the  things  related  of
him  are  true;  such  as  healing  diseases,  raising
the  .dead,  feeding  multitudes  with  a  few  loaves,  of
which  large  fragments  were  left."*  And  then
Celsus  gives,  it  seems,  an  answer  to  these  proofs
of  our  Lord's  mission,  which,  as'  Origen  under-
stood it,  resolved  the  .phenomena  into  magic  ;  fox
Origen  .begins"  his  reply  by  observing,  *  You  see
that  Celsus  in  »  manner  allows  that  there  is  such,
a  thing  as.magic."t -  v

It  appears  also  from  the  testimony  of  Saint  Je-
rome, that  porphyry,  the  most  learned  And  able
of  the  Heathen  writers  against  Christianity,  re-
sorted to  the  same  solution :  "  Unless,"  says  he,
speaking  tovV igilantius,  "  according  to  the  man-
ner of  the  Gentiles  and  the  profane,-  of  Porphyry
and  Eunomius,  ydu  pretend  that  these  are  the
tricks  of  demons,  "t

This  magic,  these  demons,  this,  illusory  appear-
ance, this  comparison  with  the  tricks  of  jugglers,
by  which  many  of  that  age  accounted  so  easily
for  the  Christian  miracles,  and  which  answers
the  advocates  of  Christianity  often  thought  it  ne-
cessary to  refute  by  arguments  drawn  from  other
topics,  and  particularly  from  prophecy,  (to  which,
it  seems  these  solutions  did  not  apply,)  we  now
perceive  to  be  gross  subterfuges.  That  such  rea-
sons were  ever  seriously  urged,  and  seriously  re-
ceived, is  only  a  proof,  what  a  gloss  and  varnish
fashion  can  give. to  any  opinion.

It'  appears,  therefore,  that  the  miracles  of  Christ
understood  as  we  understand  (hem,  ix*  their  literal
ancMiistorical  sense,  were  positively  and  precisely
asserted  and  appealed  to  by  the  apologists  for
Christianity ;  which  answers  the  allegation  of  the
objection.  -

I  am  ready,  however,  to  admit*  that  the  ancient
Christian  advocates  did  not  insist  upon  the  mira-
cles in  argument,  so  frequently  as  I  should  have
done.  It  was  their  lot  to  contend  with  notions  of
magical  agency,  against  which  the  mere  .produc-
tion of  the  facts  was  not  sufficient  for  the  con-
vincing of  their  adversaries :  I  do  net  know  whe-
ther they  themselves  thought  it  quite  decisive  of
the  controversy.  But  since  it  is  proved^  I  conceive
with  certainty,  that  the  sparingness  with  which
they  appealed  to  miracles,  was  owing  neither  to'
their  ignorance,  nor  their  doubt  of  the  .facts,  it- is,
at  any  rate,  an  objection,  not  to  the  truth  of  the
history,  but  to  the  judgment  of  its  defenders.


CHAPTER.  VI.

Want  of  universality  in  the  knowledge  and  re-
ception of  Christianity,  and  of* greater  clear-
ness in  the  evidence.

Op  a  revelation  which  really  came  from^God,
the  proof,  it  has  been  said,  would  in  all  ages  be  so
public  and  manifest,  that  no  part  of  the  human
species  would  remain  ignorant  of  it,  no  under-
standing could  fail  of  being  convinced  by  it.

The  advocates  of  Christianity  do  not  pretend


•  Iren.  L  li.  e.  57.  *  t  Lactant.  v.  3.

|  TertuU.  Apotog.  p.  30;  ed.  Piiorii,  Par.  1675.
3  B


*  Orig.  Cont.  Cels.  1.  ii.  sect.  '48. .
t  Lardnera  Jewish  and  Heath.  Ttfet.  vol.  ii.  p.  294.  ed,
4to.  X  Jeronic  coat.  VifiL  '

32*


ns


EVIDENCES  OF  CHRISTIANITY.


that  the  evidence  of  their  religion  possesses  tbeee
qualities.  .  They  do  not  deny  that  we  can  con-
ceive it  to  be  within  the  compare  of  divine  power,
to  have  communicated  to  the  world  a  higher  de-
gree of  assurance,  and  to  have  given*  to  his  com-
munication q  stronger  and  more  extensive  influ-
ence. For  any  thing  we  are  able  to  discern,  God
could  have  so  formed  men,  as  to  have  perceived
the  truths  of  religion  intuitively ;  or  to  have  car-
ried on  a  communication  with  the  other  world,
Whilst  they  lived  in  this  j  or  to  have  seen  the  in-
dividuals of  the  species,  instead  of  dying,  pass  to
heaven  by  a  sensible  translation.  He  could  have
presented  a  separate  miracle  to  each  man's  senses.
He  could  have  established  a  standing  miracle.
He  could  have  caused  miracles  to  be  wrought  in
every  different  age  and  country.  These,  and
many  more  methods,  which  we  may  imagine,  if
we  once  give  loose  to  our  imaginations,  are,  so  far
as  we  can  judge,  all  practicable.

The  question,  therefore,  is,  not  whether  Chris-
tianity possesses  the  highest  possible  degree  of
evidence,  but  whether  the  not  bavins;  more  evi-
dence be  a  sufficient  reason  for  rejecting  that
which  we  have.

Now  their  appears  to  be  no  fairer  method  of
judging,  concerning  any  dispensation  which  is
aHeffedto  come  from  (rod,  when  a  question  is
made  whether  such  a  dispensation  could  come
from  God  or  not,  than  by  comparing  it  with  other
thing*  which  are  acknowledged  to  proceed  from
the  same  counsel,  and  to  be  produced  by  the  same
agency.  If  the  dispensation  in  question  fcbour
under  no  defects  but  what  apparently  belong  to
other  dispensations,  these  seeming  defects  do  not
justify  us  in  setting  aside  the  proofs  which  are  of-
fered of  its  authenticity^  if  they  be  otherwise  en-
titled to  credit.

Throughout  that  order  then  of  nature,  of  which
God  is  the  author,  what  we  find  is  a  system  of
beneJLctncc:  we  are  seldom  or  ever  able  to  make
out  a  system  of  ootimwm.  I  mean,  that  there  are
lew  cases  in  which,  if  we  permit  ourselves  to


trivance  T— The  observation,  which  w»  ]
emplinedin  the  single  instance  jai  the
heaven,  may  be  repeated  cnnreniing
phenomena. of  nature;  and  the  true  <
which  it  leads  is  this:  that  to  inquire  what  the
Deity  might  have  done,  could  have  done,  or,  as
we  even  sometimes  presume  to  apeak,  ought  to
have  done,  or,  in  •  hypothetical  cases  would  have
done,  and  to  build  any  propositions  upon  such  in-
quiries against  evidence  of  facte,  is  wholly  unwar-
rantable. It  is  a  mode  of  reasoning  which  will
not  do  in  natural  history,  which  wQl  not  do  in
natural  religion,  which  cannot  therefore  be  applied
•with  safety  to  revelation.  It  may  have  same
foundation,  in  certain  speculative  a  priori  ideeeof


the  divine  attributes;  hut  it  has  none  In  expe-
rience, or  in  analogy.  The  general  character  of
the  works  of  nature  is,  on  the  one  hand,  goodness
both  in  design  and  effect;  and,  on  the  other  hand,
a  liability  to  difficulty,  and  to  objections,  if  such
objections  be  allowed,  by  reason  of  seeming  in-
completeness or  uncertainty  in  attaining  their
end.  Christianity  participates  of  this  character.
The  true  simihtude  between  nature  and  revelation
consists  in  this  -%  that  they  each  bear  strong  marks
of  their  original ;  that  they  each  also  bear  appear-
ances of  irrregularity  and  defect  A  system  of
strict  optimism  may  nevertheless  be  the  real  sys-
tem in  both  cases.  But  what  I  contend  is,  tnat
the  proof  is  hulden^from  us  ;  that  we  ought  not  to
expect  to  perceive  that  in  revelation,  which  we
hardly  perceive  in  any  thing;  that  beneficence,  of
which  we  can  judge,  ought  ta  satisfy  ue,  that  op-
timism, of  which  we  cannot  judge,  ought  not  to  be
sought  after.  We  pan  judge  of  beneficence,  be-
cause it  depends  upon  effects  which  we  experience,
and  upon  the  relation  between  the  meana  which
we  see  acting  and  the  ends  which  werce  produced.
We  cannot  judge  of  optimism,  because  it  neces-
sarily implies  a  comparison  of  that  which  is  .tried,
with  that  which  is  not  tried;  of  consequences
which  we  see,  with  others  which  we  imagine,  and
concerning  many  of  which,  it  is  more  than  proba-
ble we  know  nothing;  concerning  some,  that  we
have  no  notion.

If  Christianity  be  compared  with  the  stale  and
progress  of  natural  religion,  the  argument  of  the
objector  will  gain  nothing  by  the  comparison.  I
remember  hearing  an  unbeliever  say,  that,  if  God
had  given  *  revelation,  he  would  have  written  it
in  the  skies.  Are  the  truths  of  natural  religion
written  in  the  akies,  or  in  a  language  which  every
one  reads  1  or  is  this  the  case  with  the  most  useful
arte,  or  the  most  necessary  sciences  of  human  fifet
An  Otaheitean  or  an  Esquimaux  knows  nothing
of  Christianity ;  does  he  know  more  of  the  princi-
ples of  deism?  or  morality  1  which,  notwithstand-
ing his  ignorance,  are  neither  untrue,  nor  unim-
Ktant,  nor  uncertain.  The  existence  of  the
ity  is  left  to  be  collected  from  observations,
which  every  man  does  not  make,  which  every  man
perhaps,  is  not  capable  of  making.  Can  it  be
argued,  that  God  does  not  exist  because,  if  he
did,  he  would  let  us  see  him,  or  discover  himself
to  mankind  hy  proofs  (such  as,  we  may  think,  the
nature  of  the  subject  merited,)  which  no  inadver-
tency could  miss,  no  prejudice  withstand  1

If  Christianity  be  regarded  as  a  providential  in-
strument for  the  melioration  .of  mankind,  its  pro-
gress and  diffusion  resemble  that  of  other  causes

— . r —  .by  which  human  lifcvs  improved. The  diversity

«0Qi  or  does  it  make  us  cease  to  admire  the  con-  { is  not  greater,  nor  the  advance  novo  slow,  in  reh-


tange  in  possibilities,  we  cannot  suppose
thing  more  perfect,  and  more  unobjectionable,
than  what  we  see.  The  raiir  which  descends
from  heaven,  is  confessedly  amongst  the  contri-
vances of  the  Creator,  for  the  sustentation  of  the
animals  and  vegetables  which  subsist  upon  the
eurface  of  the  earth.  Yet  how  partially  and  ir-
regularly is  it  supplied !  Hbw  much  of  it  falls
upon  the  sea,  where  it  can  be  of  no  use !  how  often.
is  it  wanted  where  it  would  be  of  the  greatest!
What  tracts  of  continent  are  rendered  deserts  by
the  scarcity  of  it!  Or,  not  'to  speak  of  extreme
cases,. how  much,  sometimes,  do  inhabited  coun-
.  tries  suffer  by  its  deficiency  or  delay ! — We  could
imagine,  if  to  imagine  were  our  business,  the
matter  to  be  otherwise  regulated.  We  could
imagine  showers  to  fell,  just  where  and  when  they
would  do  good:  always  seasonable,  every  where
sufficient;  so  distributed  as  not  to  leave  a  field
upon  the  face  of  the  globe  scorched  by  drought,
or  even  a  plant  withering  for  the  lack  or  moisture.
Yet,  does  the  difference  between  the  real  case  and
the  imagined  case,  or  the  seeming  inferiority  of
the  one  to  the  other,  authorize  us  to  say,  that  the
present  disposition  of  the  atmosphere  is  not
amongst  the  productions  or  the  designs  of  the
peity?  Does  it  check  the  inference  which  we
draw  from  the  confessed  beneficence  of  the  provi


EVIDENCES  OF  CHRISTIANITY.


879


gioo,  than  we  find  it  to  be  in  learning,  liberty,
mvenunent,  laws.  The  Deity  hath  not  touched
the  order  of  nature  m  vein.  The  Jewish  religion
produced  great  and  permanent  effects;  the  Chris-
tian religion  halh  dene  the  same.  It  hath  dispps-
ed  the  world  to- amendment  It  hath  put  things
in  a  train.  It  is  by  no  means  improbable,  that  it
may  become  universal :  and  that  the  world  may
continue  in  that  stage  so  Jong  as  that  the  duration
of  its  reign  may  bear  a  vast  proportion  to  the  time
of  its  partial  influence.

When  we  argue  concerning  Christianity,  that
It  must  necessarily  be  true,  because  it  is  beneficial,


we  go,  perhaps,  too  far  on  one  aide:  and  we  cer-
tainly go  too  fiur  on  the  other,  when  we  conclude
thatitmnstbe&lsa,becauwUun0t8oefficaciQQ8


as  we  could  have  supposed.  The  question  of  its
truth  is  to  be  tried  upon  its  proper  evidence,
without  deferring  much  to  this  sort  of  argument,
on  either  side.  tT  The  evidence,"  as  Bishop  Butler
hath  rightly  observed,  "  depends  upon  the  judg-
ment we"  farm  of  human  conduct,  under  given  cir-
cumstance^ of  which  it  may  be  presumed  that  we
know  something;  the  objection  stands  upon  the
supposed  conduct  of  the  Deity,  under  relations
wftn  which  we  are  not  acquainted."  '
-  What  would  be  the  real  effect  of  that  over-
powering evidence  wjrich  our  adversaries  require
m  a  revelation,  it  is  difficult  to  foretell;  at  least,  we
must  speak  of  it  as  of  a  dispensation  of  which  we
have  no  experience.  Some  consequences  however
would,  it  is  probable,  attend  this  economy,  which
do  not  seem  to  befit  a  revelation  that  proceeded
from  God.  'One  is,  that  irresistible  proof  would
restrain  the  voluntary  powers  too  much ;  would
not  answer '  the  purpose  of  trial  and  probation ;
would' call  for/no  exercise  of  candour,  seriousness,
huimhty,  inquiry;  no  submission  of  passion,
Interests,  and  prejudices,  to  moral  evidence  and  to
probable  truth ;-  no  habits  of  reflection ;  none  of
thetprevkws  desire  to  learn  and  to  obey  the  wiH
of  Gfod,  which  forms  perhaps  the  test  of  the  vir-
tuous  principle,  and  which  induces  men  to  attend,
with  care-  and  reverence,  'to  every  credible  inti-


mation of  that  will,  and  to  resign  present  advan-
tages and  present  pleasures  to'every  reasonable
expectation  of  propitiating  bis  favour.  "  Men's
faJjprebation  may  be,  whether  they  will  take
i  earn  to  inform  themselves  by'imparnal  consi-
ation;  and,  afterward,  whether  they  will  act
as)  the  ease  requires,  upon  the  evidence  which
they  have.  And  this  we  find  by  experience,  is
often  out  probation  in  our  temporal  capacity."*

II. 'These  modes  of  communication  would  leave
Vio  place  for  the  admission  of  internal  evidence  ;
which  ought,  perhaps,  to  bear  a  considerable  part
Id  the  proof  of  every  revelation,  because  it  is  a
species  of  evidence,  wmch  applies  itself  to  the
knowledge,  love,  and  practice  of  virtue,  and
which  operates  In  proportion  to  the  degree  of
■bobs  qualities  which  it  finds  in  the  person  whom
it  addresses.  Men  of  good  dispositions,  amongst
Christians,  are  greatly  affected  by  the  impression
which  the  Scriptures  themselves  make  upon  their
■Binds.  Their  conviction  is  much  strengthened
fay  these  iinpfeasion*.  And  this  perhaps  was  in-
tended to  be  one  effect  to  be  produced  by  the  reli-
gion^ It  is  likewise  true,  to  whatever  cause  we
ascribe  it  (for  I  am  not  in  this  work  at  liberty  to
introduce  the  Christian  doctrine  of  grace  or  assut-

•  Butler's  Analogy,  part  iL  e,  vi.


en^  or  the  Christian  promise,  that,  "if  any  man
will  do  his  will  he  snail  know  of  the  doctrine!
whether  it  beofGod,"*)-4t  is  true,  I  say,  that  they
who  sincerely  act,  or  sincerely  endeavour  to  act,
according*  to  what  they  believe,  that  is,  according
to  the  just  result  of  the  probabilities,  or,  if  you
please,  the,  possibilities  of  natural  and  revealed  re-
ligion, which  they  themselves  perceive,  and  ac-
cording to  a  rational  estimate  of  consequences,  and
above  all,  according  to  the  just  effect  of  {nose
principles  of  gratitude  and  devotion,  which  even
the  view  of  nature  generates  in  a  well  ordered
mind,  seldom  fail  qf  proceeding  farther.  This
also  may  have  been  exactly  what  was  designed.

Whereas,  may  it  not  he  said  shat  irresistible
evidence  would  confound  all  characters  and  ail
dispositions  1  would  subvert,  rather  than  promote,
the  true  purpose  of  the  divine  counsels:  which  is*
not  to  produce  obcdknce  bjr  a  force  little  short  or
mechanical  constraint,  ( which,,  ©bedience  would  be,
regularity,  not  virtue,  and  would  hardly,  perhaps,
differ  from  that  which  inanimate  bodies  pay  to  the
laws  impressed  upon  their  nature,)  but  to  treat
moral  agents,  agreeably  to  what  they  are:  which
is  done,  when  light  anu  motives  are  of  such  kinds*
and  are  imparted  in  such  meaaures;  that  the  in-
fluence  of  them  depends  upon,  the  recipients  them-
selves 1  "  It  is  not  meet  to  govern  rational  free
agents  in  vid  by  sight  and  sense.  .  h  would  be  no
trial  or  thanks  to  the  most  sensual  wretch  to  for*
bear  sinning,  if  heaven  and  hell  were  open  to  his
sight.  That  spiritual  vision  and  fruition  is  our
state  wt  patrid."  (Baxter's  Reasons,  page  357.)
— There  may  be  truth  jn  this  thought,  though
roughly  expressed.  Few  things  are  more  impro-
bable than  that  we  (the  human  species)  should  be
the  highest  order  of  beings  in  the  universe:  that
animated  nature  should  ascend  from  the  lowest
reptile  to  us,  and  all  at  once  stop  there,  -  If  there
be  classes  above  us  of  rational  intelligences,  clear-
er manifestations  may  belong  to  them.  This  may
be  one  of  the  distinctions.  And  it  may  be  one,  to
which  we  ourselves  hereafter  shall  attain.

III.  But  may  it  not  also  be  asked,  whether  the
perfect  display  of  a  future  state  of  existence  would
Be  compatible  with  the  activity  of  civil  life,  and
with  the  success  of  human  affairs  7  I  can  easily
conceive  that  this  impression  may  be  overdone;
that  it  may  so  seize  and  fill  the  thoughts,  as  to
leave' no  place  for  the  cares  and  offices  of  men's
several  stations,  no  anxiety  for  worldly  prosperity,
or  even  for  a  worldly  provision,  and,  bv  conse-

?uence,  no  sufficient  stimulus  to  secular  industry*
)f  the  first  Christians  we  read,  "  that  all  that  be-
lieved were  together,  and  had  all  things  common:
and  sold  their  possessions  and  goods,  and  parted
them  to  all  men,  as  every  man  had  need ;  and,
continuing  daily  with  one  accord  in  the  temple,
and  breaking  bread  frori)  house  to  house,  did  eat
their  meat  with  gladness  and  singleness  of  heart.^t
This  was  extremely  natural,  and  just  what  might
be  expected  from  miraculous  evidence  coming
with  full  force  upon  the  senses  of  mankind :  but
I  much  doubt  whether,  if  this  state  of  mind  had
been  universal,  or  long-continued,  the  business  of
the  world  toukl  have  gone  dn.  The  necessary
arts  of  social  life  would  have  been  little  cultivated.
The  plough  and  the  loom  would  have  stood  still.
Agriculture,  manufactures,  vrade,  and  navigation.  ,
would  not,  I  think,  have  flourished,  if  they  could


kvii.17.


tA*taii44-*V


380


•EVIDENCES  OP  CHRISTIANITY.


have  been  exercised  at  all.  Men  weald  have  ad-
dicted-thenwehres  to  contemplative  and  ascetic
Uw»s,  instead  of  lives  of  business  and  oftisefai  in-
dustry. We  observe  that  Saint  Paul  found  it
necessary,  frequently  to  recall  his  converts  to  the
ordinary  labours  and  domestic  duties  of  their  con-
dition; and  to  give  them,  in  Ms  own  example,  a
lesson  of  contented  application  to  their  worldly
employments.

By  the  manner  in  which  the  religion  is  now
propose^,  a  great  portion  of  the  human  species  is
enabled,  and  of  these  multitudes  of  every  genera-
tion are  induced,  to  seek  and  to  effectuate  their
salvation,  through  the  medium  of  Christianity,
without  interruption  of  the  prosperity  or  of  the  re-
gular course  of  human  aflkirs.


CHAPTER  VII.
The  supposed  effects  of  Christianity.

That  a  religion,  which,  under  every  form  in
which  it  is  taught,  holds  forth  the  final  reward  of
▼Otoe  and  punishment  of  vice,  and  proposes  those
distinctions  of  virtue* and  vice,  which  the  wisest
and-most  cultivated  part  of  mankind  confess  to  be
just,  should  not  be  believed,  is  very  possible ;  but
that,  so  far  as  it  is  believed,  it  should  not  produce
any  good,  but  rather  a  bad  effect  upon  public  hap-
piness, is  a  proposition  which  it  requires  very
strong  evidence  to 'render  Credible.  Yet  many
have  been  found  to  contend  for  this  paradox,  and
▼err  confident  appeals  have  been  made  to  history,
and  to  observation,  for  the  truth  of  it.
-  In  the  conclusions,  however,  which  these  wri-
ters draw  flora  what  they  call  experience,  two
sources,  I  think,  of  mistake,  may  be  perceived.

One  is,  that  they  look  for  the  influence  of  reli-
gion in  the  wrong  place,  1

The  other,  that  they  charge  Christianity  with
many  consequences,  for  which  it  is  not  respon-
sible.

I.  The  influence  of  religion  is  not  to  be  sought
for  in  the  councils  of  princes,  in  the  debates  or  re-
solutions of  popular  assemblies,  in  the  conduct  of
governments  towards  their  subjects,  or  of  states
and  sovereigns  towards  one  another ;  of  conquer-
ors at  the  head  of  their  armies,  or  of  -parties  in-
triguing for  power  at  home,  (topics  which  alone
almost  occupy  the  attention,  ana  fill  the  pages  of
history;)  but  must  be  perceived,  if  perceived  at
all,  in  the  silent  course  of  private  aiu|  domestic
life.  Nay  more ;  even  there  its  influence  ma  v.  not
be  very  obvious  to  observation.  If  it  check,  in
some  degree,  personal  dissoluteness, /if  it  beget  a
general  probity  in  the  transaction  of  business,  if
it  produce  soft  and  humane  manners  in  the -mass
of  the  community,  and  occasional  exertions  of  la-
borious and  expensive  benevolence  in  a  few  indi-
viduals, it  is  all  the  effect  which  can  offer  itself  to
external  notice.  The  kingdom  of  heaven  Is  with-
in us.  That  which  is  the  substance  of  the  reli-
gion, its  hopes  and  consolations,  its  intermixture
with  the  thoughts  by  day  and  by  nfcrht,  the  devo-
tion of  the  heart,  the  control  of  appetite,  the  steady
direction  of  the  will  to  the  commands  of  God,  is
necessarily  invisible.  Yet- upon  these  depend  the
virtue  and  happiness  of  millions.  This  cause  ren-
ders the  representations  of  history,  with  respect  to
religion,  defective  and  fallacious,  in  a  greater  de-


gree than  they  are  upon  any  other  snojeet  Re*
figkm  operates  most  upon,  those  of  whom  history
knows  the. least;  uppn  fathers  and  mothers  in
their  families,  upon  men-servants  and  maid-ser-
vants, upon  the  orderly  tradesman,  the  quiet  vil-
lager, the  manufacturer  at  his  loom,  the  husband-
man in  his  fields.  Amongst  such,  its  influence
collectively  may  be  of  inestimable^  value,  yet  its
effects,  in  the  mean,  time,  little  upon  those  who
figure  upon  the  stage  of  the  world.  They  may
know  nothing  of  it ;  they  may  betieva-nothing  of
it;  they  may  be  actuated  by  motives  more  im-
petuous than  those  which  religion  is  able  to  ex-
cite, it  cannot,  therefore,  be  thought  strange,  that
this  influence  should  elude  the  grasp  and  touch  of
public  history:  for,  what  is  public  history,  but  a
register  of  the  successes  and  disappointments,  the
vices,  the  follies,  and  the  quarrels,  of  these  who
engage  in  contentions  for  power  1

7  will  add,  that  much  otthis  influence  may  be
felt  in  times  of  public  distress,  and  little  of  it  in
times  of  public  wealth  and  security..  This  also
increases  the  uncertainty  of  any  opinions  that  we
draw  from  historical  representations.  The  in-
fluence of  Christianity  is  commensurate  with  no
effects  which  history  states.  We  do  notpaetend
that  it  has  any  such  necessary  and  irresistible
power  over  the  aflkirs  of  nations,  as  to  surmount
the  force  of  other  causes.  -

The  Christian  religion  also  acts  upon  public
usages  and  institutions,  by  an  operation  which  is
only  secondary  and  indirect  Christianity  is  not
a  cede  of  civil  law.  It  can  only  reach  public  in-
stitutions through  private  character.  Now  its  in*
ftuence  upon  private  character  may  be  consider-
able, yet  many  public  usages  and  institutions  re-
pugnant to  its  principles  may  remain.  To  get
rid  of  these,  the  reigning  part  of  the  community:
must  act,  and  act  together.  But  it  may  be  long
before  the  persons  who  compose  this  body  be  suf-
ficiently touched  with  the  Christian  character,  to
join  in  the  suppression  of  practices,  to  which  they
and  the  pubbc  have  been  reconciled  by  causes
which  will  reconcile  the  human  mind 'to  any
thing,  by  habit  and  interest.  Nevertheless,  the
effects  of  Christianity,  even  in  this  view,  have
been  important.  It  has  mitigated  the  conduct  of
war,  and  the  treatment  of  captives.  It  has  soften-
ed the  administration  of  despotic,  or  of  nominally
despotic  governments.  It  has  abolished  polygamy.
It  has  restrained  the  licentiousness  of  divorces.  It
has  put  an  end  to  the  exposure  of  children/  and
the  immolation  of  slaves.  It  has 'suppressed  the
combats  of  gladiators,*  and  the  impurities  of  reli-
gious rites.  It  has  banished,  if  not  unnatural  vices,
at  least  the  toleration  of  them.  It  has  greatly
meliorated  the  condition  of  the  laborious  part,  that
is  to  say,  of  the  mass  of  every  community,  by  pro-
curing for  them  a  day  of  weekly  rest.  In  all  coun-
tries in  which  it  is  professed,  it  has  produced  nu-
merous establishments  for  the  relief  of  sickness
and  poverty ;  and,  in  some,  a  regular  and  general
provision  by  law.  It  has  triumphed  over  the
slavery  established  in  the  Roman  empire;  it  is
contending,  and,  I  trustl  will  one  day  prevail,
against  the  worse  slavery  of  the  West  Indies.


*  Liptiufl  affirms,  (Sat.  b.  i  c.  13.)  that  the  gladiato-
rial shows  sometimes  cost  Europe  twenty  or  thirty


thousand  liven 4n  a  month ;  and  that  not  only  the  men,
but  even  the  women  of  all  ranks  were  passionately  food
of  these  shows.— See  Bishop  Porteus's  Sermon  Xfll.


EVIDENCES  OP  CHRISTIANITY.


381


A  Christian  writer  *  so  early  as  in  the  second
century,  has  testified  the  resistance  which  Chris-
tianjty  made  to  wicked  and  licentious  practices;
though  established. by  law  aifci  by  public  usage : —
*  Neither  in  Parthia,  do  the  Christians,  though
Partisans,  use  polygamy ;  nor  in  Persia,  though
Persians,  do  they  marry  their  own  daughters;
nor  among  the  Bactri,  or  Galli.  do  they  violate*
the  sanctity  of  marriage ;  nor,  wherever  they  are,
do  they  suiter  themselves  to  be  overcome  By  ill-
constituted  laws  and  manners."

Socrates  did  not  destroy  the  idolatry  of  Athens,
or  produce  the  slightest  revolution  in  the  manners
of  Jus  country.

But  the  argument  to  which  I  recur,  is,  that  the
benefit  of  religion,  being  felt  chiefly  in  the  obscu-
rity of  private  stations,  necessarily  escapes  the
observation  of.  history.'  From  the  first  general
notification  of  Christianity  to  the  present  day,
there  have  been  in  every  age  many  millions,  whose
names  were  neVcr  heard  of,  made  better  by  it,  not
only  in  their  conduct,  but  in  their  disposition ;
and  happier,  not  so  much  in  their  external  cir-
cumstances, as  in  that  which  is  inter  prcecordia,
in  that  which  alone  deserves  the  name  of  happi-
ness, the  tranquillity  and  consolation  of  their
thoughts.  It  has  been  since  its  commencement,
the  author  of  happiness  and  virtue  to  millions  and
millions  of  the  human  race.  Who  is  there  that
.  would' not  wish  his  son  to  be  a  Christian  ?

Christianity  also,  in  every  country  in  which  It
is  professed,  hath  obtained  a  sensible,  although
not  a  complete  influence,  upon  the  public  judg-
ment of  uiorals.  And  this  is  very  important.
Tor  without  Ihe  occasional  correction  which  pub-
lic opinion  receives,  by  'referring  to  some  fixed
standard  of  morality,  no  man  can  foretell  into  what
extravagances  it  might  wander.  Assassination
might  become'  as  honourable  as  duelling ;  unna-
tural crimes  be  accounted  as  venial  as  fornication
is  wont'  to  be  accounted.  In  this  way  it  is  possi-
*  ble,  that  many  may  be  kept  in  order  by  Christi-
anity, who  are  not  themselves  Christians.  They
may  be  guided  by  the  rectitude  which  it  commu-
nicates to  public  opinion.  Their  consciences  may
Suggest  their  duty  truly,  and  they  may  ascribe
these  suggestions  to  a  moral  sense,  or  to  the
native  capacity  of  the  human  intellect,  when,  in
feet  they  are  nothing  more  than  the  public  opi-
nion, reflected  from  their.own  minds ;  and  opinion,
in  a  considerable  degree^  modified  by  the  lessons
of  Christianity.  "Certain  it  is,  and  this  is  a  great
deal  to  say,  that  the  generality,  even  of  the  meanest
and  most  vulgar  .and  ignorant  people,  have  truer
and  worthier  notions  of  God,  more  just  and  right
apprehensions  concerning  his  attributes  and  per-
fections, a  deeper  sense  of  the  difference  of  good
and  evil,  a  greater  regard  to  moral  obligations,
and  to  the  plain  and  most  necessary  duties  of
life,  and  a  more  firm  and  universal  expectation
of  a  future  state  of  rewards  and  punishments,
than,  in  any  Heathen  country,  any  considerable
number  of  men  were  found  to  have  had."t

After  all,  the  value  of  Christianity  is  not  to  be
appreciated  by  its  temporal  effect*.  The  object
of  revelation  is  Co  influence  human  conduct  in  this
life j  jbut  what  J  is  gained  to  happiness  by  that
influence,  can  only  be  estimated  by  taking  in  tlie
whole  of  human  existence.  Then^as  hath  already


*  Bardcsanes,  ap.  Easeb.  f?nep.  Evang.  vi.  10,
t  Clarke,  £v.  Hal  BeL  p.  SK.  ed.  v.


been  observed,  there  may  "be  abo  great  conse-
quences of  Christianity,  which  do  not  belong  to*
it  as  a  revelation.  The  effects  upon  human  sal-
vation, of  the  mission,  of  the  death,  of  the  present,
of  the  future  agency  of  Christ,  may  he  universal)
though  the  religion  be  not  universally  known.

Secondly,  I  assert  that  Christianity  is  charged
with  many  consequences  for  which  it  is  not  re-
sponsible. I  believe  that  religions  motives  have
had  no^more  to  do  in  the  formation  of  nine  tenths
of  the  intolerant  and  persecuting  laws,  which  in
different  countries  have  been  established  upon  the
subject  of  religion,  than  they  have  had  Jo  do  in.
England  with  the  making  of  the  game-laws.
These  measures,  although  they  have  the  Chris-
tian, religion 'for  their  subject,  are  resolvable  into
a*  principle  which  Christianity  certainly  did  not
plant  (and  which  Christianity  could  pot  uni-
veraallv  condemn,  because  it  n  not  universally
wromj),  which  principle'  is-  .no  other  than  thia,
that  they  who  are  in  possession  of  power  do  what
they  can'  to  keep,  it:  Christianity  w  answerable
for  no  part  -of  the  mischief  which  has  been  brought
upon  trie  world  by  persecution,  except  that  which
has  arisen  from  conscientious  persecutors.  Now
these  perhaps  have  never  been  either  numeranfl
or  powerful.  Nor  is  it  to  Christianity  that  even
their  mistake  can  fairly  be  imputed.  They  havo
been  misled  by  an  error  not  properly  Christian*  or
religious,  bqt  by  an  error  in  their  moral  philoso-
phy. 'They  pursued  the  particular/ without  ad-
verting to  the  genera!  consequence.  Believing
certain  articles  of  faith,  or  a  certain  mode  of  wor-
ship, to  be  highly  conducive,  or  perhaps  essential,
to  salvation,  they  thought  themselves  bound* to
bring'  all  they  could,  by  every  "means,  into  them.
And  this  they  thought  without  considering  what
would  be  the  effect  of  such  a  conclusion,  when
adopted  amongst  mankind  as  a  general  rule  of
conduct;  ETad  there  been  in  the  New  Testament,
what  there  are  in  the  Kdran,  precepts  authorizing
coercion  In  the  propagation  of  the  religion,  and
the  use  of  violence  towards  unbelievers,  the  case
would  have  been  different.  This  distinction  could
not  have  been  taken,  nor  this  defence  made.

I  apologize  for  no  species  nor  degree  of  perse-
cution, but  I  think  that  even  the  feet  has  been
exaggerated.  The  slave-trade  destroys  more  in
a  year,  than  the  inquisition  does  in  a  hundred,  or
perhaps  hath  done  since  its  foundation.
'  If  it  be  objected,  as  I  apprehend  it  will  be,  that
Christianity  is  chargeable  with  every  mischief,  of
which  it  has  been,  the  occasion,  though  not  the
motive ;  I  answer,  that,  if  the  malevolent  passions
be  there,  the  world  will  never  want  occasions.
The  noxious  element  will  always  find  a  conduc-
tor. Any  point  will  produce  an  explosion.  Did
the  applauded  intercommunity  of  the  Pagan  the-
ology preserve  the  peace  of  the  Roman  world  $
did  it  prevent  oppressions,  proscriptions,  massa-
cres, devastations  ?  Was  it  bigotry  that  carried
Alexander  into  the  East,  or  brought  Cosar  into
Gaul  1  Are  the  nations  of  the  world,  into  which
'Christianity » hath  rfot  found  its  wayt'  or  from
which  it  hath  been  banished,  free  from  conten-
tions ?  Are  their  contentions  less  ruinous  and
sanguinary?  'Is  it  owing  to  Christianity,  or  to
the  want  of  it,  that  the  finest' regions  of  the  East,
the  countries  inter  quotum maria,  the  peninsula
of  Greece,  together  with  a  great  part  of  the  Medi-
terranean coast,  are  at.  this  day  a  desert  1  or
that  the  banks  of  the  Nile,  wnose  constantly  ra-


389


EVIDENCES  OF  CHRISTIANITY.


newedfeitifiry  fa  not  to  be  impaired  by  neglect,
or  destroyed  by  the  ravages  of  war,  serve  only  for
the  aeene  of  a  ferocious  anarchy,  or  the  supply  of
hostilities  1 Europe  itself  has  known


Known
no  religious  wart  for  some"  centuries,  yet
hardly  ever  been  without  war.  Are  the  calami-
ties, which  at  this  day  afflict  it,  to  be  imputed  to
Christianity?  Hath  Poland  fiiUen  by  a  Christian
crusade?  &ath  the  overthrow  in  France  of  civil
eider  and  security,  been  enacted  by  the  votaries
of  our  religion,  or  by  the  foes  ?  Amongst  the
awful  lessons  which  the  crimes  and  the  miseries
of  thai  country  afford  to  mankind,  this  is  one :
that,  in  order  to  be  a  persecutor,  it  is  not  neces-
sary to  be  a  bigot;  that  in  rage  and  cruelty,  in
■nscjiief  and  destruction,  fanatKawn  itself  can  be
outdone  by  infidelity.  -v

'  Finally,  If  war,  as  it  is  now  carried  on  between
nations,  produces  less  misery  and  ruin  than  for-
merly, we  are  indebted  perhaps  to  Christianity
for  the  change,  more  than  -to  any  <X\m  cause.
Viewed  therefore  even  in  its  relation  to  this  sub-
ject, it  appears  to.  have  been  of  advantage  to  the
world. It  hath  humanized  the  conduct  of  wars :


it  hath  ceased  to  excite  them.

The  differences  of  opinion,  that  have  in  all
ages  prevailed  amongst  Christians,  fall  very  much
within  the  alternative  which  has  been  stated.  If
we  possessed  the  disposition  which  Christianity
labours,  above  all  other  qualities  to  inculcate,
these  differences  would  do  little  harm.  If  that
disposition  be  wanting,  other  causes,  even  were
these  absent,  would  continually  rise  up  to  call  forth
the  malevolent  passions  into  action.  Differences
of  opinions,  when  accompanied  with  mutual  cha-
rity, which  Christianity  forbids  them  to  violate,
are  for  the  niostpart  innocent,  and  for  some  pur-
poses useful.  •  They  promote  inquiry,  discussion,
and  knowledge.  They  help  to  keep  up  an  atten-
tion to  religious  subjects,  and  a  concern  about
them,  which  might  be  apt  to  die  away  in-the  calm
and  silence  of  universal  agreement.  I  do  not
know  that  it  is  in  any  degree  true,  that  the  influ-
ence of  religion  is  the  greatest,  where  there  are
the  fewest  djssentem. .


CHAPTER  VOL

The  Conclusion.

iN'retigkm,  as  in  every  other  subject  of  human
reasoning)  much  depends  upon  the  order  in  which
we  dispose  our  inquiries.  A  man  who  takes  up
a  system  of  divinity  with  a  previous  opinion  that
either  every  part  must  be  true,  or  the  whole  false,
approaches  the  discussion  with  great  disadvantage.
No  other  system,  which  is  founded  upon  monl
evidence,  would  bear  to  be  treated  in  the  same
manner.  Nevertheless,  in  a  .certain  degree,  we
are  all  introduced  to  our  religious  studies,  under
this  prejudication.  And  it  cannot  be  avoided.
The  weakness  of  the  human  judgment  in  the
early  part  of  youth,  yet  its  extreme  susceptibility
of  impression,  renders  it  necessary  to  furnish  it
with  some  opinions,  and  with  some  principles  or
other.  Or  indeed,  without  much  express  care,  or
much  endeavour  for  this  purpose,  the  tendency  of
the  mind  of  man  to  assimilate  itself  to  the  habits
of  thinking  and  speaking  which  prevails  around
him,  produces  the  same  effect That  indifferency


and  suspense:  that

judgment,  which  some  require  in  religious  mat-
ters, and  which  some  would  wish  to  be  aimed  at
in  the  conduct  of  education,  are  impossible  to  be
preserved.  They  are  not  given  to  the  condition
of  human  life.

It  is  a  consequence  of  this  institution  that  the
doctrines'  of  religion  come  to  us  before  the  jproofs;
and  come  to  us  with  that  mixture  of  explications
and  inferences'  from  which  no  public  creed  is,  or
can  be,  free.  And  the  effect  which  too  frequently
follows,  from  Christianity  being  presented  to  the
understanding  inN  this  form,  is,  that  when  any
articles,  which  appear  as  parts  of  it,  contradict  the
apprehension  of  the  persons  to  whom  it  is  pro-
posed, men  of  rash  and  confident  tempers  hastily
and  iiriiscriminately  reject  the  whole.  But  is  this
to  do  justice,  either  to  themselves  or  to  the  reli-
gion 1  The  rational  way  of  treating  a  subject  of
such  acknowledged  importance  is  to  attend,  in  the
first  place,  to  the  general  and  substantial  truth  of
its  principles,  and  to  that  alone.  When  we  once
feef-a  foundation ;  when,  we  once  perceive  a  ground
of  credibility  in  its  history,  we  shall  proceed  with
safety  to  inquire  into  the  interpretation  of  its' re-
cords, and  into  the  doctrines  which  have  been  de-
duced from  them.  Nor  will  it  either  endanger
our  faith,  or  diminish  or  alter  our  motives  for  obe-
dience, if  we  should  discover  that  these  conclu-
sions are  formed  with  very  different  degrees  of
probability,  and  possess  very  different  degrees  of
importance:

This  conduct  of  the  undertaking,  dictated  by
every  rule  of  right  reasoning,  will  uphold  personal
Christianity,  even  in  those  countries  in  Which  it
is  established  under  forms  the  most  liable  to  diffi-
culty and  objection.  It  will  also  have  the  farther
effect  of  guarding  us  against  the  prejudices  which
are  wont  to  arise  in  our  minds  to  the  disadvan-
tage of  religion,  from  observing  the  numerous  con-
troversies which  are  carried  on  amongst  its  pro-
fessors, and  likewise  of  inducing  a  spirit  of  lenity
and  moderation  in  our  judgment,  as  well  as  in  our
treatment  of  those  who  stand,  in  such  controver-
sies, upon  sides  opposite  to  ours.  What  is  clear
in  Christianity,  we  vhall  find  to  be  sufficient,  and
to  be  infinitely  valuable;  what  is  dubious,  unne-
cessary to  be  decided,  or  of  very  subordinate  im-
portance; and  what  is  most  obseure,  will  teach
us  to  bear  with  the  opinions  winch  others  may
have  formed  upon  the  same  subject.  We  shall
say  to  those  who  the  most  widely  dissent  frouvus,
what  Augustine  said  to  the  worst  heretics  of  his
age:  "  Ilk  in  vos  snviant,  qui  nesciunt,  cum  quo
labore  verum  inveniatur,  et  quam  difficile  caveantnr
errores; — qui  nesciunt,  cum  quanta  difficuitate
sanetur  oculus  interioris  hominis;*— qui  nesciunt,
quibus  suspiriis  <jt  gemitibus  fiat  tit  ex  quantula-
cunque  parte  possit  mtelligi  Deus."*

A  judgment,  moreover,  which  is  once  pretty  -
well  satisfied  of  the  general  truth  of  the  reugjgn,
will  not  only  thus  discriminate  in  its  doctrines,
but  will  possess  sufficient  strength  to  overcome
the  reluctance  of  the  imagination  to  admit  articles
of  faith  which  are  attended  with  difficulty  of  ap-
prehension, if  such  articles  of  faith  appear  to  be
truly  parts  of  the  revelation.  It  was  to  be  expect-
ed beforehand,  that  what  related  to  the  economy,
and  to  the  persons,  of  the  invisible'  world,'  which
revelation  professes-  to  do,  and  which,  if  true,  it


*  Aug.  contra  Ep.  Food.  cap.  il.  a.  2, 3.


EVIDENCES  OP  CHRISTIANITY.


SO


actually  does,  should  contain  some  points  remote
from  oar  analogies,  and  from  the  comprehension
of  a  mind  which  hath  acquired  all  its  ideas  from
sense  ancj-from  experience.  -

.  R  hath  been  my  care,  in  the  preceding  work,  to
preserve  the  separation  .between  evidences  and
doctrines  as  inviolable  as  I  could ;  to  remove  from
the  primary  question  all  considerations  which
have  been  unnecessarily  joined  with  it;  and  to
offer  a  defence  to  Christianity,  which  every  Chris-
tian might  read,  without  seeing  the  tenets  in
which  he  had  been  brought  up  attacked  or  decried :
and  it  always  afforded  a  satisfaction  to  my  mind
to  observe  that  this  was  practicable ;  that  few  or
none  of  our  many  controversies  with  one  another
affect  or  relate  to  the  proofs  of  our  religion ;  that
the  rent  never  descends  to  the  foundation.

•  The  truth  of  Christianity  depends  upon  its
leading  facts,  and  upon  them  alone.  Now  of  these*
we  have  evidence  which  ought  to  satisfy  us,  at
least  until  it  appear  that  mankind  have  ever  been
deceived  by  the  same:  We  have  some  uncontest-
ed and  incontestable  points,  to  which  the  history
of  the  human  species  have  nothing  similar  to  offer.
A  Jewish  peasant  changed  the  religion  of  the
world,  and  that,  without  force,  without^  power,
without  support ;  without  one  natural  source,  or.
circumstance  of  attraction,  influence,  or  success.
Such  a  thing  hath  not  happened  in  any  other  in-
stance. The  companions  of  this  Person,  after^he
himself  had  been  put  to  death  for  his  attempt,  as-
serted his  supernatural  character,  founded  upon
his  supernatural  operations :  and,  in  testimony  of
the  truth  of  their,  assertions,  i.  e.  in  consequence
of  their  own  belief  of  thai  truth,  and  in  order  to.
communicate  their  knowledge  of  it  to  others,  vo-
luntarily entered  upon  lives  of  toil  and  hardship,
and  with  a  full  experience  of  their  danger,  com-
mitted themselves  to  the  last  extremities  of  perse-
cution. This  hath  not  a  parallel.  More  parti-
cularly, a  very  few  days  after  this  Person  ha3
been  publicly  executed,  and  in  the  very  city  in
which  he  was  buried,  these  his  companions  de-
clared with  one  voice  that  his  body  was  restored
to  life;  that  they  had  seen  him,  handled  him,  ate
with  him ;  conversed  with  him;  and,  in  pursuance
of  their  persuasion  of  the  truth  of  what  they  told,
preached  his  religion,  with  this  strange  feet  as  the
foundation  of  it,  in  the  face  of  those  who  had
killed  him,  who  were  armed  with  the  power  of  the
country^  and  necessarily  and  naturally  disposed  to
treat  his  followers  as  they  had  treated  himself;
and  having  done  this  upon  the  spot  where  the
event  took  place,  carried  the  intelligence  of  it
abroad,  in  despite  of  difficulties  and  opposition,
and  where  the  nature  of  their  errand  gave  them
nothing  to  expect  but  derision,  insult,  andoutrage.
— This  is  without  example.  These  three  facts,  I
think,  are  certain,  and  would  have  been  nearly  so,
if  the  Gospels  had  never  been  written.  The
Christian  story,  as  to  these  points,,  hath  never
varied.  No  other  hath  been  set  up  against  it.
Every  letter,  every  discourse,  every  controversy,
amongst  the  followers  of  the  religion ;  every  book
written  by  them,  from  the  age  of  its  commence-
ment to  the  present  time,  in  every  part  of  the
world  in  which  it  hath  been  professed,  and  with
every  sect  into  which  it  hath  been  divided  (and
we  have  letters  andNlisconrses  written  by  contem-
poraries, by  witnesses  of  the  transaction,  by  per-
sons themselves  bearing  a  share  in  it,  and  other
writings  following  that  age  in  tegular  succession,)


ex

Lor


concur  in  representing  these  facts  in  this  manner.
A  religion,  which  now  possesses  the  greatest  part
of  the  civUiied  world,  imqucstionabiy  sprang  np
at  Jerusalem  at  this  time.  Some  account  must  be
given  of  its  origin;  some  cause-  assigned  for  its
rise.  All  the.  accounts  of  this  origin,  all  the  ex-
plications of  this. cause,  whether  taken  from,  the
writings  of  the  early  followers  of  the  religion  (in
which,  and  in  which  perhaps  alone,  it  could  oe
pected  that  they  should  be  distinctly  unfolded,)
from  occasional  notices  in  other  writings  of  that
or  the  adjoining  age,  either  expressly  allege  the
facts  above  stated  as  the  means  by  which  the  re-
ligion was  set  up,  or  advert  to  its  comniencement
in  a  manner  which  agrees  with  the  supposition  of
these  facts  being  true,  and  which  testifies  their
operation  and  effects.  v  ^

.These  propositions  alone  lay  a  foundation  for
our  faith j  for  they  prove  the  existence  of  a  trans-
action, which  cannot  even  in  its  most  general
parts  be  accounted  for,  upon  any  reasonable  sun-
position,  except  that  of  the  truth  of  the  mission.
But  the  particulars,  the  detail  of  the  miracles  or
miraculous  pretences  .(for  such  there  necessarily
must  have  been  A  upon  which  this  -unexampled
transaction  rested,  and  for  which  these  men  acted
and  suffered  as  they  did  act  and  suffer,  it  is  un-
doubtedly of  great  importance  to  US'  to  know.  We
have  thia  detail  from  the  fountain-head,  from  the
persons  themselves;  in  accounts  written  by  eye-
witnesses of  the  scene,  by  contemporaries  and
companions  of  those  who  were  so ;  not  in  one
book,  but  four,  each  containing  enough  for  the
verification  of  the  religion,  all  agreeing  Ui  the  fun-
damental parts  of  the  history.  We  have  the  au-
thenticity of  these'-books  established,  by  more  and
stronger  proofs  than  belong  to  almost  any  ether
ancient  book  whatever,  and  by  proofs  which
widely  distinguish  them  from  any  others  claiming
a  similar  authority  to  theirs.  If  there  were  any
good  reason  for  doubt  concerning  the  names  to
which  these  books  are  ascribed,  (which  there  is
not,  for  they  were  never  ascribed  to  any  other,
and  we  have  evidence  not  long  after  their  publi-
cation of  their  bearing  the  names  which  they  now
bear,)  their  antiquity,  of  which  there  is  no  question,
their  reputation  and  authority  amongst  the  early
disciples  of  the  religion,  of  which  there  .is  as  little,
form  a  valid  proof  that  they  must,  in  the  main  at
least,  have  agreed  with  what  the  first  teachers  of
the  religion  delivered.

When  we  open  these  ancient  volumes,  we  cfis-
vcover  in  them  marks  of  truth,  whether  we  consi-
der each  in  itself,  or  collate  them  with  one  another.
The  writers  certainly  knew  something  of  what
they  were  writing  about,  for  they  manifest  an  ac-
quaintance with  local  circumstances,  with  the  his-
tory and  usages  of,  the  times,  which  could  only
belong  to  an  inhabitant  of  that  country,  living  in
that  age.'  In  every  narrative  we  perceive  simplicity
and  undesignedneSB ;  the  air  and  the  language  of
reality.  When  we  compare  the  different  narra-
tives together,  we  find  them  ad  varying  as  to  re-
pel all  suspicion  of  confederacy ;  so  agreeing  under
this  variety,  as  to  show  that  the  accounts  had  one
real  transaction  for  their  common  foundation;
often  attributing  different  actions  and  discourses
to  the  person  wnose  history,  or  rather,  memoirs  of
whose  history,  they  profess  to  relate,  yet  actions
and  discourses  so  similar,  as  very  much  to  bespeak
the  same  character;  which  is  a  coincidence)  that,
in  such  writers  as  they  were,  could  only  be  the


884


EVIDENCES  OF  CHRISTIANITY.


consequence  of  that  writing  from  tact,  and  not
tron»  imagination.'

These  four  narratives  are  confined  to  the  his-
tory of  the  Founder  of  the  religion,  and  end  with
his  ministry.  Since,  however,  it  is  certain  that
the  affair  weiit  on,  we  cannot  help  being  anxious
to  know  how  jt  proceeded.  This  intelligence  hath
come  cown  down  to  us  in  a  work  purjwrting  to  be'
written  by  a  person,  himself,  connected  with  the
business  during  the  first  stages  of  it*  jnogress,
taking  up  the  story  where  the  former  histories
had  left  it,  carrying  on  the  narrative,  oftentimes
with  great  particularity,  and  throughout  with  the
appearance  of  flood  sense  *  information,  and  can-
dour;  stating  all  along  the  origin,  and  the  only  pro-
bable origin,  of  affects  which  unquestionably  were
produced,  together  with  the  natural  consequences
of  situations  which  unquestionably  did  exist;  and
confirmed,  in  the  substance  at  least  of  the  account,
by  the  strongest  possible  accession  of  testimony
which  a  history  can  receive,  original  tetter*,  writ-
ton  by  the  person  who  Is  the  principal  subject  of
the  history,  written  upon  the  business  to  which
the  history  relates,  and  during  the  period,  or  soon
after  the  period,  which  the  history  comprises.  No
man  can  say  that  this  all  together  is  not  a  body  of
strong  historical  evidence.

When  we  reflect  that  some  of  those  from  whom
the  books  proceededf  are  related  to  have  themselves
wrought  .miracles,  to  have  been  the  subject  of  mi-
racles, or  4>f  .supernatural  assistance  in  propagat-
ing the  religion,  we  may  perhaps  be  led  to  think,
that  more  credit,  or  a  different  kind  of  credit,  is
due  to  these  accounts,  than-  what  can  be  claimed
by  merely  human  testimony.  But  this,  is  an  ar-
gument which  cannot  be  -addressed  to'  sceptics  or
unbelievers.  A  man  must  be  a  Christian  before
he  can  receive  h.  The  inspiration  of  the  histori-
cal Scripture*,  the  nature,  degree,  and  extent  of
that  inspiration,  are  questions  undoubtedly  of  .se-
rious discussion ;  but  they  are  questions  amongst .
Christians  -themselves,  and  not  between  them  and
others.  The  doctrine  itself  is  by  no  means  neces-
sary to  the  belief  of  Christianity,  which  must;  in
the  first  instance  at  least,  depend  upon  the  ordi-
nary maxims  of  historical  credibility  .t

In  viewing  the  detail  of  miracles  recorded  in
these  books,  we  find  every  supposition  negatived,
bv  which*  they  can  be  resolved  into  fraud  or  delu-
sion. They  were  not  secret,  not  momentary,  not
tentative,  nor  ambiguous ;  nor  performed,  under
the  sanction  of  authority,  with  the  spectators  on
their  aide,  or  in  affirmance  of  tenets  and  practices
already  established.  We  find  also  the  evidence
alleged  for  them,  and  which  evidence  was  by  great
numbers  received,  different  from  that  upon  which
ether- miraculous  accounts  rest.  It  was  contem-
porary," it  was  published  upon  the  spot,  it  conti-
nued ;  it  involved  interests  and  questions  of  the
greatest  magnitude  j  it  contradicted  the  most  fixed
persuasions  and  prejudices  of  the  perrons  to  whom
it  was  addressed;,  it  required  from  those  who  ac-
cepted it,  not  a  simple,  indolent  assent,  but  a
change,  from  thenceforward,  of  principles  and
conduct,  i  submission  to  consequences  the  most
serious  and  the  most  deterring,  to  loss  and  danger,


•flee  Peter's  speech  upon -curing  the  cripple, -(Acts  iiil
18,)  the  council,  of  the  apoellen,  (xv.)  Paul's  discourse  at
Athens  (ivii.  22,)  before  Agrippa.  (xxvj.)  I  notice  these
passages,  both  as  fraught  with  good  sense,  and  as  free
from  the  smallest  tincture  of  enthusiasm.

t  See  Powcl's  Ditoourses,  disc  xv.  p.  245.


to  insult,  outrage,  and  persecution.  How  such  a
story  should  be  false,  .or,  if  false,  how  under  such
circumstances  it  should  make  its  way,  J  think  im-
possible to  be  explained :  yet  such  the  Christian
story  was,  such'  were  the  circumstances  under
which  it  came  forth,  and  in  opposition  to  such
difficulties  did  it  prevail.

An  event  so  connected  with  the  religion,  and
with  the  fortunes,  of  the  Jewish  people,  as  one  of
their  race,  one  bom  amongst  them,  establishing
his  authority  and  ins  law  throughout  a  great  por-
tion of  the  civilized  world,  it  was  perhaps  to  he
expected,-  should  be  noticed  in  the  prophetic  writ-
ings of  that  nation;  especially  when  this  Person,
together  with  his  own  mission,  caused  also  to  be
acknowledged  the  divine  original  of  their  institu-
tion, and  by  those  who  before  had  altogether  re-
jected it.  Accordingly,  We-  perceive  in  'these
writings  various  intimations  concurring  in  the
person  and  history  of  Jesus,  in  a  manner,  and  in
a  degree,  in  which  passages  taken  from  these  books
could  not  be  made. to  concur  in  any  person  arbi-
trarily assumed,  or  in  any  person  except  him  who
has  been  the 'author  of  great  changes  in  the  aflairs
and  opinions  of  manjrinjl.  Of  some  of  these  pre-
dictions the  weight  depends  a  good  deal  upon
the  concurrence.  Others'  possess  great  separate
strength :  one  in  .particular  does,  this irian  eminent
degree.  It  is  an  entire  description,  manifestly  di-
rected "to  one  character  and  to  one  scene  of  things:
it  is  extant  in  a  writing,  or  collection  of  writings,
declaredly  prophetic;  and  it  applies  to  Christ's
character,  and  to  the  circumstances  of  his  life  and
death,  with  considerable  precision,  and  in  a  way
which  no  diversity  of  interpretation  hath,  in  my
opinion,  been  able  to  confound.  That  the  advent
of  Ghrist,  and  the  consequences  of  it  should  not
have  been  more  distinctly  revealed  in  the  Jewish
sacred  books,  is,J  think,  in  some  measure  accounted
for  by  the  consideration,  that  for  the  Jews  to  have
foreseen  the  fall  of  their  institution,  and  that  it
was  to  emerge  at  length  into  a  more  perfect  and
comprehensive  dispensation,  would  have  cooled
too  much,  and  relaxed  their  zeal  for  it,  and  their
adherence  to  it,  upon  which  zeal  and  adherence
the  preservation  in  the  world  of  any  remains,  for
many  ages,  of  religious  truth  might  in  a  great
measure  depend.

Of  what  a  revelation  discloses  to  mankind,  one,
and  only  one,  question  can  properly  be  asked,
Was-it  of  importance  to  mankind  to  know,  or  to
be  better  assured  of?  In  this  question,  when
we  turn  our  thoughts  to  the  great  Christian  doe-
trine  of  the  resurrection  of  the  dead,  and  of  a  fu-
ture judgment,  no  doubt  can  possibly  be  entertain-
ed. He  who  gives  me  riches  or  honours,  docs
nothing ;  he  who  even  gives  me  health,  does  little
in  comparison  with  that  which  lays  before,  me
just  grounds  for  expecting  a  restoration  to  life,
and  a  day  of  account  and  retribution :  which  thing
Christianity  hath  done  for  millions.

Qther  articles  of  the  C hristian  faith,  although  of
infinite  importance  when  placed  beside  any  other
topic  of  human  inquiry,  are  only  the  adjuncts  and
circumstances  of  this.  They  are.  however,  such
as  appear  worthy  of  the  original  to  which  we
ascribe  them.  The  morality  of  the  religion,  whe-
ther taken  from*  the  precepts  or  the  example  of  its
Founder,  or  from  the  lessons  of  its  priraitive
teachers,  derived,  as  it  should  seem,  from  what
had  been  inculcated  by  their  Master,  is,  in  all  its
parts,  wise  and  pure;  neither  adapted  to  vulgar


EVIDENCES  OP  CHRISTIANITY.


885


m  ^  ,  *r  flattering  popular  notion*,  nor  ex-
cuswg  established  practices,  but  calculated,  in, the
matter  of  its  instruction,  truly  to  promote  human
happiness,  and  in  the  form  in  which  it  was  con-
veyed, to  produce  impression  and  effect ;  a  morality,
which,  let  .it  have  proceeded  from  any  person
whatever,  would  have  been  satisfactory  evidence
of  his  good  sense 'and  integrity,  of  the  soundness
of  his  understanding  and  the  probity  of  his  designs ;
a  morality,  in  every  view  of  it,  much  more  perfect
than  could  have  been  expected  from  the  natural
circumstances  and  character  of  the  person  who
delivered  it ;  a  morality,  in  a  word,  which  is,  and
bath  been,  most  beneficial  to  mankind.  ,

Upon  the  greatest,  therefore,  of  all  possible  oc-
casions, and  for  a  purpose  of  inestimable  value,  it
pleased  the  Deity  to  vouchsafe  a '  miraculous
attestation.  Having  done  this  for  the  institution,
when  this  alone  could  fix  its  authority,  or  give  to
It  a  beginning,  he  committed  its  future  progress  to
the  natural  means  of  human  communication,  and
to  the  influence  of  those  causes  by  which  human
conduct  and  human  aJfirirs  are  governed.  The
seed,  being  sown,  was  left  to  vegetate ;  the  leaven,
being  inserted,  was  left  to  ferment;  and  both  ac-
cording to  the  laws  of  nature :  laws,  nevertheless,
disposed  and  controlled  by  that  Providence  which
conducts  the  aflairs  of  the  universe*  though  by  an
influence  inscrutable,  and  generally  undistuiguish-
ahle  by  us.  And  in  this  Christianity  is  analogous
to  most  other  provisions  for  happiness.  The
provision  is  made ;  and,  being  made,  is  left  to  act
according  to  laws,  which,,  forming  a  part  of  a  more
general  system,  regulate  this  particular  subject,  in
common  with  many  others.

Let  the  constant  recurrence  to  our  observation
of  contrivance,  design,  and  wisdom,  in  the  works
of  nature,  once  fix  upon  our  minds  the  belief  of  a
God,  and  after  that  all  is  easy.  In  the  counsels
of  a  being  possessed  of  the  power  and  disposition
which  the  Creator  of  the  universe  must  possess,  it
MB  not  improbable  that  there  should  be  a  future
state ;  it  is  not  improbable  that  we  should  be  ac-
quainted with  it  A  future  state  rectifies  every
tiling:  because,  if  moral  agents  be  made,  in  the
last  event,  happy  or  miserable,  according  to  their
conduct  in  the  stations  and  under  the  circum-
stances in  which  they  are  placed,  it  seems  not
very  material  by  the  operation  of  what  causes,
aococding  to  what  rules,  or  even,  if  you  please  to
call  it  so,  by  what  chance  or  caprice,  these  stations
are  assigned,  or  these  circumstances  determined.
This  hypothesis,  therefore,  solves  all  that  objec-
tion to  the  divine  care  and  goodness,  which  the
promiscuous  distribution  of  good  and  evil  (I  do
not  mean  in  the  doubtful  advantages  of  riches
and  grandeur,  but  in  the  unquestionably  import-
ant distinctions  of  health  and  sickness,  strength
and  infirmity,  bodily  ease  and  pain,  mental  ala-
crity and  depression)  is  apt  on  so  many  occasions
to  create.  This  one  truth  changes  the  nature  of
things;  gives  order  to  confusion;  makes  the  moral
worn  ota  piece  with  the  natural.

Nevertheless,  a  higher  degree  of  assurance  than
that  to  which  it  is  possible  to  advance  this,  or  any
argument  drawn  from  .the  light  of  nature,  was
necessary,  especially  to  overcome  the  shock  which
the  imagination  and  the  senses  receive  from  the
effects  and  the  appearances  of  death,  and  the
obstruction  which  thence  arises  to  the  expectation
of  either  a  continued  or  a  future  existence.  This
difficulty,  although  of  a  nature,  no  doubt,  to  act


very  forcibly,  will  be  found,  I  think,  upon  reflec-
tion, to  reside  more  in  our  habits  of  apprehension,
than  in  the  subject;  and  that  the  giving  way  to
it,  when  we  have  any  reasonable  grounds  for  tip
contrary,  is  rather  an  indulging  of  the  imagina-
tion, than  any  thing  else.  ADstractedly  consider-
ed, that  is.  considered,  without  relatipn  to  the*  dif-
ference wnich  habit,  and  merely  habit,  produces
in  our  faculties~and  modes  of  apprehension,  I  do
not  see  any  thing  more  in  the  resurrection  of  a
dead  man,  than  in  the  conception  of  a  child:
except  it  be  this,  that  the  one  comes  into  his  world
with  a  system  of  prior  consciousnesses  about  him,
which  the  other  does  not :  and  no  person  will  say,
that  he  knows  enough  of  either  subject  to  perceive,
that  this  circumstance  makes  such  a  difference  in
the  two  cases,  that  the  one  should  be  easy,  and
the  other  impossible  ;*the  one  natural,  the  other
not  so.  To  the  first  man,  the  succession  of  the
species  would  be  as  incomprehensible,  as  the  re-
surrection of  the  dead  is  to  us.

Thought  is  different  from  motion,  perception
from  impact :  the  individuality  of  a  mind  is  hardly
consistent  with  the  divisibility  of  an  extended
substance;  or  its  volition,  that  is,  its  power  of
originating  motion,  with  the  inertness  which
cleaves  U>  every  portion  of  matter  which  our  ob-
servation or  our  experiments  can  reach.  These
distinctions  lead  us  to  an  immaterial  principle :
at  least,  they  do  this ;  they  so  negative  the  me-
chanical properties  ef  matter,  in  the  constitution
of  a  sentient,  still  more  of  a  rational  being,  that
no  argument  drawn  from  these  properties,  can  be
ofSany  great  weight  in  opposition  to  other  reasons,
when  thwquestion  respects  the  changes  of  which
such  a  nature  is  capable,  or  the  manner  .in  which
these  changes  are  effected.  Whatever  thought
be,  or  whatever  it  depend  upon,  the  regular  expe-
rience of  sleep  makes  one  thing  concerning  it  cer-
tain, that  it  can  be  completely  suspended,  and
completely  restored.

if  any  one  find  it  too  great  a  strain  upon  his
thoughts,  to  admit  the  notion  of  a  substance,
strictly  immaterial,  that  is.  from  which  extension
and  solidity  are  excluded,  he  can  find  no  difficulty
in  allowing  that  a  particle  as  small  as  a  particle
of  light,  minuter  than  all  conceivable  dimensions,
may  just  as  easily  be  the  depositary,  the  organ,
and  the  vehicle,  of  consciousness,  as  the  conge-
ries of  animal  substance  which  forms  a  human
.body,  or  the  human  brain ;  that,  being  so,  it  may
transfer  a  proper  identity  to  whatever  shall  here-
after be  united  to  it ;  may  be  safe  amidst  the  de-
struction of  its  integuments;  may  connect  the
natural  with  the  spiritual,  the  corruptible  with
the  glorified  body.  If  it  be  said,  that  the  mode
and  means  of  all  this  is  imperceptible  by  our
senses,  it  is  only  what  .is  true  of  the  most  import-
ant agencies  and  operations.  The  great  powers
of  nature  are  all  invisible.  Gravitation,  electricity,
magnetism,  though  constantly  present,  and  con-
stantly exerting  their  influence;  though  within
us,  near  us,  and  about  us ;  though  diffused  through-
out all  space,  overspreading  the  surface,  or  pene-
trating the  contexture,  of  all  bodies  with  which
we  arc  acquainted,  depend  upon  substances  and
actions  which  are  totally  concealed  from  our
senses. The  Supreme  Intelligence  is  so  himself.

But  whether  these  or  any  other  attempts  to
satisfy  the  imagination,  bear  any  resemblance  to
the  truth,  or  whether  the  imagination,  which,  as
I  have  said  before,  is  a  mere  slave  of  habit,  can  be


aas


EVIDENCES  OF  CHRISTIANITY.


satisfied  or  not:  when  a  future  ■tale,  tod  the
revelation  of  a  future  state,  is  not  only  perfectly
consistent  with  the  attribute*  of  the  Being  who
governs  the  universe;  but  when  it  is  more,  when
ft  alone  removes  the  appearances,  of  contrariety
which  attend  the  operations  of  his  will  towards
creatures  capable  of  comparative  merit  and  de-
merit, of  reward  and  punishment ;  when  a  strong
body  of  historical  evidence,  confirmed  by  many
internal  tokens  of  truth  and  authenticity,  gives
pa  iust  reason  to  believe  that  such  a  revelation
hath  actually  been  made;  we  ought  to  set  oar
minds  at  rest  with  the  assurance,  that  in  the
resources  of  Creative  'Wisdom,  expedients  can-
not be  wanted  to  carry  into  effect  what  the  Deity
hath  purposed :  that  either  a  new  and  mighty
influence  will  descend  upon  the  human  world  to


or  thai

amidst  the  other  wonderrbJ  contrivances  with
which  the  universe  abounds,  and  by  same  of  which
we  see  anhnal  life,  in  many  instances,  assuming
improved  forms  of  existence,  acquiring  new  or-
gana,  new  perceptions,  and  new  sources  of  enjoy-
ment, provision  is  also  made,  though  by  methods
secret  to  us  (as  all  the  great  processes  of  nature
are,)  for  conducting  the  objects  of  God's  moral
government,  through  the  necessary  cl
their  frame,  to  those  final  distinctions  <
ness  and  misery,  which  he  *
reserved  for  c
tue  and  vice,
right  and  the  wrong  <
ties  and  opportunities  with  which  1
pleased,  severally,  to  intrust,  and  to  try  us.


wrouv  muni

changes  of
m  of  happi-
nusery,  which  he  bath  declared  to  be
for  obedience  and  IransgressuMi,  for  vn>
vice,  for  the  use  and  the  nesjecL  the
I  the  wrong  employment,  of  the  meal-


NATURAL  THEOLOGY.


TO  THE  HONOURABLE  AND  RIGHT  REV.  SHTJTE  BARRINGTON,  LI*D.
LORD  BISHOP  OF  DURHAlL,

My  Loan,— Tk  following  Work  was  undertaken  at  your  Lsrdehifs  recommendation,  and,
among*  other  motives,- for  ike  purpose  of  making  the  mod  acceptable  return  4hat  I  could,  for  q
great  and  important  benefit  conferred  upon  me.

It  may  be  unnecessary,  yet  not  perhaps  quite  impertinent,  to  ttate  to  your  Lordship,  and  to  ike
reader,  tke  several  inducements  that  have  led  me  once  more  to  the  ptes*.  The  favour  of  my  /rot
and  ever-honoured  Patron  had  put  me  in  possession  of  so  liberal  a  provision  in  ike  Church,  at
abundantly  to  satisfy  my  wants,  and  much  to  exceed  my  pretensions.  Your  Lordship's  munifi-
cence, in  conjunction  with  that  of  some  other  excellent  Prelates,  who  regarded  my  services  with  the
partialky  with  which  your  Lordship  was  pleased  to  consider  them,  hath  since  placed  me  in
etcUsiasticul  situations,  more  than  adequate  to  every  object  of  reasonable  ambition.  In  the  mean
time,  a  weak,  and,  of  late,  a  painful  state  of  health,  deprived  me  of  the  power  of  discharging  the
duties  of  my  station  in  a  manner  at  all  suitable,  either  to  my  sense  of  those  duties,  or  to  my  moat
anxious  wishes  concerning  them.  My  inability  for  the  public  functions  of  my  profession,  amongst
other  consequences,  left  me  muck  at  leisure.  That  leisure  was  not  to  be  lost.  It  was  onlyinmy
study  that  I  could  repair  my  deficiencies  in  the  church  :  it  was  only  through  the  press  that  I  could
apeak.  Ttiese  circumstances  entitled  your  Lordship  in  particular  to  call  upon  me  for  the  only
specits  of  exertion  of  which  I  was  capable,  and  disposed  me  without  hesitation  to  obey  the  call  in
tkebeH  manner  that  I  could.  In  the  choice  of 'a  subject,  J had  no  place  left  for  doubt :  in  saying
which,  I  do  not  so  much  refer,  either  to  the  supreme  importance  of  the  subject,  or  to  any  scepticism
concerning  it  with  which  the  present  limes  are  charged,  as  I  do  to  its  connexion  with  the  subjects
treated  of  in  my  former  publications.  The  following  discussion  alone  was  wanted  to  make  up  my
works  into  a  system:  in  which  works,  suck  as  they  are,  the  public  have  now  before  them,  tke  evU
donees  of  Natural  Religion,  the  evidences  of  Revealed  Religion,  and  an  account  of  the  duties  that
result  from  both.  R  is  of  small  importance  that  they  have  been  written  in  an  order  the  very  re*
none  of  that  in  which  they  ougU  to  be  read.  I  commend,  therefore,  the  present  volume  to  your
Lordship's  protection,  not  only  as,  in  all  probability,  my  last  labour,  but  as  tke  completion  of  a
tegular  and  comprehensive  design.

Hitherto,  my  Lord,  I  have  been  speaking  of  myself,  and  not  of  my  Patron.  Your  Lordship
wmnU  not  tke  teenmony  of  a  Dedicate  I  consult  therefore  the  inu

pulse  of  my  own  mind  alone  when  I  declare,  that  in  no  respect  has  my  intercourse  with  your
Lordship  been  more  gratifying  to  me,  than  in  ike  opportunities  which  it  has  afforded  me,  of  observ
tug  your  earnest,  active,  and  unwearied  solicitude,  for  the  advancement  of  s
a  solicitude,  nevertheless,  accompanied  with  that  candour  of  mind,  which  suffers  no  subordinate
differences  of  opinion,  when  there  is  a  coincidence  in  tke  main  intention  and  object,  to  produce  any
alienation  of  esteem,  or  diminution  of  favour.  R  is  fortunate  for  a  country,  and  honourable  to
its  government,  when  qualities  and  dispositions  like  these  are  placed  in  high  and  influencing  sta-
tions. Such  U  the  sincere  judgment  which  I  have  formed  of  your  Lordship's  character,  and  of  He
public  value :  my personal  obligations  I  can  never  forget.  Under  a  due  sense  of  both  these  eonsu
derations,  1 beg  leave  to  subscribe  myself,  with  great  respect  and  gratitude,  My  Lord,  your  Lord*
ship's  faithful  and  most  devoted  servant,  WILLIAM  PALEY.

Bisbop-Wearmouth,  July,  1809.


CHAPTER  L
State  of  the  Argument.


In


a,  atone,  and  were  asked


1  pitched  my
*d  how  the  0


foot


to  be  there:  I  might  possibly  answer,  thai
for  any  thing  I  knew  to  the  contrary,  it  had  lain
there  for  eier :  nor  would  ttjperhapa  l»  yery  eaay
to  ahow  the  absurdity  of  thie  answer.  Bat  sup-
pose I  had  found  a  watch  upon  the  ground,  and

387


NATURAL  THEOLOGY.


it  should  be  inqmned  how  the  watch  happened  to  be
In  that  place ;  1  should  hardly  think  of  the  answer
which  I  had  before  riven,  that  for  any  thing  I
knew,  the  watch  might  have  always  been  there.
Yet  wiry  should  not  this  answer  serve  for.  the.
watch  as  well  as  for  the  stone  1  why  is  it  not  as
admiaeable  in  the  second  case  as  in  the  first  1  For
this  reason,  and  for  no  other,  viz.  that  when  we
come  to  inspect  the  watch,  we  perceive  (^hat  we
could  not  discover  in  the  stone)  that  its  several
parts  are  framed  and  put  together  for  a  purpose,
e.  g.  that  they  are  so  formed  and  adjusted  as  to
produce  motion,  and  that  motion  so  regulated  as
to  point  out  the  hour  of  the  day ;  that,  if  the  dif-
ferent parts  had  been  differently  shaped  from  what
they  are,  of  a  different  size  from  what  they  are.  or
placed  after  any  other  manner,  or  in  any  other
order,  than  that  in  which  they  are  placed,  either  no
motion  at  all  would  have  been  carried  on  in  the
machine,  or  none  which  would  have  answered  the
W  Jjse  that  is  now  served  by  it.  To  reckon  up  a
few  of  the  plainest  of  these  parts,  and  of  their  of-
fices, all  tending  to  one  result: — We  see  a  cylin-
drical box  containing  a  coiled  elastic  spring,  which,
by  its  endeavour  to  relax  itself,  turns  round  the
box.  We  next  observe  a  flexible  chain  (artifi-
cially wrought  for  the  sake  of  flexure,)  communi-
cating the  action  of  the  spring  from  the  box  to  the
fusee.  We  then  find  a  series  of  wheels,  the
teeth  of  which  catch  in,  and  apply  to  each  other,
conducting  the  motion  from  the  fusee  to.  the
balance,  and  from  the  balance  to  the  pointer ;  and
at  the  same  time,  by  the  size  and  .shape  of  those
wheels  so  regulating  that  motion,  as  to  terminate
in  causing  an  index,  by  an  equable  and  measured
nrogiession,  to  pass  over  a  given  space  in  a  given
** — We  take  notice  that  the  wheels  are  made


of  brass  .in  order  to  keep  them  from  rust;  the

rigs  of  steel,  no  other  metal  being  so  elastic ;
over  the  face  of  the  watch  there  is  placed  a
glass,  a  material  employed  in  no  other  part  of  the
work,  but  in  the  room  of  which,  if  there  had  been
any  other  than  a  transparent  substance,  the  hour
could  not  be  aeen  without  opening  the  case.  This
mechanism  being  observed  (it  requires  indeed  an
examination  of  the  instrument,  and  perhaps  some
previous  knowledge  of  the  subject,  to  perceive  and
understand  it ;  but  being  once,  as  we  have  said,  ob-
served and  understood,)  the  inference,  we  think,  is
inevitable,  that  the  watch  must  have  had  a  maker ;
that  there  must  have  existed,  at  some  time,  and  at
tome  place  or  other,  an  artificer  or  artificers,  who
formed  it  foe  the  purpose  which  we  find  it  actual-
ly to  answer ;  who  comprehended  its  construction,
and  designed  its  use.

hm  Nor  would  it,  I  apprehend,  weaken  the  con-
clusion, that  we  had  never  seen  a  watch  made ;
that  we  had  never  known  an  artist  capable  of
making  one,  that  we  were  altogether  incapable  of
executing;  such  a  piece  of  workmanship  ourselves,
or  <£  understanding  in  what  manner  it  was  per-
formed ;  all  this  being  no  more  than  what  is  true
of  some  exquisite  remains  of  ancient  art,  of  some
lost  arts,  ana,  to  the  generality  of  mankind,  of  the
more  curious  productions  of  modern  manufacture.
Does  one  man  in  a  million  know  how  oval  frames
•re  turned  1  Ignorance  of  this  kind  exalts  our
opinion  of  the  unseen  and  unknown  artist's  skill
ir  he  be  unseen  and  unknown,  but  raises  no  doubt
in  our  inind8  of  the  existence  and  agency  of  such
an  artist,  at  some  former  time,  and  in  some  place
or  other. Nor  can  I  perceive  that  it  varies  at  all


the  inference,  whether  the  question  arise  con*
cerning  a  human  agent,  or  concerning  an  agent  of
a  different  species,  or  an  agent  possnwing  in  some
respects  a  different  nature.

II.  Neither,  secondly,  would  it  invalidate  our
conclusion,  that  the.  watch  sometimes  went  wrong,
or  that  it  seldom  went  exactly  right  The  pur-
pose of  the  machinery,  the  design  and  the  design-
er, might  be  evident,  and  in  the  case  supposed
would  l)e  evident,  in  whatever  way  we  accounted
for  the  irregularity  of  the  movement,  or  whether
we  could  account  for  it  or  not  It  is  not  neces-
sary that  a  machine  be  perfect,  in  order  to  show
with  what  design  it  was  made;  still  leasnecea
where  the  only  question  is,  whether  it  were  i
with  any  design  pt  all.

III.  Nor,  thirdly,  would  it  bring  any  uncertain-
ty into  the  argument,  if  there  were  a  new  parts  of
the  watch,  concerninff  which  we  could \not  dis-
cover L  or  had  not  yet  discovered,  in  what  manner
they  conduced  to  the  general  effect,  or  even  some
parts,  concerning  which  we  could  not  ascertain,
whether  they  conduced  to  that  effect  in  any  man-
ner whatever.  For,  as  to  the  first  branch  of  the
case ;  if  by  the  loss,  or  disorder,  or  decay,  of  the
parts  in  question,  the  movement  of  the  watch
were  found  in  fact  to  be  stopped,  or  disturbed,  or
retarded,  no  doubt  would  remain  in  our  minds  ee
to  the  utility  or  intention  of  these  parts,  although
we  should  be  unable  to  investigate  the  manner
according  to  which,  or  the  connexion  by  which,
the  ultimate  effect  depended  upon  their  action  or
assistance ;  and  the  more  complex  is  the  machine,
the  more  likely  is  this  obscurity  to  arise.  Then,
as  to  the  second  thing  supposed,  namery2  that
there  were  parts  which  might  be  spared,  without
prejudice  to  the  movement  of  the  watch,  and  that
we  had  proved  this  by  experiment, — these  super-
fluous parts,  even  if  we  were  completely  assured
that  they  were  such,  would  not  vacate  the  reason-
ing which  we  had  instituted  concerning  other
parts.  The  indication  of  contrivance  remained,
with  respect  to  them,  nearly  as  it  was  before.

IV.  Nor,  fourthly,  would  any  man  in  his
senses  think  the  existence  of  the  watch,  with  its
various  machinery,  accounted  for,  by  being  tofcl
that  it  was  one  outof  possihle  combinations  of
material  forms ;  that  whatever  he  had  found  in  the
place  where  he  found  the  watch,  must  have  con-
tained some  internal  configuration  or  other;  and
ttyat  this  configuration  might  be  the  structure
now  exhibited,,  viz.  of  the  works  of  a  watch,  as
well  as  a  different  structure.

V.  Nor,  fifthly,  would  it  yield  his  inquiry  more
satisfaction  to  be  answered,  that  there  existed
in  things  a  principle  of  order,  which  had  disposed
the  Darts  of  the  watch  into  their  present  form
and  situation.  He  never  knew  a  watch  made  by
the  principle  of  order;  nor^can  he  even  form  to
himself  an  idea  of  what  is  meant  by  a  principle  of
order,  distinct  from  the  intelligence  of  the  watch-
maker.

VI.  Sixthly,  he  would  be  surprised  to  hear  that
the  mechanism  of  the  watch  was  no  proof  of  con-
trivance, only  a  motive  to  induce  the  mind  to
think  so.

VII.  And  not  less  surprised  to  be  informed,
that  the  watch  in  his  hand  was  nothing  more
than  the  result  of  the  laws  of  metallic  nature.  It
is  a  perversion  of  language  to  assign  any  law,  as
the  efficient,  operative  cause  of  any  thing.  A
law  presupposes  an  agent;  for  it  is  only  the  mode,


NATURAL  THEOLOGY.


889


according  to  which  an  agent  proceeds:  it  implies
a  power ;  for  it  is  the  order,  according  to  which
that  power  ,acts.  Without,  this  agent,  without
this  power,  which  are  both  distinct  from  itpelf,
the  &ro  does  nothing;  is  nothing.  The  expres-
sion,." the  law  of  metallic  nature,"  may  sound
strange  and  harsh  to  a  philosophic  ear ;  .but  it
seems  quite  as  justifiable  as  some  others  which
ase  more  familiar  to  him,  such  as  "  the  law  of  ve-
getable nature,"  "  the  law  of  animal  nature,"  or
in/deed  as  "  the  law  of  nature,"  in  general,  when
assigned  as  the  cause  of  phenomena,  in  exclusion
of  agency  and  power;  or  when  it  is  substituted
into  the  place  of  these.

VIII.  Neither,  lastly,  would  our  observer  be
driven  out  of  his  conclusion,  or  from  his  confi-
dence in  its  truth,  by  being'  told  'that  he  knows
nothing  at  all  about  the  matter.  He  knows
enough  for  his  argument :  he  knows  the  utility  of
the  end ;  he  knows  the  subserviency  and  adapta-
tion of  the  means  to  the  end.  These  points  being
known,  his  ignorance  of  other  points,  his  doubts
concerning  other  points,  affect  not  the  certainty  of
his  reasoning.  The  consciousness  of  knowing
little,  need  not  beget  a  distrust  of  that  which  he
doss  know. . .


r~


CHAPTER  n.

State  iff  the  Argument  continued.

Suppose,  in  the  next  place,  that  the  person  who
found  the  watch,  should,  after  some  time,  discover
that,  in  addition  to  all  the  properties  which  he  had
hitherto  observed  in  it,  it  possessed  the  unexpected
property  of  producing,  in  the  course  of  its  move-
ment, another  watch  like  itself  (the  thing  is  con-
ceivable) -T  that  it  containeAwithin  it  a  mechanism,
a  system  of  parts,  a  mould  for  instance,  or  a  com-
plex adjustment  of  lathes,  files,  and  other  tools,
evidently  and  separately  calculated  for  this  pur-
pose; let  us  inquire,  what  effect  ought  such  a  dis-

/  coveryto  have  upon  his  former  conclusion.

*—  I.  The  first  effect  would  be  to  increase  his  ad-
miration of  the  contrivance,  and  his  conviction  of
the  consummate  skill  of  the  contriver.  Whether
he  regarded  the  object  of  the  contrivance,  the  dis-
tinct apparatus,  the  intricate,  yet  in  many  parts
intelligible  jnechanism,  by  which  it  was  carried
on,  he  would  perceive,  in  this  new  observation,
nothing  but  an  additional  reason  for  doing  what
he  had  already  done, — for  referring  the  construc-
tion of  the  watch  to  design,  and  to  supreme  art.
If  that  construction  without  (his  property,  or.
which  is  the  same  thing,  before  this  property  had
been  noticed,  proved  intention  and  art  to  have
been  employed  about  it ;  still  more  strong  would
the  proof  appear,  when  he  came  to  the  knowledge
of  this  farther  property,  the  crown  and  perfection
of  all  the  rest.

II.  He  would  reflect,  that  though  the  watch  be-
fore him  were,  in  some  sense,  the  maker  of  the
watch  which  was  fabricated  in  the  course  of  its
movements,  yet  it  was  in  a  very  different  sense
from  that  in  which  a  carpenter,  for  instance,  is
the  maker  of  a  chair ;  the  author  of  its  contrivance,
the  cause  of  the  relation  of  its  parts  to  their  use.
With  respect  to  these,  the  first  watch  was  no
cause  at  all  to  the  second :  in  no  such  sense  as  this
was  it  the  author  of  the  constitution  and  order,


either  of  the  parts  which  the  new  watch  contained,
or  of  the  parts  by  the  aid  end  instrumentality  of
which  it  was  produced.  We  might  possibly  say,
but  with  great  latitude  of  expression,  that  a  stream
of  water  ground  corn ;  but  na  latitude  of  expres-
sion would  allow  us  to  say.  no  stretch-  of  conjec-
ture could  lead  us  to  think,  that  the  stream  of
water  built  the  mill,  though  it  were  too  ancient
for  us  to  know  who  the  builder  was.  What  the
stream  of  water  does  in  the  affair,  is  neither  more
nor  less  than  this ;  by  the  application  of  an  unin-
telligent impulse  to  a  mechanism  previously  ar-
ranged, arranged  independently  of  it,  and  arranged
by  intelligence,  an  effect  is  produced,  viz.  the  corn
is  ground.  But  the  effect  results  from  the  ar-
rangement The  force  of  the  stream  cannot  be'
said  to  be  the  cause  or  author  of  the  effect,  still
less  of  the  arrangement.  Understanding  and  plan
in  the  formation  of  the  mill  were  not  the  less  ne-
cessary, for  any  share  which  the  water  has  in  grind-
ing the  corn ;  yet  is  this  share  the  same  as  that  "
which  the  watch  would  have  contributed  to  the
production  of  the  new  watch,  upon  the  supposition
assumed  in  the  last  section. Therefore,

III.  Though  it  be  now  no  longer  probable,  that
the  individual  watch  which  our  observer  had
found,  was  made  immediately  by  the  hand  of  an
artificer,  yet  doth  not  this  alteration  in  any  wise
affect  the  inference,  that  an  artificer  had  been  ori-
ginally employed  and  concerned  in  the  production.
The .  argument  from  design  remains  as  it  was.
Marks  of  .design  and  contrivance  are  no  more  ac-
counted for  now  than  they  were  before.  In  the
same  thing,  we  may  ask  for  the  cause  of  different
properties.  We  may  ask  for  the  cause  of  the  co-
lour of  a  body,  of  its  hardness,  of  its  heat;  and
these  causes  may  be  all  different.  We  are  now
asking  for  the  cause  of  that  subserviency  to  a  use.
that  relation  to  an  end,  which  we  have  remarked
in  the  watch  before  us.  No  answer  is  given  to
this  question,  by  telling  us  that  a  preceding  watch
produced  it.  There  cannot  be  design  without  a
designer ;  contrivance,  without  a  contriver ;  order,
without  choice ;  arrangement,  without  any  thing
capable  of  arranging ;  subserviency  and  relation
to  a  purpose,  without  that  which  could  intend  a
purpose ;  means  suitable  to  an  end,  and  executing
their  office  in  accomplishing  that  end,  without  the
end  ever  having  been  contemplated,  or  the  means
accommodated  to  it.  Arrangement,  disposition
of  parts,  subserviency  of  means  to  an  end,  rela-
tion of  instruments  to  a  use,  imply  the  presence
of  intelligence  and  mind.  No  one}  therefore,  can
rationally  believe,  that  (he  insensible,' inanimate
watch,  from  which  the  watch  before  us  issued,
was  the  proper  cause  of  the  mechanism  we  so
much  admire  in  it  j— could  be  truly  said  to  have
constructed  the  instrument,  disposed  its  parts,  as-
signed their  office,  determined  their  orderj  action,
and  mutual  dependency,  combined  their  several
motions  into  one  result,  and  that  also  a  result  con-
nected with  the  utilities  of  other  beings.  All  these*
properties,  therefore,  areas  much  unaccounted  for
as  tney  were  before.

I V.  Not  is  any  thing  gained  by  running  the
difficulty  farther  back,  i.  e.  by  supposing  the  watch
before  us  to  have  been  produced  from  another
watch,  that  from  a  former,  and  so  on  indefinitely.
Our  going  back,  ever  so  far,  brings  us  no  nearer
to  the  least  degree  of  satisfaction  upon,  the  subject
Contrivance  is  still  unaccounted  for.  We  still
want  a  contriver. A  designing  mind  is  neither


NATURAL  THEOLOGY.


supplied  by  this  supposition,  nor  dispensed  with.
If  the  difficulty  were  -diminished  the  farther  we
went  back,  by  going  back  indefinitely,  we  might
exhaust  it  And  this  is  the  only  base  to  which
this  sort  of  reasoning  applies.  Where  there  is  a
tendency,  or,  as  we  increase  the  number  of  terms,
a  continual  approach  towards  a  limit,  there,  by
supposing  the  number  of  terms  to  be  what  vs.
called  infinite,  we  may  conceive  the  limit  to  be
attained :  but  where  there  is  no  such  tendency,
or  approach,  nothing  is  effected  by  lengthening
the  series.  There  is  no  difference  as  to  the  point
in  question  (whatever  there  may  be  as  to  many
points,)  between  one  scries  and  another;  be-
tween a  series  which  is  finite,  and  a  series  which
is  infinite.  A  chain  composed  of  an  infinite  num-
ber of  links,  can  no  more  support  itself,  than  a
chain  composed  of  a  finite  number  of  links.  Arid
of  this  we  are  assured  (though  we  never  <an
have  tried  the  experiment;,  because,  by  increas-
ing the  number  of  links,  from  ten  for  instance  to
a  nundred,  from  a  hundred  to  a  thousand,  &c.
we  make  not  the  smallest  approach,  we  observe
not  the  smallest  tendency  towards  self-support.
There  is  no  difference  in  this  respect  (yet  there
may  be  a  great  difference  in  several  respects)  be-
tween a  chain  of  a  greater  or  less  length,  between
one  chain  and  another,  between  one  that  is  finite
and  one  that  is  infinite.  This  very  much  resem-
bles the  case  before  us.  The  machine  which  we
are  inspecting  demonstrates,  by  its  construction,
contrivance  and  design.  Contrivance  must  have
had  a  contriver;  design  a  designer;  whether  the
machine  immediately  proceeded  from  another  ma-
chine or  not  That  circumstance  altera  not  the
case.  That  other  machine  may,  in  like  manner,
have  proceeded  from  a  former  machine :  nor  does
that  alter  the  case" :  contrivance  must  have  had  a
contriver.  That  former  one  from  one  preceding
it :  no  alteration  still ;  a  contriver  is  still  necessary.
No  tendency  is  perceived,  no  approach  towards  a
diminution  of  this  necessity.  It  is  the  same  with
any  and  every  succession  of  these  machines ;  a
succession  of  ten,  of  a  hundred,  of  a  thousand ;
with  one  series,  as  with  another;  a  series  which
Is  finite,  as  with  a  series  which  is  infinite.  In
whatever  other  respects  they  may  differ,  in  this
they  do  not.  In  all  equally,  contrivance  and  design
are  unaccounted  for.

The  question  is  not  simply,  How  came  the  first
watch  into  existence  1  which  question,  it  may  be
pretended,  is  done  away  by  supposing  the  series
of  watches  thus  produced  from  one  another  to
have  been  infinite,  and  consequently  to  have  had
no  such  Jfrrt,  for  which  it  was  necessary  to  pro-
vide a  cause.  This,  perhaps,  would  have  been
nearly  the  state  of  the  question,  if  nothing  had
been  before  us  but  an  unorganized,  unmechanized
substance,  without  mark  or  indication  of  contri-
vance. It  might  be  difficult  to  show  that  such
substance  could  not  have  existed  from  eternity
either  in  succession  (if  it  were  possible,  which  I
think  it  is  not,  for  unorganized  bodies  to  spring
from  one  another,)  or  by  individual  perpetuity.
But  that  is  not  the  question  now.  To  suppose  it
to  be  so,  is  to  suppose  that  it  made  no  difference
whether  he  had  found  a  watch  or  a  stone.  As  it
is,  the  metaphysics  of  that  question  have  no  place ;
for,  in  the  watch  which  we  are  examining,  are
seen  contrivance,  design*,  an  end,  a  purpose;
means  for  the  end.  adaptation  to  the  purpose.
And  the  question  which  irresistibly  presses  upon  I


our  thoughts,  is,  whence  this  contrivance  and  ds>
sign?  The  thing  required  is  the  intending  mind,
the  adapting  hand,  the  intelligence  by  which  thai;
hand  was  directed.  This  question,  this  demand,
is  not  shaken  ofl£  by  increasing  a  number  or  suc-
cession of  substances,  destitute  of  these  properties;
nor  the  more,  by  increasing  that  number  to  infini-
ty. If  it  be  said,  that  upon  the  supposition  of  one
watch  being  produced -from  another  in  the  course
of  that  others  movements, 'and  by  means  of  the
mechanism  within  it,  we  have  a  cause  for  the
watch  in  my  hand,  viz.  the  watch  from  which  It
proceeded :  I  deny,  thai  for  the  design,  the  contri-
vance, the  suitableness  of  means  to  an  end,  the
adaptation  of  instruments  to  a  use  (all  which  we
discover  in  the  watch,)  we  have  any  cause  what'
ever.  It  is  in  vain,  therefore,  to  assign  a  series  of
such  catlses,  or  to  allege  that  a  aeries  may  be  car-
ried back  to  infinity ;  for  I  do  not  admit  that  we
have  yet  any  cause  at  all  of  the  phenomena,  still  lees
any  series  of  causes,  either  finite  or  infinite.  Here
is  contrivance,  but  no  contriver;  proofs  of  design,
but  no  designer.

V.  Our  observer  would  farther  also  reflect,
that  the  maker  of  the  watch  before  him,  was,  in
truth  and  reality,  the  maker  of  every  watch  pro-
duced from  it;  there  being  no  difference  except
that  the  latter  manifests  a  more  exquisite  skill  be-
tween the  making  of  another  watch  with  his  own
hands,  by  the  mediation  of  fifes,  lathes,  chisels.
&c.  and  the  disposing,  fixing,  and  inserting,  of
these  instruments,  or  of  others  equivalent  to  them,
in  the  body  of  the  watch  already  made,  in  such  a
manner  as  to  form  a  new  watch  in  the  course  of
the  movements  which  he  had  given  to  the  old
one.  It  is  only  working  by  one  set  of  tools  instead
of  another.  _~-

The  conclusion  which  the  Jirst  examination  of  ,
the  watch,  of  its  works,  construction,  and  move-
ment, suggested,  was,  that  it  must  have  had,  for
the  cause  and  author  of  that  construction,  an  artK
ficer,  who  understood  its  mechanism,  ana  design-
ed its  use.  This  conclusion  is  invincible.  A  se-
cond examination  presents  us  with  a  new  disco-
very. The  watch  is  found,  in  the  course  of  its
movement,  to  produce  another  watch,. similar  to
itself;  and  not  only  so,  but  we  perceive  in  it  a  sys-
tem or  organization,  separately  calculated  for  that
purpose.  What  effect  would  this  discovery  have,
or  ought  it  to  have,  upon  our  former  inference  1
What,  as  hath  already  been  said,  but  to  increase,
beyond  measure,  our  admiration  of  the  skill  whkh
had  been  employed  in  the  formation  of  such  a  ma-
chine ?  Or  shall  it,  instead  of  this,  all  at  once
turn  us  round  to  an  opposite  conclusion,  viz.  that
no  art  or  skill  whatever  nas  been  concerned  in  the
business,  although  all  other  evidences  of  art  and
skill  remain  as  they  were,  and  this  last  and  su-
preme piece  of  art  be  now  added  to  the  rest?  Can
this  be  maintained  without  absurdity  1  Yet  this  is
atheism*


CHAPTER  HI.

Application  qf  the  Argument.

This  is  atheism :  for  every  indication  of  donrnV
vance,  every  manifestation  of  design,  which  exist-
ed in  the  watch,  exists  in  the  works  of  nature;
with  the  difference,  on  the  aide  of  nature,  of  being
greater  and  more,  and  thai  ma  degree  which  ex-


NATURAL  THEOLOGY.


391


oeeds  all  computation.  I  mean,  that  tho  contri-
vances-of  nature  surpass  the  contrivances  of  art,
in  the  complexity,  subtilty,  and  curiosity,  of  the
mechanism;  and  still  more,  if  possible,  do  they
go  beyond". them  in  number  and  variety;  vet,  in
a  multitude  of  cases,  are  not  less  evidently  me-
chanical, not  less  evidently  contrivances,  not  less
evidently  accommodated  to  their  end,  or  suited  to
their  office,  than  are  the  most  perfect  productions
of  human  ingenuity.

I  know  no  better  method  of  introducing  so  large
a  subject,  than  that  of  comparing  a  single  thing
with  a  single  thing;  an  eye,  for  example,  with  a
telescope.  As  far  as  the  examination  of  the  in-
strument goes,  there  is  precisely  the  same  proof
that  the  eye  was  made  for  vision,  as  there  is  that
the  telescope  was  made  tor  assisting  it  They  are
Bade  upon  the  same  principles;  both  being  ad-
justed to  the  laws  by  which  the  transmission  and
refraction  of  rays  of  light  are  regulated.  I  speak
not  of  the  origin  of  the  laws  themselves ;  but  such
laws  being  fixed,  the  construction,  in  both  cases,
is  adarjtea  to  them.  For  instance;  these  laws  re-
quire, in  order  to  produce  the  same  effect,  that  the
lays  of  tight,  in  passing  from  water  into  the  eye,
should  be  refracted  by  a  more  convex  surface,
than  when  it  passes  out  of  air  into  the  eye.  Ac-
cordingly we  find  that  the  eye  of  a  fish,  in  that
part  of  it  called  the  crystalline  lens,  is  much
rounder  than  the  eye  of  terrestrial  animals.  What
plainer  manifestation  of  design  can  there  be  than
this  difference?  What  could  a  mathematical
instrumentrmaker  have  done  more,  to  show  his
knowledge  of  his  principle,  his  application  of  that
knowledge,  his  suiting  of  his  means  to  bia  end ;  I
wul  not  say  to  display  the  compass  or  excellence
ef  his  skill  and  art,  for  in  these  all  comparison  is
indecorous,  but  to  testify  counsel,  choice,  consider-
ation, purpose?

To  some  it  may  appear  a  difference  sufficient
to  destroy  all  similitude  between  the  eye  and  the
telescope,  that  the  one  is  a  perceiving  organ,  the
other  an  unperceiving  instrument.  The  fact  is,
that  they  are  both  instruments.  And,  as  to  the
mechanism,  at  least  as  to  mechanism  being  em-
ployed, and  even  as  to  the  kind  of  it,  this  circum-
stance varies  not  the  analogy  at  all.'  For,  observe
what  the  constitution  of  the  eye  is.  It  is  neces-
sary, in  order  to  produce  distinct  vision,  that  an
image  or  picture  of  the  object  be  formed  at  the
bottom  of  toe  eye.  Whence  this  necessity  arises,
or  how  the  picture  is  connected  with  the  sensa-
tion, or  contributes  to  it.  it  may  be  difficult,  nay,
we  will  confess,  if  you  please,  impossible  for  us  to
search  out  But  the  present  question  is  not  con-
cerned in  the  inquiry.  It  may  be  true,  that,  in
this,  and  in  other  instances,  we  trace  mechanical
contrivance  a  certain  way:  and  that  then  we
come  to  .something  which  is  not  mechanical,- or
Which  10  inscrutable.  But  this  affects  not  the
certainty  of  our  investigation,  as  far  as  we  have
gone.  The  difference  between  an  animal  and  an
antomatir  statue,  consists  in  this,  that,  in  the  ani-
mal, wo  trace  tho  mechanism  to  a  certain  point,
and  then  wo  are  ■topped ;  either  the  mechanism
becoming  too  subtile  for  our  discernment,  or  some-
thins;  else  beside  the  known  laws  of  mechanism
taking  place;  whereas,  in  the  automaton,  for  the
coniparatively  few  motions  of  which  it  is  capable,
we  trace  the  mechanism  throughout.  But  up  to
the  lpntt,  the  reasoning  is  as  clear  and  certain  in
the  one  caoe  aa  in  the  other. In  the  example  be-


fore us,  it  is  a  matter  of  certainty,  because  it  is  a
matter  which  experience  and  observation  demon-
strate, that  the  formation  of  fin  image  at  the  bot»
torn  of  the  eye  is  necessary  to  perfect  vision.  The
image  itself  can  be  shown.  Whatever  affects  the
distinctness  of  the  image,  affects  the  distinctness
of  the  vision.  The  formation  then  of  such  an
image  being  necessary  (no  matter  how)  to  the
sense  of  sight,  and  to  the  exercise  of  that  sense,
the  apparatus  by  which  it  is'  formed  is  constructed
and  put  together,  not  only  with  infinitely  more
art,  but  upon  the  self-same  principles  of  art,  as  in
the  telescope  or  the  camera  obscura.  The  per-
ception arising  from  the  image  may  be  laid  out  of
the  question;  for  the  production  of  the  image,
these  are  instruments  of  the  same  kind.  The  end
is  the  same;  the  means  are  the  same.  The  par-
pose  in  both  is  alike;  the  contrivance  for  accom-
plishing that  purpose  is  in  both  alike.  The  lenses
of  the  telescope,  and  the  humours  of  the  eye,  hear
a  complete  resemblance  to  one  another,  in  their
figure,  their  position,  and  in  their  power  over  the
rays  of  light,  viz.  in  bringing  each  pencil  to  a
point  at  the  right  distance  From  the  lens;  namely,
m  the  eye,  at  the  exact  place  where  the  mem-
brane is  spread  to  receive  it.  How  is  it  possible,  un-
der circumstances  of  such  close  affinity,  and  under
the  operation  of  equal  evidence,  to  exclude  contri-
vance from  the  one,  yet  to  acknowledge  the  proof
of  contrivance  having  been  employed,  as  the  plain-
est and  clearest  of  afi  propositions,  in  the  other  1

The  resemblance  between  the  two  cases  is  still
more  accurate,  and  obtains  in  more  points  than
we  have  yet  represented,  or  than -we  are,  on  the
first  view  of  the  subject,. aware  of.  In  dioptric
telescopes,  there  is  an  imperfection  of  this  nature.
Pencils  of  light,  in  passing  through  glass  lenses,
are  separated  into  different  colours,  tnereby  ting-
ing the  object,  especially  the  edges  of  it,  as  if  it
were  viewed  through  a  prism.  To  correct  this
inconvenience  had  been  long  a  desideratum  in
the  art.  At  last  it  came  into  the  mind  of  a  saga-
cious optician,  to  inquire  how  this  matter  was
managed  in  the  eye ;  in  which  there  was  exactly
the  same  difficulty  to  contend  with  as  in  the  tele-
scope. His  observation  taught  him,  that,  in  the
eye,  the  evil  was  cured  by  combining  lenses  com-
posed of  different  substances,  i.  e.  of  substances
which  possessed  different  refracting  powers.  Our
artist  borrowed  thence  his  hint ;  and  produced  a
correction  of  the  defect,  by  imitating,  in  glasses
made  from  different  materials,  the  effects  of  the
different  humours  through  which  the  ravs  of  light
pass  before  they  reach  the  bottom  or  the  eye.
Could  this  be  in  the  eye  without,  purpose,  which
suggested  to  the  optician  the  only  effectual  means
of  attaining  that  purpose  1

Buf  farther ;  there  are  other  points,  not  so  much
perhaps  of  strict  resemblance  between  the  two,  as
of  superiority  of  the  eye  over  the  telescope ;  yet  of
a  superiority  which,  being  founded  in  the  laws
that  regulate  both,  may  furnish  topics  of  fair  and
just  comparison.  Two  things  were  wanted  to
the  eye,  which  were  not  wanted  (at  least  in  the
same  degree)  to  the  telescope;  and  these  were,  the
adaptation  of  the  organ,  first,  to  different  degrees
of  light ;  and,  secondly,  to  the  vast  diversity  of  dis-
tance at  which  objects  are  viewed  by  the  naked
eye,  uiz.  from  a  few  inehes  to  as  many  miles.
These  difficulties  present  not  themselves,  to  the
maker  of  the  telescope.  He  wants  all  the  light  he
can  get;  and  be  never,  directs-  his  injtrument  to


9M


IffATURAL  THEOLOGt.


If  it  be  overlooked  by  the  observer  of  nature;  it
can  only  be  became  it  is  obvious  and  familiar.
Tfaia  m  a  tendency  to  be  guarded  -against.  We
past  by  the  plainest  -instances,  whilst  we  are  ex-
ploring those  which  .are  rare  and  carious:  by
which  conduct  of  the  understanding  we  sometimes
neglect  the  strongest  observations,  being  taken  up
with  others,  which,  though  more  recondite  ang
scientific^  are,  as  solid  arguments,  entitled  to  much
lev  consideration.

Ill  order  to  keep  the  eye  moist  and  clean,  (which
qualities  are  necessary  to  its  brightness  and  its
use,  J  a  wash  is  constantly  supplied  by  a,  secretion
fa  the  purpose;  and  the  superfluous  brine  is  con-
veyed tQ  the  nose  through  a  perforation  in  the
bone  as  large  as  a  goose-quilL  When  once  the
fluid  has  entered  the  nose,  it  spreads  itself  upon
the.  inside  of  the  nostrilt  and  is  evaporated  by  the
current  of  warm  air,  which  in  the  course  of  respi-
ration is  continually  passing  over  it  Can  any
pipe  or  outlet,  for  carrying  off  the  waste  liquor
from  a  dye-house  or  a  distillery,  be  more  mecha-
nical than  this  is?  It  is  easily  perceived,  that  tfce
ere  must  want  moisture:  but  could  the  want  of
.  the  eye  generate  the  gland  which  produces  the.
tear,  or  bore  the  hole  by  which  it  is  discharged,—
a  hole  through  a  bone  f

It  ii  observable  that  this  provision  is  not  found
in  fish,— the  element  in  which  they  live  supplying
a  constant  lotion  to  the  eye.

It  were^however,  injustice  to  dismiss  the  eye  as
ft  piece  of  mechanism,  without  noticing  that  most
exquisite  of  all  contrivances,  the  nictitating  mem-
brane, whicji  is  found  in  the  eyes  of  birds  and  of
many  ouadraneds.  Its  use  is  to  sweep  the  eye,
which  it  does  in  an  instant,  to  spread  over  it  the
lachrymal  humour;  to  defend  it  also  from  sudden
injuries;  yet  not  totally,  when  drawn  upon  the
pupil,  to  shut  out  the  light  The  qommodious-
ness  with  which  it  lies  folded  up  in  the  upper
corner  of  the  eye.  ready  for  use  and  action,  and
the  quickness  witn  which  it  executes  its  purpose,
are  properties  known  and  obvious  to  every  ob-
server: out  what  is  equally  admirable,  though  not
quite  so  obvious,  is  the  combination  of  two  kinds
of  substance,  muscular  and  elastic,  and  of  two  dif-
ferent kinds  of  action,  -by  which  the  motion  of
this  'membrane  is  performed.  It  is  not,  as  in
ordinary  cases,  by  the  action  pf  two  antagonist
muscles,  one  putting  forward  and  the  other  back-
ward, that  a  reciprocal  change  is  effected ;  but  it
is  thus:  The  membrane  itself  is  an  elastic  sub-
stance, capable  of  being  drawn  out  by  force  like
ft  piece  of  elastic  gum,' and  by  its  own  elasticity
returning,  when  the  foree  is  removed,  to  its  former
position.  Such  being  its  nature,,  in,  order  to  fit  it
up  for  its  office,  it  is  connected  by  a  tendon  or
thread  with  a-muscle  in  the  back  part  of  the  eye :
this  tendon  or  thread,  though  strong,  is  so  fine  as
not  to  obstruct  the  sight,  even  when  it 'passes
across  it ;  and  the  muscle  itself,  being  placed  in
toe-eacft  part  of  the  eye,  derives  from  its  situation
the  advantage,  not  only  of  being  secure,  but'  of
being  out  ofthe  way ;  which  ir.would  hardly  have
been  in  any  position  that  could  be  assigned  to  it
in  the  anterior  part  ef ,  the  orb,  where  its  function
lies.  When  .the  muscle  behind  the  eye  contracts,
the  membrane,  by  means  of  the  communicating
thread,  is  instantly  drawn  over  the  fore-part  of  it.
When  the  muscular  contraction  (which  is  a  posi-
tive, and,  most  probably,  a  voluntary  effort)  ceases
»  be  exerted,  the  elasticity  alone  ofthe  membrane


brings  it  back  again  tp-its  position*  Bees  net
this,  if  any  thing  .can  do  it,  bespeak  an  artist,
master  of  his  work,  acquainted  witn  his  materials  1
"  Of  a  thousand  other  things  "  say  the  French
academicians,  "we  perceive  not  the  contrivance,
because  we  understand  them  only  by  the  effects,
of  which  we  know  not  the  causes.:  hut  we  here
treat  of  a  machine,  all  the  parts  whereof  are, visi-
ble: and  whjch  need  only  be  looked  upon,  to  dis-
cover the  reasons  of  its  motion  and  action,  "t

In  the  configuration  of  the  muscle  which,
though  placed  behind  the  eye,  draws  the  nictitat-
ing membrane  over  the'eye,  there  is,  what  the
authors,  just  now  quoted,  deservedly  call  a  mar-
vellous mechanism.  I  suppose  this  structure  to
be  found  in  other  animals ;  but,  in  the  memoirs
from  which  this  account  .is  taken,  it  is  anatomi-
cally demonstrated  only  in'  the  cassowary,  The
muscle  is  patted  through  a  loop  formed  by  an-
other muscle ;  and  is  there  inflected,  as  if  it  were
round  a  pulley.  This  is  a  peculiarity  ;  and  ob-
serve the  advantage  of  it  A  single  muscle  with  a
straight  tendonv  which  is  the  common  muscular
form,  would  have  been  sufficient,  if  it  had  had  power
to  draw  far  enough.  But  the  contraction,  neces-
sary to  draw  the  membrane  over  the  whofe  eye,
required  a  longer  muscle  than  could  lie  straight
at  the  bottom  of  the  eye.  Therefore,  in  order  to
have  a  greater  length  in  a  less  compass,  the  cord
ofthe  main  muscle  makes  an  angle.  This,  so  far,
answers  the' end;  but,  still  farther,  it  makes  an
angle,  not  round  a  fixed  pivot,  but  round  a  loop
formed  by  another  muscle ;  which  second  muscle,
whenever  it  contracts,  of  course  twitches  the  first
muscle  at  the  point  of  inflection^  and  thereby  as-
sists the  action  designed  by  both.


One  question  may  possibly  have  dwelt  in  the
reader's  mind  daring  the  perusal  of  these  observa-
tions, namely,  Why  should  not  the  Deity  have
given  to  the  animal  the  faculty  of  vision  at  once  ?
Why  this  circuitous  perception;  the  ministry  of
so  many  means ;  an  element  provided  for  the  pur-
pose; reflected  from  opaque  substances,  refracted
through  transparent  ones ;  and  both  according  to
precise  laws ;  then  a  complex  organ,  an  intricate
and  artificial  apparatus,  in  order,  by  the  operation
of  this  element,  and  in  conformity  with  'the  re-
strictions of  these  laws,  to  produce  an  image  upon
a  membrane  communicating  with  the  brain?
Wherefore  all  this  ?  Why  make  trje  difficulty  in
order  to  surmount  it  1  If  to  perceive  objects  by
some  other  mode  than  that  of  touch,  or  objects
which  lay  out  of  the  reach  of  that  sense,  were  the
thing  proposed ;  could  not  a  simple  volition  of  the
Creator  have  communicated  the  capacity?  Why
resort  tq  contrivance,  where  power  is  omnipotent?
Contrivance,  by  its  very  definition  and  nature,  is
the  refuge  of  imperfection.  To  have  recourse  to
expedients,  implies  difficulty,  impediments,  re-
straint, defect  of  power.  This  question  belongs
to  the  other  senses,  as  well  as  to  sight ;  to  the
general  functions  of  animal  life,  as  nutrition,  se-
cretion, respiration ;  to  the  economy  of  vegetables;
and  indeed  to  almost  all  the  operations  of  nature.
The  question,  therefore,  is  or  very  wide  extent;


•  Phil.  Trans.  1796,

t  Memoirs  for  a  Natural  History  of  Animate,  ay  tte
Royal  Academy  of  Sciences  at  Paris,  done  into  English
by  order  of  the  Royal  Society,  1701,  page  918.


NATURAL  THEOLOGY.


.  which  may  be  given
of  which  probably  we  are*
ignorant,  one  answer  is  tins:  It  is  only  by  the
display  of  contrivance,  that  the  existence,  the
agency,  the  wisdom,  of  the  Deity,  could  be  testi-
fied to  his  rational  creatures.'  This  is  the  scale  by
which  we  ascend  to  all  the  knowledge  of  oar
Creator  which  we  possess,  so  for  as  it  depends
upon  the  phenomena,  or  the  works  of  nature.
Take  away  this,  and  you  take  away  from  u»
every  subject  of  observation,  and  ground  of  rea-
soning ;  1  mean  as  our  rational  faculties  are  form-
ed at  present.  Whatever  is  done,  God  could  have
done  without  the  intervention  of  instruments  or
means;  but  it  is  in  the  construction  of  instruments,
in  the  choice  and  adaptation  of  means,  that  a  crea-
tive intelligence  is  seen.  It  is  this  which  constitutes
the  order  and  beauty  of  the  universe.'  God,  there-
fore, has  been  pleased  to  prescribe  limits  to  his
own  power,  ana  to  work  his  ends  within  those
limits.  The  general  laws  of  matter  have  perhaps
the-  nature  of  these  limits ;.  its  inertia,  its  re-action ;
the  laws  which  govern  the  communication  of  mo-
tion, the  refraction  and  reflection  of  light,  the  con-
stitution of  fluids  non-elastic  and  elastic,  the  trans-
mission of  souid  through  the  latter;  the  laws  of
magnetism,  or  electricity;  and. -probably  others,
yet  undiscovered^  These  are  general  laws;:  and
when  a  particular  purpose  is  to  be  effected,  it  is
not  by  making  a  new  law,  nor  by  the  suspension
ef  the  old  ones,  nor  by  making  them  wind,  and
bend,  and  yield  to  the  occasion  (for  nature  with
mat  steadiness  adheres  to  and  supports  them ;)
But  it  is,  as  we  have  seen  in  the  eye*  by  the  inter-
position of  an  apparatus,  corresponding  with  these
laws,  and  suited  to  the  exigency  which  results
from  them,  tHat  the  purpose  is  at  length  attained.
Aa  we  have  said,  therefore,  God  prescribes  limits
to  his  power  that  he  may  let  in  the  exercise,  and
thereby  exhibit  demonstrations  of  his  wisdom.
For  then,  i  e.  such  laws  and  limitations  being
laid  down,  it  is  as  though  one  Being  should  have-
fixed  certain  rules;  and,  if  we  may  so  speak,  pro-
vided certain  materials ;  and,  afterward,  nave  com-'
mitted  to  another  Being,  out  of  these  materials,
and  in  subordination  to  these  rales,  {he  task  of
drawing  forth  a  creation :  a  supposition  which  evi-
dently leaves  room,  and  induces  indeed  a  necessity,
for  contrivance.  Nay.  there  may  be  many  such
agents,  and  many  ranks  of  these.  We  da  not
advance  this  as  a  doctrine  either  of  philosophy  or
of  religion ;  but  we  say  that  theeubject  may  safely
be  represented  under  this  view,  because  the  Deity,
acting  himself  by  general  laws,  will  have  the  same
consequences  upon  our  reasoning,  as  if  he .  had
prescribed  these  laws  to  another.  It  has  been
said,  that  the  problem  of  creation  was,  "  attraction
and  matter  being  given,  to  make  a  world  out  of
themj"  and,  as  above  explained,  this  statement
perhaps  does  not  convey  a  false  idea.


We  have  made  choice  of  the  eye  as  an  instance
upon  "which  to  rest  the  argument  of  this  chapter.
Borne  single  example  was  to  be  proposed;  ana  the
ore  offered  itself  .under  the  advantage  of  admitting
of  a  strict  comparison  with  optical  instruments.
The  ear,  it  is  probable,  is  no  less  artificially  and
mechanically  adapted  to  its  office,  than  the  eye.
But  we  know  leas  about  it :  we  do  not  so  well  un-
derstand the  action,  the  use,  or  the  mutual  de-
pendency, of  its  internal  puts./  Ita  general  form,


however,  both  external  and  internal,  is  sufficient
to  show  that  it  is  an  instrument  adapted  to  the  re-
ception of  sound ;  that  is  to  say,  already  knowing
that  sound  consists  in  pulses  of  the  air,  we  per-
ceive, in  the  structureor  the  eaf,  a  suitableness  to
Deceive  impressions  from  this  species  of  action,
and  to  propagate  these  impressions  to  the  brain.
For  of  what  does  this  structure  consist  1  -  An  ex-
ternal ear  (the  concha,}  calculated,  like  an  ear-
trumpet,  to  catch 'and  collect  the  pulses  of  which
we  have  spoken ;  in  large  quadrupeds,  turning  to
the  sound,  and  possessing  a  configuration!  aa  wall
as  motion,  evidently  fitted  for  the  office :  of  a  tube
which  leads  into  the  head,  lving  at  the*  root  of  this
outward  ear,  the  folds  ana  sinuses  thereof  tending
and  conducting  the  air  towards  it:  of  a  thin  mem-
brane, like  the  pelt  of  a  drum,  stretched  across
this  passage  upon  a  bony  rim  :,of  a  chain  of  move-
able, and  infinitely  curious,  hones,  forming  a  com-
munication, and  the  only  communication  that  can
be  observed,  between  the  membrane  last  mention-
ed and  the  interior  channels  and  recesses  of  the
skull:  of  cavities,  similar  in  shape  and  form  to
wind  instruments  of  music,  beingnplral  or  portions
of  circles:  of  the  eustachian  tube,  like  the  hole  in
a  drum,  to  let  the  air  pass  freely  into  and  out  of
the  barrel  of  the  ear,  as  the  covering  membrane
vibrates,  or  as  the  temperature  may  be  altered :  the
whole-  labyrinth  hewn  out  of  a  rock;  that  is
wrought  into  -the  substance  of  the  hardest  bone  of
tbe  body.  This  assemblage  of  connected  parts
constitutes  together  an  apparatus,  plainly  enough
relative  tothe  transmission  of  sound,  or  of  the  im-
pulses received  from  sound,  and  only  to  be  lament-
ed in  not  being  better  understood.

The  communication  within,  -formed  by  the
small  bones  of  the  ear,  is.  to  look  upon,  more  like
what  we  are  accustomed  to  call  machinery,  than
any  thing  I  am  acquainted  with  in  animal  bodies.
It  seems  evidently  designed  to  continue  towards
the  sensorium  the  tremulous  motions  which  are .
excited  in  the'  membrane  of  the  tympanum,  or
what  is  better  known  by  the  name  of  tne  "  drum
of  the  ear*"  The  compare  of  bones  consists  of
four,  which  are  so  disposed^  and  sohinge  upon  one
another,  as  that  if  the  membrane,  the  drum  of  the
ear.  vibrate,  all  the  four  are  put  in  motion  together ;
and,  by  the  result  of  their  action,  work,  the  base
of  that  which  is  the  last  in  the  series,  upon  an  aper-
ture which  it  closes,  ano\  upon  which  it  plays,  and
which  aperture  opens  into  the  tortuous  canals  that
lead  to  tne  brain.  This  last  bone  of  the  four  is
called  the  stapes.  The  office  of  the.  drum  of  the
ear  is  to  spread  out  an  extended  .surface,  capable
of  receiving  the  impressions  of  sound,  and  of  being:
put  by  them  into  a  state,  of  vibration.  The  office
of  the  stapes  is  to  repeat  these  vibrations.  It  is  &
repeating  frigate,  stationed  more  within  the  line.
From  which  account  of  its  action  may  be,  under-
stood, hpw  the  sensation  of  sound  wul  be  excited
by  any  thing  which  communicates  a  vibratory
motion  to  the  stapes,  though  not,  as  in  all  ordinary
cases,  through  the  intervention  of  the  membrane
tympani.  This  is  done  by  solid  bodies  applied  to
the  bones  of  the  skull,  as  by  a  metal  bar  holden  at
one  end  between  the  teeth,  and  touching  at  the
other  end  a  tremulous  body.  It  likewise  appears
to  be  done,  in  a  considerable  degree,-  by  the  ait
itself  even  when  this  membrane,  the  drum  of  the
ear,  is  greatly  damaged.  Either  in  the  natural  or
preternatural  state  of  the.  organ,  the  use  of  the
chain  of  bones  m  to  propagate  the  hnpuimina


396


NATURAL  THEQLOGV.


direction  towards  the  brain,  mud  to  propagate  it
with  the  advantage  of  a  lever;  which  advantage
consists  in  increasing  the  fbrce  and  strength  of
the  vibration,  and  at  the  same  time  diminishing
the  space  through  which  it  oscillates;  both  -of
which  changes  may  augment  or  facilitate  the  still
deeper  action  of  the  auditory  nerves.  -

The  benefit  of  the  eustachian  tube  to  the  organ,
may  be  made  out  .upon-  known  pneumatic  princi-
ples. Behind  the  drum  of  the  ear  is- a  second  ca-
vity, or  barrel,  called  the  tympanum.  The  eusta-
chian tube  is  a  slender  pipe,  out  sufficient  for  the
passage'  of  air,  leading  from  this  cavity  into  the
Dark  part  of  the  mouth.  -  Now,  it  would  not  have
done  to  have  had  a  vacuum  in  this  cavity ;  for,  in
that  case,  the  pressure  of  the  atmosphere  from
without  would  have  burst  the  membrane  which
covered  it.  Nor  would  It  have  done  to  have  filled
the  cavity  with  lymph  or  any  other  secretion;
which  would  necessarily  hav^e  obstructed  both  the
vibration  -of  the  -membrane  and  the  play  of  the
small  bones.  Nor,  lastly,  would  it  have  done  to
have  occupied  the  space  with  confined  air,  be-
cause the  expansion  of  that  air  by  heat,  or  its
contraction  by  cold,  would  have  distended  or  re-
laxed die  covering  membrape,  in  a  degree  incon-
sistent with  the  purpose  which  it  was  assigned  to
execute.  The  only  remaining  expedient,  and  that
for  which  the  eustachian  tube  serves,  is  to  open  to
this  cavity  a  communication  with  the  external  air.
In  one  word ;  it  exactly  answers  the  purpose  of
the  hole  in  a  drum.

The  membrana  tympani  itself,  likewise,  de-
serves all  the  examination  which  can  be  made  of
it.  It  is  not  found  in  the  ears  of  fish ;  which  fur-
nishes an  additional  proof  of  what  indeed  is  indi-
cated by  every  thing  about  it,  that  it  is  appropri-
ated to  the  action  of  air,  or  of  an  elastic  medium.
It  'bears  an  obvious  resemblance  to  the  pelt  or
head  of  a  drum,  from  which  it  takes  its  name.  4t
resembles  also  a  drum-head  in  this  principal  pro-
perty, that  its  use  depends  upon  its  tension.  Ten-
sion is  the  state  essential  to  it.  Now  we  know
that,  in  a  drum,  the  pelt  is  carried  over  a  hoop,
ahd  bfaced  as  occasion  requires,  by  the  means  of
strings  attached  to  its  circumference.  In  the
membrane  of  the  ear,  the  same  purpose  is  provided
for,  more  simply,  but  not  less  mechanically,  nor
less  successfully,  by  a  different  expedient,  viz.  by
the  end  of  a  bone  (the  handle  -of  the  malleus)
pressing  upon  its  centre.  It  is  only' in  yery  large
animals  that  the  texture  of  £his  membrane  can  be
discerned.-  'In  the  Philosophical  Transactions  for
the  year  1800,  (vol.  i.)  Mr.  Everard  Home  has

S'ven  some  curious  observations  upon  the  ear,  and
e  drum  of  the  ear  of  an  elephant.  He  discovered
in  it,  what  he  calb  a  radiated  -muscle,  that' is,
straight,  muscular  fibres,  passing  along  the  mem-
brane from  the  circumference  to.  the  centre ;  from
the  bony  rim  which  surrounds  it  towards  the  han-
dle of  the-  malleus  to  which  the  central  part  is  at-
tached. '  This  muscle  he  supposes  to  be  designed
to  bring  the  membrane  into  unison  with  different
sounds:  but  -then  he  also  discovered,  •  that  this
muscle  itself  cannot  act  unless  the  membrane  be
drawn  to  a  stretch,  and  -kept  in  a  due  state  of
tightness,  by  What  may  be  called  a  foreign  force,
viz.  the  action  of  the  muscles  of  the  malleus.  Sup-
posing his  explanation  of  the  use  of  the  parts  to
be  just  our  author  is  well  founded  in  the  reflec-
tion which  he  makes  upon  it,  "  that  this  mode
of  adapting  the  ear  to  different  sounds,  is  one  of  i


the  most  beautiful  .applications  of  muscles  in  the
body :  the  mtthanism  is  so  simpUt  and  the  varie-
ty if  eff&*»  *>  great:'

In  another  volume  of  the  Transactions  above
referred  to,  and  of  the  same  year,  two  most  curious
cases  are  related,  of  persons  who  retained  the
sense  of  hearing,  not  in  a  perfect,  but  in  a  very
considerable  degree,  notwithstanding  the  almost
total  loss  of  the  membrane  we  have  been  describing.
In  one  of  these  cases,  the  use  here  .assigned  to
that  membrane,  of  modifying  the  impressions  of
sound  by  change  of  tension,  was  attempted  to  be
supplied  by  straining  the  muscles  of  the  outward
ear.  "  The  external  ear,"  we  are  tokl,  w  had  ac-
quired a  -distinct  motion  upward  and  backward,
which  was  observable  whenever  the  patient  lis-
tened to  any  thing  which  he  did  not  distinctly
hear;  when  he  was  addressed  in  a  whisper,  tbie
ear  was  seen  immediately  to  move ;  when  the  tone
of  voke  was  louder,  it  then  Jwnained* altogether
motionless."

It  appears  probable,  from  both  these  cases,  that
a  collateral,  it  not  principal,  use  of  the  membrane,
is  to  cover  and  protect  the  barrel  of  the  ear*  which
lies J?ehin4  it.  Both  the  patients  suffered  from  cold :
one,  "  a  great  increase  of  deafness*  from- catching
cold ;"  the  other,  "  very  considerable  pain  from
exposure  to  a  stream  of  cold  air."  Bad  effects
therefore  followed  from  this  cavity  being  left  open
to  the  external  air;  yet,  had  the  Author  of  nattus
shut  it  up  by  any  other  cover,  than  what  was  ca-
pable, by  its  texture,  of  receiving  vibrations  from
sound,  and,  by  its  connexion  with  the  interior
parts,  of  transmitting  those^ibrations  to  the  brain,
the  use  of  the  <
have  been  end


le  organ,  so  for  as  we  can  judge^most
ntirelv  obstructed.


CHAPTER  IV.

Of  the  Suficeesion  of  Plants  and  Animals.

The  generation  of  the  animal  no  more  accounts
for  the  contrivance  of  the  eye  or  ear,  than,  upon
the  supposition  stated  in  a  preceding  chapter,  the
production  of  a  watch  by  the  motion  and  mechan-
ism of  a  former  watch,  would  account  for  the  skill
and  intention  evidenced  in  the  watch,  so  produced ;
than  it  would  account  for  the  disposition  of  the
wheels,  the  catching  vof  their  teeth,  the  relation  of
the  several  parts  of  the  works  to  one  another,  and
to  their  common  end ;  for  the  suitableness  of  their
forms  and  places  to  their  offices,  for  their  con-
nexion, their  operation,  and  the  useful  result  of
that  operation.  I  do  insist  most  strenuously  upon
the  correctness  of  this  comparison ;  that  it  holds
as  to  every  mode  of  specific  propagation;  and
that  Whatever  was  true  of  the  watch,  under  the
hypothesis  above-mentioned,  is  true  of  plants  and
animals.

I.  To  begin  with  the  fructification  of  plants.
Can  it  be  doubted  but  that  the  seed  contains  a
particular- organization?  Whether  a  latent  pfan-
tute  with  the  means  of' temporary  nutrition,  or
whatever  else  it  be.  It  encloses  an  organization
suited  to  the  germination  of  a  new  plant.  -  Has
the  plant  which  produced  the  seed  any  thing  mole
to  do  with  that  organization,  than  the  watch
would  have  had  to  do  with  the  structure  of  the
watch  which  was  produced  in  the  course  of  its
mechanical  movement  1  I  mean,  has  it-any  thing
at  all  to  do  with  the  contrivance  ?  The  maker  and


NATURAL  THEOLOGY.


897


contriver  of  one  watch,  wmh  he  inserted  within
it  a  mechanism  suited  to  the  production  of  another
watch,  was,  in  truth,  the  maker  and  contriver  of
that  other  watch.  AH  the  properties  of  the- new
watch  were  to  be  referred  to  his.  agency :  the  de-
sign manifested  in  it,  to  hid  intentions  the  art,  to
him  as  the  artist :  the  collocation  of  m each  part  to
his  placing:  the  -action,  effect,  and  use,  to  his
counsel,  intelligence,  and  workmanship.  'In  pro-
ducing it  by  the  intervention  of  a  former  watch,  he
was  only  working  by  one  set  of"  tools  instead  of
'another.  So  it  is  with  the  plant,  and  the  seed
produced  by  it.  Can  any  distinction  be  assigned
between  the  two  cases;  between  the  producing
watch  and  the  producing  plant;  both  passive,  un-
conscious substances;  both^  by  the  organization
which  was  given  to  them,  producing  their  like,
without  understanding  or  design;- both,  that  is,
instruments  1

II.  From  plants  we  may  proceed  to  oviparous
animals ;  from  seeds  to  eggp.  Now  I  say,  that  the
bird  has  the  same  concern  in  the  formation  of*  the
egg  which  she  lays,  as  the  plant  has  in  that  of  the
seed  which  it  drops ;  and  no  other,  nor  greater.
The  internal  constitution  of  the  egg  is  as  much  a
secret  to  the  hen,  as  if  the  hen  were  inanimate.
Her  wUl  cannot  alter  it,  or  change  a  single  feather
of  the  chick.  She"  can  neither  foresee  nor  deter-
mine of  which  sex  her  brood  shall  be,  or  how  ma-
ny of  either;  yet  the  thing  produced  shall  be,  from
the  first,  very  different  in  its  make,  according  to  the
sex  which  it  bears.  So  far,  therefore,  from  adapt-
ing the  means,  she  is  not  beforehand  apprised  of
the  effect.  If  there  he  concealed  within  that  smooth
.shell  a  provision  and  a  preparation  for  the  produc-
tion ana  nourishment '  of  a  new  animal,  they  are
not  of  her  providing  or  preparing :  if  there  be
contrivance,  it  is  none  of  hers.  Although,  there-,
lore,  there  be  the  difference  of  life  and  perceptivity
between  the  animal  and  the  -plant,  it  is  a  differ-
ence which  enters  not  into  the  account;  it  is  a
foreign  circumstance:  it  is  a  difference  of  proper-
ties not  employed.  '  The -animal  function  and  the
"vegetable  function  are  alike  destitute  of  any  de-
sign which  can  operate  upon  the»form  of  the
thing  produced.  Tne  plant  bas  no  design  in  pro-
ducing the  seed,  no  comprehension  of  the  nature
or  use  of  what  it  produces ;  the  bird,  with  respect
to  its  egg,  is  not  above  the  plant  with  respect  toits
seed.  Neither  the  one  nor  the  other  bears  that
sort  of  relation  to  what  proceeds  from  them,  which
a  joiner  dees  to  the  chair  which  he  makes.  Now
a  cause,  which  bears  this  relation  to  the  effect,  is
what  we  want,  in  order  to  account  for-  the  suita-
bleness of  means  to  an  end,  the  fitness  and  fitting
of  one  thing  to  another ;  and  this  cause  the  parent
plant  or  animal  does  not  supply.

It  is  farther  observable  concerning  the  propaga-
tion of  plants-  and  animals,  that  the-apparatus  em-
ployed exhibits  no  resemblance  to  the  thing  pro-
duced;' iif  this  respect  holding  an  analogy  with
instruments  and  tools  of  art.  The  filaments,  an-
thers, and  stigmata  of  flowers  bear  no  more  re-
semblance to  the  young  plant,  or  even  to  the  seed,
which  is  formed  by  their  intervention,  than  a  chisel
or  a  plane  does  to  a  table  or  chair.  What  then  are
the  -filaments,  anthers,  and  stigmata  of  plants,  bat
instruments  strictly  so  called  1

•  III.  We  may  advance  from  animalrwhich  bring
forth  eggs,'  tp  animals  which  bring  forth  their
young  afive  \  and  of  this  latter  class,  from  the  low-
est to  the  highest  j  from  irrational  to  rational  life,


from  brutes  to  the  human  species;  without  per>
oeiving,  as  we  proceed,  any  Alteration  whatever
in  the  terms  or  the  comparison.  The  rational
animal  does  not  produce  its'  offspring  with  more
certainty  or  success  than  the  irrational  animal;  a
man  than  a  quadruped,  a  quadruped  than  a  birds
nor  (for  we  may  follow  the  gradation  through  its
whole  .scale)  a  bird  than  a  punt ;  nor  a  plant  than
a- watch,  a  piece  of  dead  uiechanism,  would  do,
upon  the  supposition  which  has  already  so  often
been  repeated.  Rationality,  therefore,  has  noshing
to  dp  in  the  business.  If  an  account  most  be  given
of  the  contrivance  which  we  observe-;  'if  it  be  de-
manded, whence  arose  either  the  contrivance  by
which  tne  young  animal  is  produced,  or  the  con*
trivance  manifested  in  the  young  animal  itself  it
is  not  from  the  reason  of  the  parent  that  any  such
account  can  be  drawn.  He  is  the  cause  of  his  off-

r'ng  in.  the  same  sense  as  that  in  which, a  gar-
er  is  the  cause  of  the  tulip  which  grows  upon
his  parterre,  and  in  no  other.  We  admire  the
flower;  we  examine  the  plant;  we  perceive  the
conduciveness  of  many  of  its  parts  to  their  end
and  office;  we  observe  a  provision  for  its  nourish-
ment, growth,  protection,  and  fecundity ;  but  we
never  wink,  of  the  gardener  in  all  this.  We  at-
tribute nothing  of  this  to  his  agency;  yet  it  may
still  be  true,  that  without  the  gardener,  we  should
not  have  had  the  tulip:  just  so  it  is  with  the  suc-
cession of  animals  even  of  the  highest  order.  For
the  contrivance  discovered  in  the*  structure  of  the
thing  'produced,  We  want  a  contriver*  The  parent
is  not  the  contriver.  His  consciousness  decides
that  question.  -He  is  in  total  ignorance  why  that
which  i*  produced  took  its  present  form  rathef
than  any  other.  It  is  for  him  only'  to  be  astonish-
ed by  the  effect.  We  can  no  more  look)  therefore!
to  the  intelligence  of  the  .parent  animal  for  what
we  are  in  search  of,  a  cause  of  relation,  and  of
subserviency  of  parts  to  their  use,  which  relation
and  subserviency  we  see  in  the  procreated  body,
than  we  can  refer  the  internal  conformation  of  an
acorn  to- the  intelligence  of  the  oak  from+which  it
dropped,  or  the  structure  of  the  watch  to  the  in-
telligence of  the  watch  which  produced  it ;  there
being  no  difference,  as  far  as  argument  is  concern-
ed, between  an  intelligence  which  is  not  exerted,
and  an  intelligence  which  does  not  exist


CHAPTER  V.

Application  qfthe  Argument  continued, <

Evert  observation'  which  was  made  in  onr  first
chapter,  concerning  the  watch,  may  be  repeated
with  strict  propriety  concerning  the  eye;  concern-
ing animals;  concerning  plants;  concerning,  in-
deed, all  the  organized  parts  of  the  works  of  na-
ture. As,

I.  When  we  are  Inquiring  simply  after  the
existence  of  an  -intelligent  Creator,  imperfection,
inaccuracy,  liability  to  disorder,  occasional  irre-
gularities, may  subsist  in  a  considerable  degree,
without  inducing  any  doubt  into  the  question:
just  as  a  watch  may  frequently  go  wrong,  seldom
perhaps  exactly  right,  may  be-  feulty  in  some
parts,  defective  In  some,  without  the  smallest
ground  of  suspicion  from  thence  arising"  thai  it
was  not  a  watch  ;•  not  -made ;  or  not  made  for  the
purpose  ascribed  to  it. Whan  faafes  are  pointed


898


NATURAL  THEOLOQYV


out,  and  when  a  question  Sf  started  concerning
the  skill  of  the  artist,  or  dexterity  with  which  the
work  is  executed,  then,  indeed,  in  order  to  defend
these  qualities  from  accusation,  we  must  be  able,
either  to  expose  some  intractabieness  and  imper-
fection in  the  materials,  or  point  out  some  invinci-
ble difficulty  in  the  execution,  into  which  imper-
fection and  difficulty  the  matter  of  complaint  may
he  resolved;  or  if  we  cannot  do  this,  we  must  in-
duce such  specimenstof  consummate  axt  and  con-
trivance, proceeding  from  the  same  hand,  as  may
convince  the  inquirer  of  the  existence,  in  the  case
before  him2  of  impediments  like  those  which  we
have  mentioned,  although,  what  from  the  nature
of  the 'case  is  very  likely  to  happen,  they  be  un-
known and  onpetceived  by  him. .  This  we -must
do  in  order  to  vindicate  the  artist's  skill,  or,  at
least,  (he  perfection  of  it:  as  we  must  also  judge
of  his  intention,  and  of  the  provisions  employed
in  fulfilling  that  intention,. not  from  an  instance
in  which  they  fidL  but  from  4he  neat  plurality  of
instances  in  which  tbey  succeed:  But,  after  all,
these  are  different  questions  from  the  question  of
the  artist's  existence;  or,  which  is  the  same,  whe-
ther the  thing  before  us  be  a  work  of  art  or  not :
and  the  questions  ought  always  to  be  kept  sepa-
rate in  the  mind.  So  likewise  it  is  in  the  works
of  naturje.  Imgularities  and  imperfections  are
of  little  or  no  weight  in  the  consideration,  when
that  csnsideration  relates  simply  to  the  existence
of  a  Creator.  When  the  argument  respects  his
attributes,  they  are  of  weight ;  but  are  then  to  be
taken  in  conjunction  (the  attention  is  not  to  rest
upon  them,  but  they  are  to  be  taken  in  conjunc;
tion)  with'  the  unexceptionable  evidences  which
we^possess,  of  skill,  power,  and  benevolence,  dis-
played in  other  instances:  which  evidences  may,
in  strength,  number,  and  variety,  be  such,  and
may  so  overpower  apparent  blemishes,  as  to  in-
duce us,  upon  the  most  reasonable  ground,  to  be-
lieve, that  these  last  ought  to  be  referred  to  some
cause,  though  we  be  ignorant  of  it,  other  than  de-
fect of  knowledge  or  of  benevolence  in  the  author.
II.  There  may  be  also  parts  of  plants  and  ani-
mals: as  there  were  supposed  to  be  of  .the  watch,
of  which,  in  some  instances,  the  operation,  in
others,  the  use,  is  unknown.  These  form  differ-
ent.cases:'  for  the  operation 'may.  be  unknown,
yet  the  use  be  certain.  Thus  it  is  with  the  lungs
of  animals.  ,  It  does  not,  I  think,  appear,  that  we
are  acquainted  with  the  action  of  the  air  upon  the
blood,  or  in  what  manner  that  action  b  communi-
cated by  the  lungs  ;*  yet  we  find  that  a  ver^  short
suspension  of  their  office  destroys  the  life  of  the
animal.  In  this  case,  therefore,  we  may  be  said
to  know  the  use,  nay  we  .experience  the  necessity,
of  the  organ,  though  we  be  ignorant  of  its  opera-
tion. Nearly  the  same  thing  may  be  observed  of
what  is  called  the  lymphatic  system.  We  suffer
grievous  inconveniences  from  its  disorder,  without
being  informed  of  the  office  which  it  sustainS'in
the  economy  of  our  bodies.  There  may  possibly
also  be  some  few  examples  of  the  second  class,  in
which  not  only  the  operation  Is  unknown,  but  in
which  experiments  may  seem  to  prove  that  the
part  is  not  necessary;  or  may  leave  a  doubt,  how
far  it  is  even  useful  to  the  plant  or  animal  in  which
it  is  found.  This  is  said  to  be  the  case  with  the
spleen;  which  has  been  extracted  from  dogs,
without  any  sensible  injury  to  their  vital  func-
tions. Instances  of  the  former  kind,  namely,  in
which  we  cannot  explain  the  operation,  may  be


numeK>os;fbTtheywfflrjesoinpfopo^ioo»euT
ignorance. They. will  be  more  or  fewer  to  diffid-


ent persons,  and  in  different  stages  of  sck
Every  improvement  of  Imowledgeduiinishes  their
number.  There  is  hardly,  perhaps,  a  year  passes,
that  does  not,  in  the  works  of  nature,  bring  some
operation,  or  some  mode  of  operation,  to  light,
which  was  before  uiuharovered,— probably  unsus-
pected. Instances  of  the  second  kind,  namely,
where  the  part  appears  to  be  totally  useless.  1  be-
lieve to  be  extremely  rare ;  compared  with  the
number  of  those,  of  which  the  use  is  evident,  they
are  beneath  any  assignable  proportion;  and,  per-
haps, have  never  been  submitted  to  a  trial  and
examination  sufficiently  accurate,  long  enough
continued,  or  often  enough  repeated.  No  accounts
which  I  have  seen  are  satisfactory.  The  muti-
lated animal  may  five  and  grow  fat,  (as  was  the
case  of  the  dog  deprived  of  its  spleen,)  yet  may  be
defective  in  some  other  of  its  functions ;  which,
whether  they  can  all,  or  in  what  degree  of  vigour
and  perfection,  be  performed,  or  how  long  pre-
served, without  the  extirpated  organ,  does  no}
seem'  to  be  ascertained  by  experiment.  .But  to
this  case,  even  were  it  fully  made,  out,  may  be  ap-
plied the  consideration  which  we  suggested  con-
cerning the  watch,  viz.  that  these  superfluous
parts  do  not  negative  the  reasoning  which  we  in-
stituted concerning  those  parts  which  are  useful
and  of  which  we  know  the  use:  the  indication  of
contrivance,  with  respect  to  theo^  remains  as  it
was  before.

III.  One  atheistic  way  of  replying  to  our  ob-
servations upon  the  works  of  nature,  and  to  the
proofe  of  a  Deity  which  we  think  that  we  perceive
in  them,  is  to  tell  us,  that  all  which  we  see  must
necessarily  have  had  some  form,  and  that  it  might
as  well  be  its  present  form  as  any  other.  Let  us
now  apply  this  answer  to  the  eye,  as  we  did
before  to  the  watch.  Something  or  other  must
have  occupied  that  place  in  the  animal's  head;
must  have  filled  up,  we  will  say,  that  socket;  we
will  say  also,  that  it  must  have  been  of  that  sort
of  substance  which  we  call  animal  substance,  as
flesh,  bone,  membrane,  cartilage^eVc.  But  that
it  should  nave  been  an  eye,  knowing  as  we  do
what  an  eve  comprehends,-r-*t*.  that  it  should
have  consisted,  first  -of  a  series  of  transparent
lenses  (very  different,  by  the  by,  even  in  their
substance,  from  the  opaque  materials  of  which  the
rest  of  the  body  is,  in  general  at  least,  composed;
and  with  which  the  whole  of  its  surface,  this
single  portion  of  it  excepted,  is  covered ;)  secondly,
of  a  black  cloth  or  canvass  (the  only  membrane  of
the  body  which  is  black)  spread  out  behind  these
lenses,  >bq  as  to  receive  the  image  formed  by
pencils  of  light  transmitted  through  them ;  and
placed  at  the  precise  geometrical  distance-  at
which,,  and  at  wnich  alone,  a  distinct  image  could
be  formed,  namely,  at  the  concourse  of  the  refract-
ed rays :  thirdly,  of  a  large  nerve  coinmunicating
between  this  membrane  and  the  bnun ;  without
which,  the  action  of  light  upon  the  membrane,
however  modified  by  the  organ,  would  be  lost  to
the  purposes  of  sensation :— that  this  fortunate
conformation  of  parts  should  have  been  the  lot,  not
of  one  individual  out  of  many  thousand  indivi-
duals, like  the  great  prize  in  a  lottery,  or  like  some
-singularity  in  nature,  but  the  happy  chance  of  a
whole  species  f  nor  of  one  species  out  of  many
thousand  species,  with  which  wo  are  acquainted,
but  ci  by  for  the  greatest  number  of  all  that  exist  j


NATURAL  THEOLOGY,


899


*  1m)  thai  wider  varieties,  not  casta),  or  capricious,
but  bearing  marks  of  being  suited  to  ^heir  respect-
ive exigencies  :~-that  idl  this  should  have  taken
place,  merely  because  something  must  have  occu-
pied, those  pointsin  every  animal's  forehead ;— or,
that  all  this  should  be  thought  to  be  accounted  for,
by  the  short  answer,  "that  whatever  was  there,
must  have  had  some  form  or  other,"  is  too  absurd
to  be  made  more  so  by  any  augmentation.  We
•re- not  contented  with  this  answer;'  we  find  no
satts&ctkm  in  it,  by  way  of  accounting  for  appear-
ances of  organisation  far  short  of  those  of  the  eye,
such  as  we  observe  in  fossil- shells,  petrified  bones,
or  other  substances  which  hear  the  vestiges  of
I  or  vegetable  recrements,  but  which,  either


in  respect  of  utility,  or  of  the  situation  in  which
they' are  discovered,  may  seem  accidental  enough.
It  is  no  way  of  accounting  even  'for  these  things,

-  to  say  that  the  stone,  for  instance,  which'  is  shown
to  as  (supposing  the  question  to  be  concerning  a
petrifaction,)  must  have  contained  some'  internal
conformation  or  other:  Nor  does  it  mend  the  an-
swer to  add,  with  respect  to  the  singularity  of  the
conformation,,  that,  after  the  event,  it  is  no  longer
to  be  computed  what  the  charices'were  against  it.
This  k  always  to  be  computed,  when  the  question
is,  whether  a  useful  or  imitative  conformation  be
the  produce  of  chance  or  not:  I  desire  no  greater
certainty  in  reasoning,  than  that  by  which  chance
1*  excluded  from  the  present  disposition  of  the
natural  world.  Universal,  experience  is  against
U.  What  does  chance,  ever  do  for  us  %  in  the
human  body,  for  instance,  chance,  *.  &  the  opera-
tion of  causes  wi&houLdesignj  may  produce  a  wen,
a  wart,  a  mole,  a  pimple,  but  never  an  eye.
Amongst  inanimate  substances,  a  clod,.a  pebble;  a
liauid  drop,  might  be ;  but  never  was  a  watch,  a
telescope,  an  organized  body  of  any  kind,  answer-
ing a*  valuable  purpose  by  a  complicated  mechan-
ism, the  effect  of  chance.  In-  no  assignable
instance  hatl*  such  a  thing  existed  without  inten-
tion somewhere.

IV.  There  is  another  answer,  which  has  the
same  effect  as  the  resolving  of  things  into  chance ;
which  answer  would  persuade  'us  to  believe,  that
the  eye,  the  animal*  to  which  it  belongs,  every
other  animal,  every  plant,  indeed  every  .organized
body  which  we  see,  are  only  so  many  out  of  the
possible  varieties  and  combinations  of  •  being,
which  the  lapse  of  infinite  ages  has  brought  into
existence ;  that  the  present  world  is  the  relict  of
that  variety ;  millions  of  other  bodily  forms  and
other  species  having  perished,  being  by  the  defect
of  their  constitution  incapable  of  preservation,  or
of  continuance  by  generation.  Now  there  is  no
foundation  whatever  for  this  ^conjecture  in  any
thing  which  we  observe  in  the  works  of  nature ;
no  such  experiments  are  going  on  at  present;  no
such  energy  operates,  as  Quit  which  is'  here,  sup-
posed, and  which  should  be  constantly  pushing
into  existence  new  varieties  of  beings.  Nor  are
there  any  appearances  to  support  an  opinion,  that
every  possible  combination  of  vegetable  or  animal

.structure  has  formerly  been  tried.  Multitudes  of
conformations,  both  of  vegetables  and  animals,
may  be  conceived  capable  of  existence  and  succes-
sion, which  yet  do  not  exist.  Perhaps  almost  as
many  forms  of  plants  might  have  been  found  in
the  fields,  as  figures  of  plants,  can  be  delineated
upon  paper.  A  countless  variety  of  animals
might  nave  existed,  which  do  not  exist.  Upon
the  supposition  here  stated,  we  should  see  uni*


corns  and  mermaids,  sYlpha  and  centaurs,  the
fancies  of  painters,  and  the  fables  of  poets,  realized
by  examples. r  Or,  if  it  be  alleged  that  these  may
transgress  the  limits  of  possible  life  and  propaga-
tion, we  might',  at  least,  have  nations  or  human
beings  without  nails  upon  their  fingers,  with  more
or  fewer  fingers  and  toes,  than  ten ;  some  with
one  .eye,  others  with  one  ear/ with  one  nostril,  or
without  the  sense  of  smelling  at  all.  All  these,
and  a  thousand  other  imaginable  varieties,  might'
live  and  propagate.  We  may  modify,  any  one
species'  many  different  ways,  all  consistent  with
life,  and  with  the  actions  necessary  to  preservation,
although  affording  different  degrees  of  convenien-
ce ana  enjoyment  to  the  animaL  And  if  we  carry
these  modifications  through  the  different  species
which  are  known  to  subsist,  their  number  would
be  incalculable.  No*  reason  can  be  given  why,
if  these  deperdits  ever  existed,  they  have  now  dis-
appeared. Yet,  if  all  possible  existences -have
been  tried,  they  must  have  formed  part  of  the
catalogue.  v

But,  moreover,  the  division*  of  organised  sub-
stances into  animals  and  vegetables,  and  the  dis-
tribution  *nd  sub-distribution  of  each  into  genera
and  species,  which  distribution  is  not  an  arbitrary
act  of  the  mind,  but  founded  in  the  order  wjiich
prevails  in  external  nature,  appear  to  me  to  con-
tradict the  supposition  of  the  present  world  being
of  an  ii  "


the  remains  of  an  indefinite  variety  of  existences;
of  a  variety  which  rejects  all  plan.  The  hypothe-
sis teaches,  that  every  possible  variety  of  being
hath,  at  one  time  or  other,  found  its  way  into  ex-
istence, (by  what  cause  or  in  what  manner  is  not
said,)  and  that  those  which  were  badly  formed,
perished ;  but  how  qr  why  those  which  survived
should  be  cast,  as  we  see  that  plants  and  animate
are  cast,  into  regular  classes,  the  hypothesis  does
not  explain;  or  rather  the  hypothesis  is  inconsist-
ent with  this  phenomenon.  v

The  hypothesis,  indeed,  is  hardly  deserving  of
the  consideration  which  we  nave  given  to  it.
What  should  we  think  of  a  man  who,  because
we.  had  never  ourselves  seen,  watches,  telescopes,
stocking-mills,  steam-engines,  &c.  made,  knew
not  how  they  were  made,  or  could  prove  by.  testi-
mony when  they  were,  made,  or  by  whom,— would
have  us  believe  that  these  machines,  instead  of  de?
riving  their  curious  structures  from  the  thought
and  design  of  their  inventors  and  contrivers,  in
truth  denve  them  from  no  other,  origin  than  this;
viz.  that  a  mass  of  metals  and  other  materials
having  ran  when  melted  into  all  possible  figures,
and  combined  themselves  in  ai)  possible  forms,
and  shapes,  and  proportions,  these  things  which
we  see,  are  what  were  left  from  the  accident,  as
.best  worth  preserving;  and, 'as  such,  are  become
the  remaining  stock  of  a^magazine,  which,  at  one
time  or  otljer,  has,  by  this  means,  contained  every
mechanism,  usefuVand  useless,  convenient  and  in-
convenient, into  which  such-like  materials  could
be  thrown  ?  I  cannot  distinguish  the  hypothesis
as  applied  to  the  works  of  nature,  from  this  solu-
tion, which  no  one  would  accept,  as  applied  to  ti
collection  of  machines.

V.  To  the  marks  of  contrivance  discoverable  in
animal  bodies,  and  to  the  argument  deduced  from
them,  in  proof  of  design,  and  of  a  designing  Cre-
ator, this  turn  is  sometimes  attempted  to  be  given,
namely,  that  the  parts  were  not  intended  for  the
use,  but  that  the  use  arose  out  of  the  parts.  This
distinction  is  intelligible. .  A  cabinet-mate  rubs


400


NATUHAL  THEOLOGY.


his  mahogany  with  fish-skin;  yet  it  would  bo
too  much  to  assert  that  the  skin  of  the  dog-fish
was  made  rough  and  granulated  on  purpose  for  the
polishing  of  wood,  and  the  use  of  cabinet-makers.
Therefore  the  distinction  is  intelligible.  But  1
think  that  there  ft  very  little  place  for  it  in  the
works  of  nature:  When  roundly  and  generally
affirmed  of  them,  as  it  hath  sometimes  been,  -it
amounts  to  such  another  stretch  of  assertion,  as  it
would  be  to  say,  that  all  the  implements  of  the
cabinet-maker's  work-shop,  as  well  as  his  fish-skin,
were  substances  accidentally  configurated,  .which
he  had  picked  up,  and  converted  to  his  use;  that
his  adzes,  saws,  planes,  and  gimblets,  were  not
made,  as  we  suppose,  to  hew.  cut,  and  smooth,
shape  out,  or  bore  wood  with;  but  that,  these
things  being  made,  no  matter  with  what  design.
or  whether  with  any,  the  cabinet-maker  perceived
that  they -were  applicable  to  his  purpose,  and
turned  them  to  account

But  again.  So  far  as  this  volution  is  attempted
to  be  applied  to  those  parts  of  animals,  the  action
of  which  does  not  depend  upon  the  will  of  the  ani-
mal, it  is  fraught  with  still  more  evident  absurdity.
Is  it  possible- to  believe  that  the  eye  was  formed
without  any  regard  to  vision ;  that  it  was  the  ani-
mal itself  which  found  out,  that  though  formed
with  no  such  intention,  it  would  serve  to  see  with ;
and  that  the  use  of  the  eye,  as  an  organ  of  sight,
resulted  from  this  discovery,  and  the  animal's  ap-
plication of  it  1  The  same  question  may  be  asked
•f  the  ear;  the  same  of  all  the  senses.  None  of
the  senses  fundamentally  depend  upon  the  election,
of  the  animal;  consequently,  neither  upon  his  sa-
gacity, nor  his  experience.  It'  is  the  impression
which  objects  make  upon  them,  that  constitutes
their  use.  Under  that  impression,  he  is  passive.
He  may  faring  objects  to  the  sense,  or  within  its
reach ;  ne  may  select  these  objects :  but  over  the
impression  itself  be  has  no  power,  or  very  little  y
and  that  properly  is  the  sense.

^  Secondly,  There  are  many  parts  of  animal  bo-
dies which  seem  to  depend  upon  the  will  of  the
animal  in  a  greater  degree  than  the  sensea  do,  and
yet  with  respect  to  which,  this  solution  is  equally
unsatisfactory.  If-  We  apply  the  solution  to  the
human  body,  for  instance,  it  forms  itself  into  ques-
tions, upon  which  no  reasonable  mind  can  doubt ;
such  as,  whether  the  teeth  were  made  expressly
for  the  mastication  of  food,  the  feet,  for  walking,
the  hands  for  holding  1  or  whether,  these  things
being  as  they  are,  being  in  tact  in  the  animals
possession,  his  own  ingenuity  taught  him  that
they  were  convertible  to  these  purposes^  though
no  such  purposes  were  contemplated  in  their
formation  1

All  that  there  is  of  the  appearance  of  reason  in
this  way  of  considering  the  subject  is,  that  in
some,  cases  the  organization  seems  to  determine
the  habits  of  the  animal,  and  its  choice,  to  a  parti-
cular mode  of  life ;  which,  in  a  certain  sense,  may
be  called  "  the  use  arising  out  of  the  part."  Now
to  all  the  instances,  in  which  there  is  any  place
for  this  suggestion,  it -may  be  replied,  that  the
organization  determines  the  animal  to  habits  bene-
ficial and  salutary  to  itself;  and  that  this  effect
would  not  be  seen  so  regularly  to  follow,  if  the
several  organizations  did  not  bear  a  concerted  and
contrived  relation  to  the  substance  by  which  the
animal  was  surrounded.  They  would,  otherwise,
be  capacities  without  objects ;  powers  without  em-
ployment The  web-foot  determines,  you  say,


4heduck  to  swim;  but  what  would  that  avail,  if
there  were  no  water  to  swim  in  1  The  strong,
hooked  bill,  and  sharp  talons,  of  one  species  of
lird,  determine  it  to  prey  upon  animals;  the  soft,
straight  bill  and  weak  daws  of  another  species,
determine  it  to  pick  up  seeds:  but  neither  deter-
mination could  take  effect  in  providing  for  the
sustenance  of  the  birds,  if  animal  bodies  and  vege-
table seeds  did  hot  he  within  their  reach.  The
peculiar  conformation  of  the  bill  and  tongue  and
claws  of  the  woodpecker,  determines  that  bird  to
search  for  his  food  amongst  the  insects  lodged  be-
hind the  hark,  or  in  the  wood,  of  decayed  trees:
but  what  should  this  profit  him,  if  there  were  no
trees,  no  decayed  trees,  no  insects  lodged  under
their  bark,  or  in  their  trunks  The  proboscis  with
which  the  bee  is  fornished,  determines  him  to
seek  for  honey :  but  what  would  that  signify,  if
flowers  supplied  none!  Faculties  thrown  down
upon  animals  at  random,  and  without  reference  to
the  objects  amidst'  which  they  are  placed,  would
not  produce  to  them  the  services  and  benefits  which
we  see ;  and  if  there  be  that  reference,  then  there
is  intention.

Lastly,  the  solution  fails  entirely  when  applied
to'  plants.  The  parts  of  plants  answer  their  uses,
without  any  concurrence  from*  the  will  or  choke
of  the  plant.

VJ.  Others  have  chosen  to  refer  every  thing  to
a  principle  of  order  in  nature.  A  principle  of
order  is  the  Word :  but  what  is  meant  by  a  princi-
ple of  order,  as  dtfierent  from  an  intelligent  Crea-
tor, has  not  been  explained  either  by  definition  of
example ;  and,  without  such  explanation,  it  should
seemNto  be  a  mere  substitution  of  words  for  rea-
sons, names  for  causes.  Order  itself  is  only  the
adaptation  of  means  to  an  end ;  a  principle  of  order
therefore  can  only  signify  the  mind  and  intention
which  so  adapts  them.  Or,  were  it  capable  of
being  explained  in  any  other  sense,  is*  there  any
experience,  any  analogy,  to  sustain  it?  Was  a
watch  ever  produced  by  a  principle  of  older  ?  and
why  might  not  a  watch  be  so  produced  as  well  as
aneyel  •

Furthermore,  a  principle  of  order,  acting  blindly,
and  without  choice,  is  negatived  by  the  observation,
that-older  is  not  universal ;  which  it  would  tie,  it
it  issued  from  a  constant  and  necessary  principle:
nor  indiscriminate,  which  it  would  be,  if  it  issued
from  an  unintelligent  principle.  Where  order  if
wanted,  there  we  find  it ;  where  order  is  not  want*
ed,  u  e.  where,  if  it  prevailed,  it  would  be  useless,,
there  we  do  rtqt.  find  it.  In  the  structure  of  the
eye,  (for  we  adhere  to  our  example,)  in  the  figure
and  position  of  its  several  parts,  the  most  exact
order  is  maintained.  In  the  forms  of  rock*  and
mountains,  in  the  lines  which  bound  the  coasts  of
continents  and  islands,  in  the  shape  of  bays  and
promontories,  no  order  whatever  is  perceived,  be-
cause it  would  have  been  superfluous.  No  useful
purpose  would  have  arisen  from  moulding  recks
-and  mountains  into  regular  solids,  bounding  the
channel  of  the  ocean  ny  geometrical  curves;  or
from  the  map  of  the  world  resembling  a  table  of
diagrams  in  Euclid's  Elements,  or  Simpson's  Conk
Sections.

VII.  Lastly,  The  confidence  which  we  place
in  our  observations  upon  the  works  of  nature,  in
the  marks  which  we  discover  of  contrivance,
choice,  and  design,  and  in  our  reasoning  upon  the
proofs  afforded  us,  ought  not  to  be  shaken,  as  it  is
sometimes  attempted  to  be  done,  by  bringing  for-


NATURAL  THEOLOGY.


401


.  wnrd  tooqr  viei(r  omrown  ignorance,  or  rather  the
•general  imperfectkm  of  our  knowledge  of  nature* ,
rfor,  in  many  eases,  ought  thj»  cons^eration  to
affect  us,  ewen*vhen,jt  respacts  some  parte  of  the
subject  immediately  under  our.  notice.  True  for-,
tjtude  of  understanding  consists  nvnoVsuffering
What  weknow,  to  he  disturbed  by  what  we  do  not
kndw.  H"  we  perceive  a  useful  ena^  anil  means
saJaptpd  to  that  end;  we  perceive,  enough  for.  our
ooadoaion.  •.  If  these'  thing*  be  clear,  no  matter
wfea^  4*  obscure.  The  argument  is  finished.  For
jnsranm;  if  the  utility  pf  "vision,  ^o  the  animal
which  enjoys  it,  and  tto  adaptation.^  the  eye  to
this  office,  pe  evident  and  certain,  (and  I  can  men-
tion nothing  which  is  more  so,)  ought  it  to  preju-
dice the  mlerenee  which;  we  draw  jrom  these  pre-
mises, that  we  cannot  explain  the  use  ofthe  spleen  ?
Jfay„  more :;  if  there  i»e  parts  of  the  eye,  viz.  the
cstnea,  the  crystalline,  the  retina,  in  their  aub-
atanoe,  n^pre,  and  poakbn,  manifestly  suited  to
it^fermanoiuaf  an.  image  by  the  refraction  of  jays
of  light,  «t  least,  as  maiufestly  as  the  glasses  and
tubes  of  a  dioptric  telescope  are  suited  to  that  pur-
nose  ;  it  concerns  not  the  proof  which  t^ese  afford  of
design,  and  of  ^designer,  that  these  may  perhaps  he
other  partsy  certain  muscles  for  instance,  or  peryea
in  the  same  eye,  of  the  agency  or  effect  of  which
ate  can  give  no  account,  anymore  than  we  should
be  inclined  *o  deuht,  or  ought  to  doubt,  about  the
(construction  of  a  telescope,  wi  for  what  purpose
it-was  constructed,  or  whether  it  were  constructed
as  all,  because  there  belonged  to  it  cectain  screws
.and  pins,'  the' use  or  action  of-  which  we  Sid  not
comprehend. .  I  take  it  to  be  a  general  way  of  in-
fnsng  doubts  and  scruples  intorthe  mind,  to  recur
to  its  own  ignorance,  its,own  imbecility:  to  tell  us
that  upon  these  subjects  we  knew*  hula ;  that  fettle
iinajanectly  ;«or  rather,  that  we/knoty  nothing  pro-
perty about  the  matter.  These  suggestions  so  rail'
m,  wjth  our  conscrousness.  as  sometimes  pa  pro-
duce a  general  distrust  of  our  faculties  and  our.
conclusions.^  But  this'is  an  unfounded  jealousy.
The;  uncertainty  of  one  thing  does  not  necessarily
aifect  the  certainty  of  another-  thing.  Our,  igno-
rmnce  of  many  points  needLnot  suspend  out  assur-
ance of  a  few.  Before  we  yield,  in  any  particular
instanoe,  to  the  scepticism  .whicn  this  sort  of  in-
sinuation would  induce,  we  ought  accurately-  to*
sjsfirtsin?  whether  our  ignorance  or  doubt  concern
those  precise  points  upon  which  our  conclusion
tester  ■  Otsjer  points  are  nothing.  Our  ignorance
of  ether  point*  may  be  of  no  consequence  to  these,
though  they  he  pouts,  in  various  respects,  of  great
importance.  A  Just  reasoner  removes  from  hi*
cnosnhnnaan,  not  only  what  he  knows,  but  what
he  doss  not  know,  touching  matters  not  strictly
connected  with  Ins  argument,  i  c.  not  forming
the  very  steps  pfhis  deduction :  beyond  these,  his
kndwfedge  and  his  ignorance  are  alike  relative. -


CHAPTER  VI.

Tike  Argument  cumulative.

Wgnfe  then  no  example  in.  the  world,  of  con-
trivance, vxcept  that  of  the  eye,  it*  would  be  alone
sufficient  to  support  the  conclusion  which  we
draw  fioni'tt,  as  to  the  necessity  of  an  intelligent
Creator.  It  could  never  be  got  rid-of;  because-it
couM  not  he  accounted  for  by  any  other  suupori-
3E


4ionrwlucl|  .did  not  contradict  asjtfce  principles
we  possess  of  knowledge  f  the  principles  accord-
ing to  which,  things  dp,  ar  often  as.  they,  can  he
brought  to  the- test  of  experience,  turn  out  to  be
true  or  raise,  its  coats  and  humoura'constructed,
as  the  lenses  of  a  telescope  are  constructed,  for
the-  refraction  of  rays  of  light  to.  a. point,  which
forms  the  proper  action  of  the -organ ;  the  provi-
sion in  its  muscuiaj  tendons  fpr  turning 'its  puntl
Jo  t^e  object,  similar  to.  that  which  is  given  to  the
telescope  by  screws,  and  upon  which  power  of
direction,  in  the  eye,  the  exercise  of  its  office  as
an  optical  instrument  depend*;  the  farther  provi-
sion for  tAb  defence,  for  its  constant  publicity  and
moisture,  whiohvwe  sea  in  it?  socket  and  its  lids,
hr  its  gland  for  the  seqretion  of  the  matter  of  tears,
its  outlet  or  conrniunication  with  the  nose' for  car-
rying off  the  liquid  after  the  eye  is  washed,  with
it ;  these  provisions,  compose,  altogether  an,  appa-
mtus,  a  system  of  parts,  a  preparation  of  means,
so  manifest  in  their  design,  so.  exquisite  in' their  ~
contrivance,  so  successful  in  their  issue,  so  preci-
ous, and  so  infinitely  beneficial  in  their  use,  as,  in
my  opinion,  to  bear.  down,  all  dpufct  that  can  be
raised  Upon  the  sutgect.  And  what  I  wish,  under
the  title  of  the  present  chapter,  to  observe  i*>  that
if  other'  parts,  of  nature  were *  hiaocessihle  to  pur
inquiries,  or  even  if  other  pirta  of  nature  pre-
sented nothing  to  our  examination  but  disorder
and  confusion,  the  -validity  of  this  example  would
ramauv  the  same.  Jf  there  were '  but  one  watch
in  the  world,  it  would  not  be  less  certain  that  it
-had  a  maker.  If  we  had  never  in  otfr  lives  seen
any  but  one  single  kiad  of  hydraulic  machine,  .yet,
if  of  that  one  kind  we  understood  ihe  mechanism
and  ,use,  J*e  should  be  as  perfectly  assured  that  it
proceeded  from  the  hand;  and  thought,  and?  skill,
of  a  workman,  as  if  we  visited  a  museum  of
the  arts, 'and  saw  collected  there  tWenty  different
kinds -of;  machines  Tor  drawing  .water,  or  a  thou-
sand; different  kinds  Jbx  other  purposes.  >  Of  tins
point,  each  machine  is  a  proof,  independently  of
all  the  rest  So  it  is  with  the  evidences. of  a.
Pivine  agency.  The  Proof  is  not  a  conclusion
which  lies  at  the  end  or  a  chain  of  reasoning,  of  •
which  chain  each  instanoe  of  contrivance  is  only
a  link,  and  of  winch,-  if  one  link  foil,  the  whole
folia;  but  it  is  an.  argument  separately  supplied
hy  every  separate  example.  An  error  in  stating
an  example,  affects  only  that  example.  The
argument  is  cumulative,  in  the  fullest  sense  of  that
term.  The  eye  proves -it  without  the  ear;  the
ear  without  the  eye.  The  proof  in  each  example
is  complete;  fop  when  the  daaignof  the  part,  and
the  condudvenest  of.  its  structure  to  that  design,
is  shown,  the  mind  may  set  itself  at  rest  ;^io  fuUue
consjderdtion  can  detmctany  thing  irom  the  force
of  the  example^


CHAPTER  Yll.

Ofthe  mechanical  and  immechanical  PatU  and
Function*  qfyAnimais  and  Vegetables.

.  It  is  not  that  evert  part  of  an  animal  or  veg£
table  has  not  proceeded  from  a  contriving  miptl;
pr  that  every  part  is  not  constructed  wi^h  a  view
to  its  proper  end  and  purpose,  according  to  the
laws  belonging  to  and  coverntng  the  substance  or
the  action  Inade  usnoTin  that  pant;  oivthai  each  .


NATURAL  TfiEOLOCar.


put  tr noted  cotsttfucted  as  to  effectuate  its  pttf-
nose  whilst  ft  operates  according  to  these  laws ;
out  it.is  because  these.lawe  themselves  are  not  In
all  oases,  equally  understood;  or,  what  amountsJo
nearly -the  same  thing,  are  not  equally  exemplified
In  more  simple  processes,  and  more  simple  ma-
chines; that  we  lav  down  the  .distinction,  here
proposed,  between  the  mechanical  parts  and  other
parts  of  animals  and  vegetables. :_

For  instance :  The  principle  of  muscular  mo-
tion, viz.  upon  what  cause  the  sweffiiig  of  the
teHy  of  the  muscle,  and  consequent  contraction  of
its  tendbnq,  either  by  an  act  of  the  will,  or  by
involuntary  irritation,  depends,  is  wholly  un-
known to  us.  The  substance  employed,  whether
it  be  fluid;  gaseous,  elastic,  electrical,  or  none  of
these,  .or  nothing  resembling  these,  te  also  un-
known to  us:  of  course  the  laws  belonging  to
that  substance,  and  which  regulate  its  action,  are
unknown  to  us.  We  see  nothing  similar  to  this
contraction  in  any  machine  which  we  can  make,
or  any  process  which  we  can  execute.  So  iar^it
is  confessed)  we  are  in  ignorance,  but  no  farther.
This  power  and  principle,  from  whatever  cause  it
proceeds,  being  assumed,  the  collocation  of  the
fibres  to  receive  the  principle,  the  ^disposition  ^of  v
the  muscles  for  the  tfie  and  application  of  the

-  power,  is  mechafticali  and  is  a^uiteHigible  as  the
adjustment  of  roe  wires  and  strings,  by  which  a
puppet  is  moved. We  see,  therefore,  as  far  as'

-  respects  the  subject  before  us,  wjiat  is  not  mecha-
nical in  the  animal  frame, .  and  what  is.  '  The
nervous  infiuenbe{Torwe  are  often  obliged  to  give
names  to  things  which  we  know  little  -about) — I
say  the  nervous  influence,  by  which  the  belly,  or
inSMle.of  we  muscle,  is*  swelled,  is  not  mechani-
cal The  Utility  of  the  effect  we  perceive j  the
means,  or  the  preparation  of  means,  by  .which -it
|s  produced,  we  do  not  But  obscurity  as  to  the
origin  of  muscular  motion,  brings  no  doubtfulness
into  our  observations  upon  the  -sequel  of  the  pro-
cess: which  observations  relate,  l«t  To  the  con-
stitution of  the  muscle1;  in-  consequence  of  which
constitution,  the  swelling  of  the  belly  <>r  middle
pared*  •  necessarily  and-  mechanically  fojlow^dby
the  Contraction  of  the  tendons:  vdiy.  To  the!
number  and  variety  of.  the  muscles,  and  the  cor-
responding number  and  variety  of  useful  power*
which  they  supply  to  the  animal;  which  is  asto-
nishingly great:  3o7y.  To  the- judicious  (if we
may  be  permitted  to  use  that  term,  in  speaking  of
die  Author,  ot  of  the  works,  of  nature.)  to  the
wise  and  well-contrived  disposition  of  each  muscle-
Jfr  its  specific  purpose :  for  moving  the  joint  this
way,  ana  that  way,  and  the  other  way ;  for  pulling
ana  drawing  the  part  to  which  it  is- attached,  in. a
determinate  and  particular  direction ;  which  is  a-
nwyhanical  operation,  exemplified  in  a  multitude
of  instances.  To  mention  only  one :  The  tendon
of  the  trochlear  muscle  of  the  eye^to  the  end  that
it  mav^draw  in  the  line  required,  is  passed  through
a  cartilaginous  ring,  at  which  it  is  reverted,  exact-'
lyjn  (the  same  manner- as  a  rope  in  a  ship  is'
carried  over  a  block  or  round  a  stay,  in  order  to
make  it  pull  in  the  direction  which  is  wanted.
.All  this,  as  we  have  said,  is  mechanical ;  and  is
as  accessible  to  inspection,  as  capable  of  Ifcrag
ascertained,  as  the  mechanism  of  the  automaton
in  the  Strand.  Suppose  the  automaton  to  be  nut
in  motion  bjr  a  magnet  (which  is  probable,),  it


will  supply  us  with  a  comparison  veryjrot  for  bur
fnsent  purpose, Oftheinafneticeffluvii


» mafnetic  effluvium,  we


know  perhaps  as  fittfe  as  w»  do  of  the-  neriMi
fluid.  But,  magnetic  attraction  being  assumed  Qt
signifies  nothing  from  what -cause  it  proceeds,)
we  can  trace,  or  there  can  be  pointed  out  to  us,
with  perfect  clearness  sand  certainty,  the  mecha-
nism, viz,  the  steel  liars,  the  wheels,  the  joint*,
the  wires,  by  which  the  motion  so  much  sdsairea
Is  eommunicatedto  me  fingers  of  the  image :  and
to  make  any  obscurity,  or  difficulty,  or  contrgver-


in  the  automaton,  would  -be  exactly  the


themselves,  a  ground  of  question  or  i
t*  the  seasoning  winch  we  institute  concerning
the  mechanical  part  of  pur  frame.  That  ^n  ani-
mal is  a  machine,  is  a  proposition,  neither  correct-
ly true , nor  wfcoUy  felse.  The  distinction  which
we  haye  been  discussing  will  serve  to  show  how
far-the  comparison,  which  this  expretsion  imphes,
holds  j  and  wherein  ft  fiukv.  And  whether  the
distincfionhe  thought  of  importance  or  not,  it  is
certainly  of  importance  to  remember,  that  there  is
neither  truth  nor  justice  in  endeavouring  to  bring
a  cloud  over  our  undeTstandrnf^oraMttsbuM  into
our  reasoningB  upon- this  subject,  by  suggesting
that  w*  know  nothing  of  wjhnjitaijr  motion,  of  ins-
tability, of  the  principle  of  life,  of  sensation;^
•animal  heat,  upon  all  which  the  animal  function*
depend;  for,  jDur Ignorance  of  these  parts  of  the
animal  frame  concerns  not  at  all  our  knowledge  of
the  mechanical  part>  of  tbft-aama  fnune.  1  con-
tend, therefore,  thatthere  is  mechanism  in  ani-
mals; that  this  mechanism  is-as  properly  such,
as  it  is  in  machines  made  by  art ;  that,  this  me-
chanism is*  inteltigiWe  ascertain ;  that  it  is  not
the  less  so,  because  it  often  begins  or  terminates
with  something  which  is -not  mechanical^  that
whenever  it  is  mtejligible  and.  certain,  it  demon-
strates intention  and  contrivance,  as*vell  in  the
works  of  nature  as  in  those  of  art ;  ancTthat  it  is
the  best  demonstration  whieh  either  can  afford.
'  But  whilst  I^contend  for  these  proposftiotia,  I
do  not  exclude  myself  from  asserting,  that  them
may  be,  and  $at  there  an,  other  cases,  in  winch,
although  WQ-cannbt  exhibit  mechanism,  or  prase
indeed  that  mechanism  is,  employed,  we  want  not
sufficient  evidence  to  conduct  -us  to  the  same  oon-
ciusion.^  ^

>  There  is  what  may  be  called  the  tkymiccU  part
of  our  frame';  of  which,  by  reason  of  the  imperfec-
tion of 'our  ehVmistry,  we  can  attain  to- no  distinct
knowledge;  I  mean,  not  tc~a  knowledge,  either
in,  degree,  or  kind,  similar  to  that  .which  we  pos-
sess of  the  mechanical'  part  of  our  frame.  It  does
not,  therefore,  afibsd  the  same  species  of  iugument
as  that  which  mechanism  affords ;  and  yet  it  may  -
afford  an 'argument  .ina  hiph  degree,  satisfactory.
The  gastric  juice,  or  the  liquor  which  di^esta  the
food  in  the  stomachs-  of  animals,  id  of  this  class.
Of  all  menstrua,  it  is  the  most  active,  the  moat
universal.  In  the  human  stomach,  for  instance,
consider  what  a  variety  of  strange  substances,  and
how  -widely  different  from  one  another,. it,  in  a
few  hours,  reduces  to  a  uniform  pulp,  milk>  or
mucilage,  it  seizes  npon  every  thing,  it  dissolves
the  texture  of  almost  every  thing  that  comes  in  its
way.  The  flesh  of  perhaps  all  animals:  too  seeds
and  fruits  of  the  greatest  number  of  plant*]  the


'JttTDHAb  THE0LOGY.


408


note,  and  atiOu)  en*  We*,  of  h^y -hard  and
lough  as  they  are,  yield  to  Us  powerful  pervasion.
The  change  wrought  by  it  is  diftrent  from  tw
chvmical  solution  which  we  can  produce,  or  with
which  we  are  acquainted,  in  thia,  respect  as  Weil
as  many  others,  that,  in  our  chymistry,  paruoulat
menatruaact  only  upon  particular  substances.  Cen-
aideranofeover,  that  this  fluid,  stronger  in  its  ope-
ration than  a  caustic  alkatior  nuuefalactdthan
red  precipitate,  or  aquafortis  itself,  k  nevertheless
as  nnld,  and  bland,  .and  inoflenaiVe  to  the  touch  or
taste/ as  saliva  or  gum- water,  which  it  much  re-
sembles.  Consider,  I  say,  these  several  properties
of  the  digestive  organ,  and  of  the  juice  witfc  whiqh
k  is  supplied,  or  rather  with  which  it  is  made  to
supply  itself,  and  you  will  confess  it  to  be  entitled
to.  a*  name,  which  it  has  sometimes  -received,  that
of  "  the  chymical  wonder,  of  animal  nature."  ••
t  fitill  we,  are  ignorant  ef  the  composition  of  this
fluid,  and  of  the  mode-  of  its  action ;  .by.  which  is
meant,  that  we  are  not  capable,  as  we  are  in  the
mechanical  part  of  our  frame,  of  collating  it  with
the  operations  qf  art. And  this  I  call  thp  imper-
fection of  our  chymistry ;  for,  should  the  time  ever
arrive,  which  is  not  perhaps  to.  be  despaired  of,
when  we  can  compound  ingredients,  sp  aato  form
a  solvent  whjch  will  act  in  the  manner' in  winch
the  gastric-juice  acts,  *e  may  be  able  to  ascertain
the  cbymicsi  principles  upon  which  its  efficacy
depends/ as  well  as  from  what  part,  and  by  what
concoction,  m  the  human  body,  these  principles"
an  generated  and  derived.

In  4he  mean  time,  ought  that,  which  is  in  truth
the  defect  ofouj  cbvmistry,  to  hinder  us  from  ac-
qniespirig  in  the  inference,  which  a  production  of
nature,-  by  its,  place,  its  properties,  its  action,  its
surprising  efficacy,  its  invaluable  use,  authorises
lis  to  draw  in  respect  of  a  creative  design  1

Another  most  subtile  and  curious  function  of
animaVbodies  is  setretion*  This,  function  is  semi-
<hymica|  and  semi-mechanical ;  exceedingly  im-
portant and  diversified  in  its  efiects,  but  obscure
in.  its  process  and  in  its  apparatus. The  iraport-
> once  of  the  secretory  organs  is  but  too  well  attest-
ed by  the  diseases,  which  an  excessive,  a  deficient,
'  or  a  vitiated  secretion  is  almost  sure  oi  producing.
A  single  secretion  Jieing-  wrong,  js  enough  to
make  fife  miserable,  or  sometimes  te  destroy  k.
.Nor  i*  flie  variety  less  than  the  importance.  From
one  and  the  same,  blood  (I  speak-  of  the 'human
body)  about  twenty  different  fluids  are  separated';
ill- their  sensible  properties,  in  taste,  smell,  colour,
modi consistency,  theinost  unlike-oneanother  that
is  possible;-,. thick,  thuvsajt.  bitter,  sweet;  and,  if
from  our  own  we  pass,  to  other  species  of  animajs,
we  findTaxnetlgst  their  secretions  not  only  the  most
▼ttriobs,  hot  the  most  opposite  properties ;  the  moat
nutritious  aliment,  the  deadliest  poison ;  the  sweet-
est perfumes,  the  most  foetid  odours. Of  these
the  greater  part,  as  the  gastric  juice,  the  saliva,
the  bile,  the  slippery  mucuage  which*,  lubricates
the  joints?,  the  tears  which  moisten  the  eye,  the
wax  which  defends  the  ear,  are,  after  they  are
secreted,  made  use  of  in  the*  animal  economy ;  are
evidently,  subservient,  and  are  actually  contribut-
ing to  the  utilities  of  the  animal  itself. Other
fluids  seem  to  be  separated  only  to  be  rejected.
That  .this  also  it  necessary  (though  why- it  was
originally
the


ktioh.  «by  which  one  and  the  -saniejUoed  is  eon-
verted  into  bone,  muscular  flesh,  nejrves/mem-
Jffanes,  .tendons;  thingB  as  "different  as  the  wood
and  iron,  canvass  and  cordage,  of  which  a  ship
with,  te  furniture  is'  composed^  We  have  no  ope.'
ratjon  of-ar*  wherewith  exactly  to  compare  all  thin,
for  no  other  reason  perhaps  .than  that  all  opera-
t^ona  of  art  ara  exceeded  by  it  No  chymical  ejec-
tion, no  chymical  analysis  or  resolution  of  a  subr
stance  into  its  constituent  parts,  no  mechanical
sifting  or  division,  that  we  are  acquainted  with,  in

Srfectida  or  variety,  cor£e.up  to.  animal  secretion,
evertheless,  the  apparatus  'and  process  are  ob-
scure^ not  to  say  absolutely  -concealed  from  our
inquiries-.  In  a  few)  and;  only  a  ftw  instances,
we  pan  discern  a  Htfle  of  the  constitution  of  a
gltnd.  In  the  kidoeys'of  large  animals,  we  pan
trace  the  emulgent  artery,  dividing  itself  into;,  an
infinite  number  of  branches;  th$*  extremujea
every  where  communicating  wjth  little  round
bodies,, in  the  substance  of  which  bodies  the  secret
of  the  machinery  seems  to  resiuepfor  there  the
change  is-  made.  We  can  discern  pipes  laid  from-
these  jound  bodies  toward  the  pelvis, (.which  ia-a.


discern  these  pipes  joining  and  coDeeting  together
into  larger,  pipes ,';  and,  when  so  collected,  ending  -
in  innumeraule  papilla),  through  which  tie  se-
creted fluid  is.continualIy  ooeing  into  its  receptacle..
•J  his  is  all  yre  know  of  the  mechanism  of  a  glahaV
even  in  the  case  in  which  it  seems  most  capable  of
being  investigated. Yet  to  pronounce  that  we
know  nothing  of  animal  secretion,  or  nothing
satisfacterily,  "and  with  that  concise'  remark  to
dismiss  the  .article  nam  our  argument,  would  be,
to  dispose  of  the  subject  very  hastily  and  very  ir-
rationally. For  the  purpose  which  we.waht,  that
of -evincing  intention,  we  know  a  great  deal.  And
what  we  know  is  this. We  see  the  blood  carried
by  a  pipe,  conduit,  qr  duct,  to  the  gland. We  sea
an  organized  apparatus,  be  its  construction  of
action  what  it  will/ which*  We  call  that  gland.  We
see  the  bipod,  or  part  of  the  blood,  after  it  has
passed  through  and  undergone  the  action  of  the
gland,  cpming  from  it  by  an  emulgent  vein  or
artery,  t.  ex  by  another  pipe  or  conduit. And  we
see  also  at  the  same  time  a  new  and  specific  fluid
issuing  from  the  same  gland  tyr  its  excretory  duct,
t.  e.  by  a  third  pipe  or  conduit  ;*  which  new  fluid
is  in  some  cases  discharged  out  of  the  body,  in
mojre  cases  retained  within  it.  and  there  execut-
ing some  important  and  -intelligent -office' Now
supposing,  or  admitting,  that  we  know  nothing  of
the  proper  internal  constitution  of'  a  gland,  of  of
the  mode  of  its  acting  upon  fbi  blood;  then  our
situation  is  precisely  like  that  of  an  unmocfrahical
looker  on,  who  stands  by  a  stockipgjoom,  a  corn- .
mill,  a  carding-machiBS,  or  a  thrasriing- machine,  at
work,  the  fabric  and  mechanism  of  which,  as  well
as  all  that  passes  within,  is  hidden  from  nis  sight
by  the  outside  case.).<>r,  if  seen,  would*  be-Too  comv
plicated  for  his  irninformed,  uninstructed  under*
standing  to  comprehend.  And  what  is  that  situa-
tion? This"  spectator,  ignorant  as  he  is, -seer  at
ohe  end  a  material  enter  the  machine  as  un-
ground  grain  the  mill,  raw  cotton  the  cardmg-
machine,  sheaves  of  unthrashedcorn  the  thrash-
ing-machine ;  and,  when  ^e  casts  his  eye  to  the '
other  end  of  the  apparatus,  he  sees-  the  material
issuing  from  it  in  a  new  state;  and,  what  lemons,,
in  a  state  manifestly  adapted  to  future  uses;  the
grain  in  meal  fit  for  the  making  of  bread-  the  wool


404


NATURAL  THBOLQGY.


in  revings  ready  for  spinning  into  thread*,  the
shea?  tn  corn  dressed  fot  the  mill.  Ishaecessssy
that  this  man,  to  enter  ttf  be  convinced  that  de-
sign, that  intention,  thai  contrivance,  has  been
employed'  about  the  rnaehine,  should  be  allowed
to  pull  \t  to  pieces;  should 'be  enabled  to  examine
the  parts  separately ;  explore  their  action  upon  one
another;  or  their  operation,  whether  simultaneous
or  successive,  upon  thejnaterial  presented  to  them  1
He  may  long  to  do  this  to  gratify  his  curiosity  ;*h?
may  desire  to  do.it  to  improve  his  theoretic  know-
ledge ;  or  he  may  have  a  more  substantial  season
for  requesting  it,  if  he  happen,  instead'  of  a  com-
mon visitor,  to  be  a  millwright  by  profession,  or  a
person  sometimes  called  in  to  repair  such-like
machines  when  out  of  order ;  but,  for  the  purpose
of  ascertaining  the  existence  of  counsel  and  design
in  tae  formation  of  the  machine,  he  went*  no  such
intromission  or  .privity.  What  he  sees,  m  suffi-
cient. The  effect  upon  the  material,  the  change
produced  jn  it,  the  utility  of  that  change  for  future
applications,  abundantly  testify,, be  the  concealed
'  part  of  the  machine  or  of  its  construction  what  it
will,  the  hand  and  agency  of  a  contriver.

If  any  confirmation  were  wanting  to  the  evi-
dence which  the  animal  secretions  afford  of  design,
it.  may  be  depved,  as  has  been  already  hinted,
from' their  variety,  and  from  their  appropriation  to
their  place  and  use.  They  aU  come  from  the  same
blood :  they  (re  all  drawn  off  by  glands :  yet  the
produce  is  very  different,  and  the  difference  ex-
actly adapted  to  the  work  which  is  to  be  done,  or
tile  end  to  be  answered.  No  account  can  bejnven
of  this,  without  resorting  to  appointment.  Why>
for  instance,  is  the  saliva,  wtuch  is  diffused  over
the  aeqt  of  taste,  insipid,  whilst  so  many  others  of
the  secretions,  the  urine,  the  tears,  ana  the  sweat,
are  salt)  Why  does  the  gland  within  the  ear  se-
parate a  viscid  substance,  which  defends  that  pas-
sage; the  gland  in  the  upper  angle  of  the  eye,  a
thin  brine  which  washes  the  ball  ?  Why  is  the
synovia  of  the  joints  mucilaginous ;  the  bile  bitter,
stimulating,  and  soapy  1  Why  docs,  the  juice,
which  flows  into  the"*  stomach,  contain  powers,,
which  make  that  bowel  the.great  laboratory,  as  it
is  by  its  situation  the  recipient,  of  the  materials  of
future  nutrition!  These  are -all  fair  questions;
and  no  answer  can  be  given  to  them  but  what  calk
in  intel%ence. and  intention. -  '  >

My  object  in  the  present -chapter  has  been  to
teach  three  things :  ^nrst>  that  it  is  a  mistake  to
suppose  tha^t,  in'  reasoning  jrqmthe  appearances  of
nature,  the  imperfection  of  our  knowledge  propor-
tionably  affects'  the  certainty  of  our  conclusion ;
to*  in.  many  cases  it  does  not 'affect  it  at  alfc  se-
condly, tbat  the  different  parts  of  the  animal irame
may  bo  classed  and  distributed,  according  to  Hie
degree  of  exactness  with  which  we  can  compare
them  with,  works  of  art :  thirdly,  that  the  mechani-
cal parts  of  our  frame,  or  those  in  which  this  com-
parison is  most  complete,  although  constituting,
probably,  the,  coarsest  portions  of  nature's  work-
manship, are  the  most  proper  to  be  alleged  as.
proofs  and  specimens  of  design. . .

CHAPTER  VJ».

Qf  Mechanical  Arrangement  in  the  Human,
Fraint,:

We  proceed,  therefore,  to  propose  certain  exam-
plea  taken  out^f  this  class  ^making  choice  of  such


tooorkM**  ~
appear  to>ba  the  most  striking,  and  the  best
rtpodr  but  obliged,  perhaps,  to  postpone  both
these  fpomimendatkMUi  to  a  third;  that  oftbe  ex*
ample  being  capable  of  explanation  without  states,
or  figures,  oc  technical  language.

, Ofthebont*.

I.— I.  chaHenge  arty  man  to  produce,  in  the
joints  and  pivots  of  the  most  eonmuoatad  or  the
most  flexible  machine  that  waa  ever  contrive^,  a
construcfton  move  artificial,  or  mere  ^vtoWUy
artificial  than  that  which  is  seen  in  the  verte-
bra; of  the  human  ntck.<—  Two  things  were  to
be  done.  The  head  was  to  have  the  power  of
bending  forward  and  backward,  as  in  the  ad
of  nodding,  stooping,  looking  upward  of  down-
ward: and,  at  the  same  time,  of  turning  itself
round  upon  the  body  lo  a  certain  extent  the

Suadrant  we  will  say,  or*  rather,. perhaps,  a  non-
red  and  twenty  degrees  of  a  curie.-  For  these
two  purposes,  two  distinct  contrivances  are  em-
ployed: First,  the^nead  rests,  immediately  upon
the  uppermost  of  the  vertebrae,  and  -is  united  to  it
by  a  Aingv-joint ;  upon  which- joint  the  head  plays
treely  forward'  and  backward,  as  far  either  Way  as
is  necessary,  or  as  the  Ugtimenis  allow:  which
was  the  first  thing  required.  JBut  then  the  rotato-
ry motion  is  unprovided  for ;  Therefore,  secondly,
to-inake  the  head  capable  of  this,  a  farther  me-  *
onanism  is  introduced ;  not  between  the1  head  and
the  uppermost  bone  of  the  neck,  where  the  hinge
is,  but  between  that'  bone,  and  the  hone  next  un-
derneath it.  It  is  a  mechanism  resembling  a  J»>
non  and  mortice.  This  second,  or  uppermost
bone  but  one,  has  what"  anatomists  call  a  process.
viz.  a  projection,  somewhat  similar,  in  sue  ana
shape,  to  a  tooth ;  which  tooth,*entering  a  tunes-
ponding  hole  or  socket  in  the-  bone  above  it,  forms
a  pivot  or  axle,  upon  which  that  upper  bone,  to-
gether with  toe  head  which  it  supports,  turns
freely  in  a  circle ;  raid  as  far  in  the  circle  as  the
Attached  muscles  permit  the  head  to  turn.  Thus
.  are  both  motions  perfect,  without  interfering  with
each  other.  When  we  nod  the  head,  we  jise  the
hinge-joint,  which  lies  between  the  head  antfthe
first  bone  of  the*  neclt.  When  we  turn  the  bead
-round,  we  use  the  tenon  and  mortice,  which  rune
between  the  first  bone  of  the  neck  and  the  second.
We  see  (he  saitfe  contrivance  and  'the  same  prin-
ciple employed  iri  the  frame  or  mounting  of  a  teles-
cope/ It  is  occasionally  requisite,  that  the  object-
end  of  the  instrument  be-  moved  up  and  down,  air
well  as  horizontally  or  equatorially.  For  the  ver-
tical motion,  there  is  a  hinge,  upon  which  the
telescope  plays ;  for  the  horizontal  or^eonatorial
motion,  an  axis  upon  .which  the  telescope  'and  the
hinge  turn  round  together.  And  thU  is  exact ty
the  mechanism  which  is  applied  to  the  motion  of
the  head:  nor  will  any  one  here  doubt  of  (he  ex-
istence, of -counsel  and  design,  except  it  he-tr/  that
debility  of  mind,  which  can  trust  to  its  own  rea-
sonings in  nothing.  .  '

We  may  add,  that  it  was'  on  another  account
also,  expedient,  that  the  .motion  of  the- head  back-
ward* and  forward  should  be  performed  upon  the
upper  surface  of  the  first  vertebra :  for  if  the  first
vertebra  itself  had  bent  forward,  if  would  have
brought  the  spinal  marrow,  at  the  very  beginning
,  of  its  course,  upon  the  point  Of  the  tooth:

\1.  Another  mechanical  contrivance,  jiot  unliko
the  last  in  its  object,  but  diffemntand  original  in


l^LTURAL  THEOLOGY.


405


it*  means,  tmHrfn  whMariatttmatecall  the^r*
army  that  ill,  in  the  ann  between  the  elbow  and
the  wjrist.  Here,  for  the  perfect *««  of  the^fimb>
two  motions  are  Wanted:  a  motion  at  the  elbow
backward  and  forward,  which  is called a  reaprV
cal  motion ;  and  a  rotatory  motion-,  by  which  the
palm  of  the  hand,  as  nccaskm  requirea,  may  be
turneXj-fcpWard.  How  is  this  managed  1  the  fore-
Arm,  it  k  well  known,  eonsfettfof  two  bones,  tying'
along-side  each  other,  but  touching  only  towards
the  ends:  One;  and  only  one,  of  these  bonea,  is
joined  to  the  cubit,  or.  upper  par*  of  the  arm  at
the  elbow;  the  otke*  aloney  to  the  hand  at  the
wrist  The  first,  by  means,  at  the  elbow,  of  a
hinge-joint  (which  allows  pnjv  0/  motion  in  ihe
aaine  •plane,)  swinge  backward  and '  forward,  car-
rying' along-  with  hvthe  other  hone,  and  the  whole
Jorc-anh*  In  the  mean  time^  a*  often  aa  $here  is-
occafiiohto  turn  the  palm  upward,  that  other  bone
to  which  the  hand  ia  attached,  rolls  m^on  the  firsts
by  the'  help  pf  a  groove  or  hollow  near -each  end
-  of  one  bone;  to  which  -is  fitted  a  corresponding
prominence  in  the  ttther.  iCboth  bones  had  bean
joined  to  the' cubit  or  upper  arm;  at  the  elbow,  or
both  to  the  hand  at  the  wrist,  the*  thing  could  not
'  bave'heen  done.  The  first'  was  <to  /  be  at  ubertV
at  one  end,  and  the  second*  at  the  others  by  which
meant)  the;  twd  actions  may  be  performed  together.
The -great  bone,  which  carries  the  ibre-ara^  may
be  swinging  npdn,  its  hinge  at  the  elbow,  at  the
▼ery  time  that -the  leaser  hope,  which  carries  ,the
band,  may  be  yarning  round  it  in  tije  grooves.
•The  management  also  of  these  grooves,  or  rather
the  tubercles  and  grooves,  Is  very  observable.  The
two  borie*  are  called  the  radios  and  the  rUna,
Above,  i  e.  towards  the  elbow,  a  tubercle  of  the
radios  plays  into  the  socket-of'the  ulna;  whilst.
,  i.e.  towards  the  wrist;  the  radius  finds


below;  x.e.  towards  the  wrist;  the  radius  finds  the
socket,  and  the  ulna  the  tubercle.  A  single  hone
iti  the  fore-arm,  with  a  ball  and  socket  Joint  at'the
elbow,  which  admits  of  motion  in  all  directions,
might,  in  some  degree,  have  answered  the  purpose
of  both  moving  the  arm  and  turning  the  hand.
But  how  much,  better  it  is  accomplished  by  the
present'  mechanism.  Buy  person  may  convince
itunseif  who  puts  me  ease  and  quickness  with
which  he  can  shake  his.hand  at  the-  wrist  circu-
larly ( moving  likewise,  if  he  pleases,  his  arm'  at
the  elbow  at  the  same  time,)  in  competition  with
the  comparatively'  slow  and  laborious  motion-,  with
which  his  arm  can  he  made  to  turn  round  at,  the
■boulder,  by  the  aid  of  a  ball  and  socket  joint.
-  III.  The  spine,  or  back-bone,  is^e:,  chain  -of
joints  of  very  wonderful  construction.  Various,
difficult,  and  almost  inconsistent  offices  were  to  be.
executed  by  the  same  instrument.  It  was  to  be.
Aon,  yet  flexible :  (now  I  know  no  chain  made  by
art,  which  is  both  these ;  for  by  fittnness  I  mean,
not  only  strength,  but  -stability  ^n^t,  to  support
the  erect  position  of  the  body ; flexible,  to  allow  of
.tile  bending  of  the  trunk  m  ail  degrees'  of  eurva-
fnre.  It  was  farther  also  (which  \b  another,  and
ejuhe  a  distinct  purpose  from  the  rest)  to  become'
«  pipe  ot  conduit  fot  the  safe  conveyance  from  the
brain,  of  the  most  important"  fluid  of  the  animal
frame,  that,  namely,  upon  which  all  voluntary
motion  .depends,  the  spinal  mttaowj  a  substance
not  only  .of  the  first  necessity  to  actidn,  if  hot  to
life,  but  of  a  nature  so  delicate  andTtender,  so  sus-
ceptible, and  so  impatient  of  mjury,  as  'that  any
unusual  pressure  upon  it,  or  any  considerable  ob-
struction of  its  course,  iafbttowed  by  paralysis  or


Now  the  spsne  was  not  enjy  to  fhrnjau
the  main  trunk -for  ^ki  passage  of  the  .medullary
substance  from  the  brain,  but  vto  give  out,  in  the
course  of  its  pwtfrew,  small  pipes  therefroni,  which
being  afterward  imfefpnkely  subdivided,. might,
under  the  name  of  nerves,  distribute  this  exquisite
supply  to  every  part  of  the. body.4  The  san>4
spine  .was  also  to  sjerve  another  .use  not.  leas
wanted  than  the  preceding,  *i*\  to  afford  a  fulcrum,
stay,  or  basis  <or  more  prqperly  speaking,  a  sejiea
•«f  these,)  Jbr  the  insertion,  of  the  mneptes  which,
are  spread  over  the  trunk  of  the  body.:  in  which
trunk  share  are  not,  aa  in  the  limbs,  cylindrical
bones  to  which  4hey  een«be  fastened:  an^J,  likewise,
which  is  a  sjmilar  use,  to  furnish  a  support  for  the '
endsof  the  ribs  to- rest  upon.

Bespeak-  of  a  workman  a  piece  of  mecharnsm
whkh  shall  comprise  all  these  purposes,  and  let
him  set  about to  contrive  it:  let  nun  try  hi  skill
upen.it ;  let  Aim  feel  the^ifficulty  of  accompfiah-
ing  the  task,  before  he  be  told  how  the  same  thing
is  effected  in  the  animal  frame.  'Nothing  ww
enable  him  to  judge,  so  weffof  the  wisdom  whien
has  been  employed^  nothing  will -dispose  him:  to
think  of  it  so  truly.  Fiist;  for"  t^s  jfrmness,  yet
flexibility,  of  the  spine  •  it  is  composed  of  a.  great
number  of  bones  (in  the  human  subject,  of  twen-
ty-four)^ joined  to  one  another^  and  compacted  by
bread  -bases.  The  breadth  of  ihe  oases  upon
which  the<part*  severally  rest,  and  the  closeness"
of  the  junction,  gifo  to  the-ohain  its  £nnness  juod
stability ;  the  number  of  parta^and  conseouent  fre?
qdency  6f  points^  its  flexibility.  .Which  flexibility,
we  may  also  observe,  varies  in  different '.  parte  ot
the  chain j  is  least  in  the,  back,  where  strength
mote  than  flexure  is  wanted;  greater'  in  thecoma,
which  it  was  necessary  should  be  more  simple
than  the  back*,  and  greatest  of  all  in  the  neck,  tor
the  free  motion  of  the  head.  •  Ttien;  secondly,  in
order  to  afford  a  passage  for  the  descent-  ot  the
medullary  substance,  each  of  these  bones  iB.feored
through' m  the  middle  in  such  a  manner,,  aa  that,
When  -put  together,' the  hole  in  one  bone  falls  into
a  line,  and  corresponds  with  the  holes  in  the  two
bones,  contiguous  to  it.  By  which  means,  the
perforated*  pieces,  when  joined,  farm  an  entire,
close,  unmterrupted  channel)  at  least,  whilst  the
spine  is-  upright,  -and  at  rest  But  as  a  settled
posture  ia  inconsistent  with  its  use,  a  great  diffi-
culty still  remained,  which  was  to  prevent  the
vertebra  shifting  upon  one  another,  so  as  to  break
the  hue  'of  the-eanal  aa  .often  -  as  the^boqy,  moves
or  twists:  or  the  joints -gaping  externally,  when-
ever die  body  is  bent  forward/and  the  epme  there-
upon made  to  take  the  form  of  a  bow.  These
dangers,  which  are  mechanical,  are  inechairically
~fjrovided  against.  The  vertebra,  by  means*  of
their  processes  and  projections,  and  of  the  articOt
latibns  which  some  of  these  form  with,  one  another
at  their  extremities,  are  so  locked  in  and  confined,
as  to  maintain,  in  what  are  •called,  the  bodies  or
braid  surfaces  of  the  bones,  Jhe  relative  .position
nearly  unaltered :  and  to  throw  the  change  and
the  pressure,  produced  by  fltxiori,  almost  entirely
npotf  the  intervening' cartilages,  the  springiness
and*  yielding  nature  of  whose  substance  admits  of
all  the  motion  which  is  necessary  to  _be  performed
upon  them,  without  any  chasms  being  produced
bjasepantbnofthe'parte.  I  say,  ofali  the  mo-
tion which  is  necessary ;  for  although  we  bend
our  backs  to  every  degree  almost  of.  inclination,
the  motion  of  each  witubiei  ia  very  email;  aqenis


406


NATURAL  TKEOLOG7.


Hie  advantage  we  receive -frem  tin  chain  being
epmposed'of  so  many  linka,  the  spine  of  so  many
bonesr  Had -it  consisted  of  three-  op  four  bones
only  >  in-  bending  the  -  bqdy,  the.  spinel  nmn^w
niiifit  have>been  bruiaed  at  every  angle.  The
reader  need  not  be  told/  that  thee*  intervening  car-
tilages are  gristles;  ana  he  may  see -them  in  per-
fection in  a  loin  of  veal.  Their  form  also  favour*
the  eanie  intention.  -They  are  thicker  before  than
behind;  eo  that,  when  we  stoop-  forward,  the
compressible  substance  of  the  cartilage,  yielding
in  its  thicker  and  interior  part  to  the  force  which
squeezes  it,  hnnga  the  surfaces  of  the  .adjoining-
Tertebra)  nearer  to  the  being  parallel  with  one
another  than  they  weitf  before,  matead  of  increas-
'  ing  '(he  inclination  of  their  plftnes}  which  mast
have  occasioned  a  fissure  or  opening  between  them.
Thirdly,  'for  the  medullary  canal  giving  out  hr  its
course,  and  in  a  convementTomer  a  supply  of
nerves  to  different  parts  of  Che  body,  notches  are
made  in  the  upper  and  lower  edge  of  every  verte-
bra; two  on  eacJTedge;  eqm-distantan  each*  side
from  the  middle  line  of  the  back.  ^  When  the
yertebrsj  an  pnUogether,  these  notches,  exactly
fitting,  form  small  betes,  through  which  the
nerves,  at  each  articulation,  Issue  out  in  pairs;  in
order  to  send  thesfhranches  to^  every  part  of  the
body,  and  with  ari  equal  bounty  to  bofn  -sides  of.
the  body.  The  fourth  purpose  assigned  to  the
same  instrument,  is  the  insertion  o£  the 'bases  of
the  muscles,  and  the  support  of  tlpe  ends  of  the
ribs;  and  for  this  fourth  purpose,  especially  the
former  part  ofit,  a  figure,  specifically  suited  to  the
design,  anAunneeessary  for  the  other  purposes,  is
given  to  the  constituent  bones.  Whilst  they  are
plain,  and.  round,  and  smooth,  towards  the  front,
where  any  roughness  or  projection  might  have
Wounded  the  adjacent  viscera,  they  run  out  behind
and  4m  each  aide,  into  long  processes,  to  winch
processes  the  muscles  necessary  to  the  motions  of
the"  trunk  are  fixed ;  and  fixed  with  «idj  *rf,  that,
whilst  the  vertebr»  supply  a  basis  for  the  muscles,
the*  muscles  help  to  keep  these  bones  in  their  poai:
tion.  or  by  their  tendons  to  tie  them  together.

That  mnst  important,  however,  and  general
property,  viz.  the  strengtn^of  the  competes,  and  ■
the  security  against  luxation,  was  to  be  sUll  more
eepecialr/  consulted:  for  where  so  many  joints
were  concerned,  and  where,  in  every  one  a.  de-
rangement would  have  been  fatal,  it  toecame  a
subject  of  studious  precaution.  For  this  purpose,
the  vertebns-are  articulated,  that  is,  the  moveable
joints,  between  them  are  formed  by  means  of  those'
projections  of  their  substance,  which  we  have
mentioned  under*  the*  name  of  processes ; .  and
jbhese  so  lock  in  with,  and  overwrap  one  another '
as,  to  secure?  the  body,  of  lae  vertebra  notvonly
from  accidentally  slipping  but  even  from  being
pushed  but  of  its  place  by  any  violence  short  of
that  which  would  break  the  bo$e.  t  nave  often
remarked  and  admiredVthis-  structure  in  the/chine,
of  a  hare.  In  tfaia,  as  in  maiiy  instances,  a  plain,
observer  of  tlje  animal  economy  may  spam  himself
the  disgust  of  being- ofeaentat  human  dissections,,
and  yet  Jearn  enongn  forms  information  and  sa-
tisfaction, by  even  examining  the.  bones  ef  the
suumeJs  which  come -unon  his  table.  Let  him
take,  for  example,- into  his  hands,  a  piece  of  the
clean-jacked  bone  ef  a  hare's  back ;  consisting,  we
wfflsuopose,  of  three  vertebra).  He  will  find  the'
middle  Done  of  the  three  so  implicated,  by  means.
ofbsorojectioQeoT  pwcesses,  with  the  bone -on  I


each  side  of  it,  that  fto;pijBSsefl*  wh«&ue  can  nse.
will  force  it  outof  its  plafle  between  them.  It  will
give  way  neither  forward  nor  backward,  nor  on
either  aide.  'In  whichever  direction  Jie  pushes,  he
perceives,  in  the  form,  or /unctionrO^ovej- lapping,
of  the  bones,  an  impediment  opposed  fo  bis  at-
tempt j  a  check  and  guard  against  dislocation.  In.
one  part  of  the  spine,  he  will  find*,  sttt)  farther/
fortifying  expedient,  in  the  ^mode-  sjoconjmg  to
which  the  ribs,  are  annexed  to  the  spine.  •  Each
rib  rests  upon  two  vertebral.  That  n  the  "thing
to  be  remarked,  and  any  "one  may  remark  it  in
carving  a  neck  of  mutton.  The  manner  of  it  is
this:  &e  end  of  the  rib  is  divided  by  a  middle
ridftc  into  two  surfaces;  which  surfaces  are  joined
to  the  bodies  of  twe  contiguous  vertebra?,  the  ridge
applying  itself  to  the  Intervening  cartilage.  How
this  is  tne  very  contrivance  which  is  amptoyed
in  the  famous  iron  bridge  at  my  door  at  Bishop
Wearmouth ;  and/or  Che  same  purpose  of  stability ;
tiz.  the  eheeks  of  the  bars,  wnich  pass  between-
the  arches,  ride  across  the  joints,  i>y  which  the
pieces  composing  each  arcn  are  united.  Bach
cfloss-bar  rests  upon  two  of  these  pieces  at  their
place  of  junction ;  and  by  that  position  resists,  at
least  in  one  direction,  any  tendency  ineiiher  pieceto
slip  ouVof  its  place.  Thus  perfectly,  by  one  means  -
or  the  other,  at  the  danger  of  supping  laterally,
os  of  being  drawn  aside  out  of  the  Une  of  the  back,
provided  against. :  and  to  withstand  the  bones  being
pulled  a».upder  longitudinally,  or  in  the  direction
of  that  line,  a  strong  membrane  runs  from  one
end  of  the  chain  to  the  other;  sufficient  to  resist
any  force  Whwh  is  ever. likely  to  act  in  the  direo-
tioirof  the  back,  or  parallel  to  it,  andeonsequehs^r
to  secure  the  whole  combination  in  their  places.
The  general  result  isr  that  hot  only,  the .  morions
of  the  human  body  necessary  for  the  ordinary  of-
fices of  life  are  performed  with  safety,  but.  that  it
is  an-  accident  hardly  ever  heard  ofy  that  even  the
gesticulations  of  a  harlequin  distort  his  spine.

tJpon  the  whole,  and  as  a  guide  to  those  who
may  be  inclined  to  carry  the  consideration  of  this
subject  .farther,  there  are  three  views  under  which
the  spine  ought  to'be  regarded,  an<J  in  all  which
it  cannot  foil  to  excite  our  admiration.  These
views  relate  to  its  articulations,  its  ligaments,  and
its  perforation',  and  to  tne  corresponding  advan-
tages which  the  body  derives  from  it,  for  action,
for  strength,,  and  for  that  which  is  essential  to
every  part, «  secure  qbmmuijication  with  the  brain.

The  structure  of  the  epiqe  is  not  in  general
different  in,  different'  animals..  In  the  serpent
tribe,  however,  it  b  considerably  varied;  out  with
a  strictreference  to  theconyeniencyof  the  animal
For',  whereas,  in-quadruped»  the  number  of  verte-
bra is,  from  thirty  to  .forty,  in  the  serpent  it  is
nearly  one  hundred  and  nifty:  whereas  in  men
a.nd  quadrupeds  the  surfaces  of  the  bones  are  fiat,
and  wee  fiat  surfaces  Jaidene  against  the  other,
and  bound  tightly  ainewa*  in  U?e  serpent,  die
bones -play  one* within  another  like  a  Mil  and
socket,*  so  that  they  have  a  free  motion. uoon  one
another  in  every  direction:  that  is.  to  say,  in  men
and  quadrupeds,  firmness  ia  more  consulted;  In
serpents,  phoney. ^  Yet, even  pliancy  is  not  ob-
tained at  the  expense  ef  safety.  The  back-bone
ofa  serpent,  for  coherence  and  flexibility,  is  one
of  the  most  curious  pieces  of  animal  mecjianism
with  which.  w«  ere  acquainted. The  chain  of  a


*  Der.  rtysTTOooL  J5  39*


ItATEftAS.  THEOLOGY .


Affl


Watch  (I  mash  A?  okin  whicfc  pauses  between
the  spnng-barrel  and  the  fusee,)  which  aim*,  at
the  same  properties,  4s  but  a  bungling  piece-  of
workmaaismp.in  comparison  with  that  of  which
;we  gpeak.  '  -  * . • „ •

IV.  The  reciprocal  enlargement  and  confraction
of  tbecAerf  to  allow  for  thffplay  of  the  long*;  de-
pends upon  a*  simple  yet  -beautiful  mechanical


contrivance,  referable  td  the  structurextf  the  bones.
qrhich  endow  k.  The  ribs  are  articulated  to  the
back-bone,  or  rather  to  its  aide  projections,  oh-
Hquely:  that  is,  in  their  natural  position  they  bend
or  slope  from,  the  place  of  articulation  downwards.
But  the  basis  upon  which  they  rest  .at  this  end
being  fixed,  the  consequence  of  the  oblicjify  >or
the-  inclination,  downwards,  is,  that  when  they
come  to  move,  whatever  pulls  the  ribs  iupwards,
necessarily,  at  the  same  time,  draws  them  out ;
and,  that,  whilst  the  ribs  are  brought  to  a  fight
angle  with  the  spine  behind,  the  sternum,  or  part
oflhe  chest  to  which  they  "are  attached  in  Jront,  is
thrust  forward.  The  simple  action,  therefore,  of
the  elevating  muscles  does  the  business:  whereas,
if  the  ribsiad  bearhartfculated  with  the  bodies  of
the  vertebra  at  rjght'angles,  the  cavity  of  the  tho-
rax could  never  have  been  farther  enlarged  uby  a
change  of  their  position;  ff  each  rib  had  been  a
rigid  bone,  articulated  at  both  ends  to  fixed  bases,
jffifc  whole  chest  had  been  immoveable.  Kefllhas
observed,  that  the.  breast-bone,  m  an  easy  uupira-%
tioryia  thrust  put  one  tenth  o£an  inch.'  and  he*


calculates  that  this,  added  to  what  is  gamed  tt>  the
•pace  within  the>oheat  by  the  fattening  or  descent
or  the  diaphragm,  leaves  room  for  forty-two  cubic
inches  of  air  to  enter  at  every  drawing-in  of  the
breath.  When -there- js  a  necessity  for  a  deeper
anymore  laborious  inspiration,  the  enlargement
of  the  capacity  ef  the  cnesT  may  be  so  increased
by  effort,  as  that  the  lungs  maybe  distended  with
seventy  or  a  huridred  such  cubic  inches*  The
.thorax*  says  Schefoammer,  forms  a  kind  of  bei-
loWs,  such  aa  never  have  been,  nor  probably  will
beC  made  by  any^artifioar.

V .  The  patella,  or  knee-pan,  is  a  curious  little
bone ;  in-  its  font  and  office,  online  any  other  bone
of  the  bocjy.  It  is  circular;  the  sine  of -a  crown
piece;  pretty  thick;  a  little  convex  on  both  sides,
and  covered  with -a  smooth  cartilage;  It  lies  upon
-tile  front  of  tfcehnce;  and  theCpowerftri  tendons,
by  winch  the  leg  is  bropght,forward,  pass  through

-  it  {or  mt^r  tt  niakes-a  part  of  their  continuation,)
from  their  origin  irrthie  thigh  u>thehMnsertk>n  in

.the.  tibia.  It  protects  both  -the  tendon  and  the
point  from  any  injury  which  either  might  suffer,"
by  the  rubbing  of  one  against  the  other,  or  by  the
pressure  of  unequal  surfaces. .  It  also  gives  to  the


I  a  very  considerable  mechanical  advantage,
by  altering'  the  line  of  their  direction,  and  by  ad-
trancing  it  father- out  from  the  centre  of  motion ;
and  thsr  upon  the  principles  ef  the  resolution  >of

1  farcer  upon  winch  principles  all  machinery  is
fancied.  These  ate  its  uses. '  But  what  is  most
observable  in  it  1s,  that  it  appears  to  be  supple-

.  mental, as k  were,  to  the  frame: added,  a*  it  should
almost  seem,  afterward;  not  quite  necessary,  but
very  convenient  It  is  separate  from  the  other
bonea;  that  is,  It  is  not  connected  with  any  other
bones  by  the  common  mode  of  union.  It  is  soft,
or  harcjfy  formed,  in  in&ncy;  and  produced  by  an
— ut— — ^  of  the  inception  or  progress  of  which


*  An*,  p.  889.


no  account  can  be  given  from  the*  stmoture  or
exercise  of  the  part..

-  VI.  The'  ihoulderJfhade  is,  in  some  rhaterial
respects,  a  jrery  singular  bone;  appearing  to  be
made  so  expressly  far  its  own  purpose,  and  so  in-
dependently of  every-  other  reason*  In  such  qua-
drupeds as^have  no  CDilaivbones,  which  are  by  hur
the  greater  number,  the  shoulder-blade  has  no
bony  communication  .with  the  trunk,  either  by  a
joint  or  process,  or  in  any.  other  way.  It  does  not
trow  to,  of"  out  of,  any  other  bone  of  the  tarunE
It  does  not  apply  to  any  other  bone  of  the  trunk :  (I
know  not  whether  this  be  true  of<any  second  bone
in  the  body,  except  perhaps  the-os  hyoides:)  m
strictness  it  forms  no"  part  ef  the 'skeleton..  It  is
bedded  in  t{ie>flesh;  attached  only  to  the  muscles,
k  is  no  other  than  a  foundation-bone  for  the  arms,  -
laid  in,  separate,  as  it' were,  and  distinct,  fiem  the
general  ossification.  The  lower  limbs  connect
themselves  at  the  hip  with  bones  which  form  part
.of  the  skeleton :  but  this  connexion,  in  the  upper


limbs,  being  wanting,  ajmsisj  whereupon  the
might  be  articulated,  was^t*  oe  supplied-  by%a  de-
tached ossification*  for  the  purpose. -

^  Of  th*  Joints.

I.  The  abaye  ate  a  Jew  examples  of  bones  mad*
remarkable  by  their  configuration:  but  to. almost
all  the  bane#  belong  Joint*  ;  and  .in.  these)  still
more  clearly  than  in  the  form,  or  shape  of  the
bones  themselves,  are  seen  both  contrivance  and
contriving  wisdom.  Every  joint  is  a  curiosity,
and  is  also  strictly  mechanical.  There  Is  the
hinge-joint,  and  the  mortice,  and  tenon-joint ;  each
as  manifestly  such,  and  as  accurately'  defined)  as
any  which  can  be  produced  out  of  a  cabinet-
maker's shop;  and  one  or  the  other  <prevails,  as
-ejt^eris  adapted  to  tb^e  motion  which,  is  wanted :
fi.  g.  a  mortice  and  tenon,  or  ball  and  socket-joint,
is  not  required  ai  .the  knee,  the  )eg  standing  in
need  only  of  a  motion  backward  and. forward  in
the  same  plane,  for  which  a  hinge-joint  is  sufficient  \
a  mortice  and  tenon,  or  ball  an<l  socket-joint,  is
wanted  at  the-  hip,  that  not  only  the  progressiva'
step  may  be  provided  for,  but  the  interval  between
the  limbs  may  be  enlarged  or  contracted  at-plea-
sura.  Now  obserw  what  would  have  been  the
incoqveniency,  t.  e.  both  the  superfluity,  and  the
defect  of  articulation,  if  the,  case  had  been  inverted ;
if  the  ball  and  socket-joint  had  been  at  the  Jp»eet
and  the  ^inge-joint  at  the- hip.  The  thighs  must
have  been  kept  constantly  together,  ana  the  legs
have  been  loose^aad  straddling.  Jhere  would
have  been  no  use,  that  we' know  of,  in  tieing  able
ia  turn  the  ajdves\o£  the  legs-  ^efore;  and  there  .
would  have  been  great  confinement  by  restraining^
the  motion  of  the  thighs'  to  one  plane.  The.disr
advantage  would  not  have  beenjess,  if  the  joints
at  the  hip  and  the  knee  had  been  both  ofthesamo
sort ;  both  balls  and  sockets,,  or  both  hinges':  yet
why,  independently  or  utility,  and-  of  a  Creator
who  consulted  that  utility,  should  the  same  bono
(the  thigh-bone)  be  rounded  at  one  end,  and  chan-
nelled at  the  other  1

.  The  hinge-jointis  not  formed  by  a  bolt  passing
through  the  two  parts  of  the  hinge,  and  thus  keep-
ing them  in  their  places  j.  but' by  a  different  expe-
dient A  strong,  tough,  narchment^ike"  mem-
brane, rising-  from  the  receiving  Bones,  and  in-
serted ail  round  the  received  bones  a  little  below
their  heads,  encloses  the  joint  on  every  side.  Thai


NATURAL  THEOLOGY.


408


tnembrane  ties,  «mfine«;  end  hotde,  the  ends  of
the  bona  together;  keeping  the  corr^ponding
parts  ef  the  joint,  i.  e.  the  relative  convexities  said
ooncavniis,  in  dose  appficatkaVto  each  otl^er.  •

For  Che  fatf  ahd  socket  joint,  betide  the  mem-
tone  already  deecrihedj  there  is  in  some  import-
ant joints,  «  an  additional  security,  a  { snort
strong;  yetifcxible  ligament;  inserted  by  one  end
into  the  head  of  the  ball,  by  the  other  into  the  bot-
tom of  the  cop;  which  ligament  keape  the  twoparts
of  the  joint  bo  firmly  in  their  pace,  that  Done^f
the  motions  which  the  fimb  naturally  performs, .
none  of  the  jerka  and  twists  to  which  it  is  ordi-
narily liable,  nothing  leas' indeed  than  the- utmost
and  the  most  unnatural  violence,  can  poll  them
asunder.  It  is  hardly  imaginable,  hoy?  gnat  a
force  is  necessary,  even  to  stretch.  Kill  shore  to
break,  this  ligament;  yet  aoJflexible  is  it*  as  to  op-
pose no  impediment  to  the  sappleness  of  the  joint.
By  its  "situation  also,  it  is  inaccessible  to  injury
from  sharp  edges.  As  it  cannot  be*uptnred,  (such
is  its  strength!)  so  it  cannot  he'  cut,  except  by  an
accident  wpjch  would  sever  the  Kmb.  •  if  I  had
been  permitted  to  fame  a,  proof  of  contrivance,
auehaa  might  satisfy  the  most  distrustful  inqui-
rer, I  know  jwt  whether  I  could  have  chosen' an
example  of  mechanism  more  unequivocal,  or  more
free  from  objection,  than  this  ligament..  Nothing
fan  be  mate  meehankal;  nothing,  however  eub-
aervient  to  tneeafety,  less  capable  of  being  gene-
-  rated*  by  the  action  of  the  joint.'  I  would  particu-
larly solicit  the  reader.!*  attention *o  thie  provision,
as  it  is  found  hi  the  head  of  the  thdgt^bone  /  to
Us  strength,  its  structure,  and  its  use. U  ia  an

•  instance  upon  wfaic^.1  lay  my  hand.  One  single
met,  weighed  by  a  mind  m  earnest,  leaves  often-
times the  deepest  impression.  For  the^wrjpose  of

'  addressing  different  uhderjrtaHdingB.and  different
'  apprehensions;— for  the'  purpose  of  sentiment,  for
the  purpose  of  •exciting  admiration  of  the  Creator's
Works,  we>  diversify  our  views/  we  multiply  ex-
amples; but  for  the  'purpose  of  strict  argument,
v  one  dear  instance  is.  sufficient ;  -imd  not  only  su£
.  fidentytat  capable  perhaps  of  generating.  *  firmer
assurance  than  what  can  arise  from  a  divided  at-
tention.

.  The  £»tt*bmua,  at  hirlge-johit,  does  not,  it-  is
manifest,  admit  of  a  ligament  of- the"  same  kind
with  that  of  the  ball  and  socket-joTnt,  but  it  is  al-
ways ferti(oif  brjhe  species  of  ligament  ofwfcich
it  does  admit "  The  strong,  firm,  investing  meel-
brane,  above  'described,  accompanies  it  in  every
_  part:  and'  in  particular  joints,  -this  membrane,
which  'is  properly  a  hgament,  &  considerably
rtrongeron  t|ie  sides  than  either  before  or  behind,,
m  order  that  ibn  cenvexitiea  may  play*  true  in
their  concavities^  and  not  be  subject  to  slip  side-
ways, whjch  is  the  chief  danger}  for  the  museu-
'  lar  tendons  generaHy*e*train  the  parts  from  go-
ing farther  than  "they  ought  to  go  in  the  pianeof
their  motion.  In  the  knee,  which  is  -a  joint  of
this  form,  and  of  great  importance,  there  Are  s*u-

*  peiadded  to  the'  common  provisions  for  the  sta-
.  bflity  of  the  joint,  two  strong  ligaments  which

cross  each  other ;  and  cross  each  other  in  such  a
manner^  as  la  secure  the  joint  from  being  dip-
>plaoed  in  any  assignable  direction."  "I  think,"
says  Cheselden, ''  that  the  knee  cannot  be  coin-'
pletery  dislocated  without' breaking  the  cro*  liga-
ments."* We  can  hardly  help  comparing  this  with,


•Cam  Aaati  fed  7m.  p.  45.


theJrinding  up  efa  fracture^  where  the  fflhris  al-
most always  strapped  across,  ferthe  aakeof  givng
firmness  and  strength  to  the  bandage.'

Another  no-leas  important  joipt,  arid  that  also
of  the  ginglyrous  sprt^  is  the  ankie-s  yet  though
important,-  («  order,  /perhaps,  to  preserve  the
symmetry  an^l  lightness  of  the  limb,)  email,  ami,
on  that  accdunt,  more  liable  to  injury,  .tfowthis
-joint  is  strengthened,  i.  e.  is  defended  from  dislo-
cation, by  two  remarkable  processes  or  prolonga-
tions of  the*  bones  of  the  leg;  whjch  growjwea
form  U»e  protuberances  that  we  call  the  inner  and
outer  ankle.  It  is  part  of  each  bone  going  down
lower  than  the  other  part,  and  thereby  overlap-
ping the.  joint :  so  that,  if  the  joint  he  in  danger
of  slipping  outward,  it  is  curbed  by  the  inner  pro-
jection, i.  a.,  that  of  the  tibia;  if  Inward,  by  the
outer  projection,  »\*e.  that  of  the  fibula.  Between
both,  itis  locked  in  its  position.  I  know  no  ac-
count that  can  be  given  of  tfus;  structure,  except
its  utility.  Why  should  the  tibia  termmate -ol  ils
lower,  extremity,  With  a  double  end,  and  the  fibula
the  aame,-*but  to  barricade  the  join  ton  both  sides
by  a  continuation  of  past  of  the  thickest  of  the
beneoverirt  The  joint  atthe  sfio^lder  compased
with  the  joint  at  the  Atp,  though  both  ball  and
'  socket-joints,  discovers  a  difference  in  thcar.  forjn
and  proportiona/well  suited  to  the  different  offices
which  the  limbs*  have  4o  execute.  *The  cup  of
socket  at  the  shoulder  is,  much  shallower  and  flat-
ter than  it  is  at  the  hip,  and  is  also  in  pert*  formed
of  cartilage  aet  rBUnd  the  rim  of  the  cup.  The
socket,  into  which  the  mead  of  the  thigh-bone  is
inserted,  is  deeper,  and  made  of  more  solid  ma-
terials.- This  agreee^rith*  the  duties  asaisrnedto
each  part  The  arm  is  an  instrument  of  knotion,
principally,  if  not  solely,  '  Accordingly  the  shal-
lowness of  the  socket  at  v  the  shoulder,  and  the
yieldinatness  of  the  (at£laginou»  s\ibstance  wfth
which  its  edge  is  set  round,  and  which,  in  fact,
composes  a  considerable  part  of  its  concavity,  are
excellently  adapted  for  the4  allowance  of  a  free  mo-
tion and  a  wide  range :  both  which  the  arm  wants.
Whereas,  the  'lower  lifeb,  forming  a  yeri  of  the
column  of  the  body ;  haying  to  support  the-  body,
as  well  as  to  begth^meaiied?  tttfoco^otmn ;  firm-
rness  was  &  be  consulted,  as  well  as  action.  With
a  capacity  for.  motion  in  all  diieeu<ftisvindeed,  as
at  the  shoulder,,  but  not  in  any  direction  to  the
same  extent  as  in  the  arm,  wan  to  be  united  sta-
bility, or  resistance  td  dislocation..  Hence  the
dcepef>exeavetioaof~the'  socket ;  and  the  presence
of  a  leae  proportion  .of  eajtilage  xrpon  tBe-edge.

The  suppleness  and  pliab&jtyo'f  the  joints,  we
every  moment  experience ;  and  the  Jirmneeg  of
animal  articulation;  the  property*  we  have  hitherto
been  considering,  may  be  judged  of  from  this  sin-
gfe  observation;  that,  at  any  given  .moment  of
tune,  there-  are  millions  of  animal  joints  in  com-
plete repair  and  use,,  foe. one  that  ia  dislocated:
and  thir,  notwithstanding  the  coirtortiona  and
wrenches  to  which  the  Umbs  of  anhnals  ate  oon-
Unoally-sufcjeot. '»  **  -

4 II.  The  joirds,  of  rather  the  ends  of  the  bone*
which  form  them,  display  also,  k>  their  configura-
tion, another  use.  The  nerves,  blood-vessel*,  and
tendons,  which  are  neoeeeatyto  the  lift,  or  for  the
motion,  of  the  Umbs,  must,  it  is  evident,  in  their
way  from  the  trunk  bfJhe  body  to4he  place  of
their  destination,  travel  over  the  moveable  joints;
and  it  is  no  less  evident,  that,  in  this  part  of  their
course;  they  will  have,  iron*  sudden  j


NATURAL  THEOLOGY.


400


from  abrupt  changes  of  curvature,  to.  encounter
the  danger.of  comprehension',  attrition,  or  lacera-
tion. To  guard  fibres  so  tender  "against  conse-
quences so  injurious,  their  path  is  in  those  parts
protected  with  peculiar  care ;  and  that  by  a  provi-
sion, in  the  figure  of  the  bones  themselves.  The
nerves  which  supply  the  fore-arm,  especially  the
inferior  cubital  nerves,  are  at  the  elbow  conducted,
by  a  kind  of  covered  way,  between  the  condyle,  or
ntner  under  the  inner  extuberances  of  the  bone
which  composes  the  upper  part  of  the  arm.4  -  At
the  knee,  the  extremity  of  the  thigh-bone  is  di-
vided by  a  sinus  or  cliff  into  two  heads  or  protu-
berances: and  these  heads  on  the  back  part  stand
oat  beyond  the  cylinder  of  the  bone:  Through
the  hollow,  which  lies  between  the  hind  parts  of
these  two  heads,  that  is 'to  say,  under  the  ham,
between  the  ham-strings,  and  within  the  concave
recess  of  Che  bone  formed  by  the  extuberances  on
each  side ;  in  a  word,  along  a  defile  between  rocks,
pass  the  great  vessels  and  nerves  which  go  to  the
fcg.t  Who  led  these  vessels  by  a  road  so  defended
and  secured  ?  In  the  joint  at  the  slumlder,  in  the
edge  the  cup  which  receives  the  head  of  the  bone,
is  a  mttch,  which  is  joined  or.  covered  at  the  top
with  a  Hffament.  Through  this  hole,  thus  guard-
ed, the  blood-vessels  steal  to  their  destination  in
the  arm,  instead  of  mounting  over  the  edge  of  the
concavity  .$

III  In  all  joints,  the  ends  of  the  bones,  which
work  against  eadh  other,  are  tipped  with  gristle.
In  the  ball  and  socket-joint,  the  cup  is  lined,  and
the  ball- capped  with  it.  Tne  smooth  surface,  the
elastic  and  unfriable  nature  of  cartilage,  render  it
of  all  substances  the  most  proper  for  the  place  and
purpose.  I  should,  therefore,  have  pointed  this
out  amongst  the  foremost  of  the  provisions  which
have  beeh  made  in  the  joints  for  the  facilitating  of

.  their  action,  had  it  not  been  alleged,  that  cartilage.
in  truth,  is  only  nascent  or  imperfect  bone ;  and
that  the  bone  in  these  places  is  kept  soft  and  im-
perfect, in  consequence  of  a  more  complete  and
raid,  ossification  being  prevented  from  taking
pace  by  the  continual  motion  and  rubbing  of  the
surfaces:  which  being  so,- what  we  represent  as  a
designed  advantage,  is  an  unavoidable  effect.  I
am  far  from  being  convinced  that  this  is  a  true  ac-
count of  the  lact  jor  that/  if  it  were  so,  it  answers
the  argument:  To  me,  the  surmounting  of  the
ends  of  the  bones  with  gristle,  looks  more  like  a
putting  with  a  different  metal,  than  like  the  same
metal  Kept  in  ja  different  state  by  the  action  .to

J  which  it  is  exposed.  At  all  events,  we  have  a
•  great  particular  benefit,  though  arising  from  a
general  constitution:  but  this  last  not  being  quite
•what  my  argument  requires,  lest  I  should  seem
by  applying  the  instance  to  over-rate  its  value,  I
have  thought  it  fair  to  state  the  question  which  at-
tends it,

.IV.  In  some  joints,  very  particularly  in  the
knees,  there  are  loose  cartilages  or  gristles  between
the  bones,  and  within  the  joint,  so  that  the  ends
of  the  bones,,  instead  of  working  upon  one*  another,
work  upon  fte  intermediate  cartilages.  Chesel-
oen  has  observed,S  that  the  contrivance  of  a  loose
ring  is  practised  by  mechanics,  where  the  friction
of  the  joints  of  any  of  their  machines  is  great;  as
between  the  parts  of  crook-hinges  of  large  gates,

'  or  under  the  head  of  the  male  screw  of  large  vices.


•  Chss.  Anat.  p.  95&  ed.  7.  fib.  p.  35.'

J  lb.  p.  30.  $  lb.  p.  13.

o  F


-  The  cartilages  of  which  we  speak,  have  very  mucfc
of  the  form  of  these  rings.  'The  comparison  more-
over shows  the  reason  why  we  find  fhem  in  the
knees  rather  than  in  other  joints.  It  is  an  expe-
dient, we  have  seen,  which  a  mechanic  resorts  tot
only  when  soma  strong  and  heavy  work  is  to  be
done.  So  here  the  thigh-bone  has  to  achieve  its
motion  at  the  knee,  with  the  whole  weight  of  the
body  pressing  upon  it,  and  often,  as  in  rising  from
our  seat,  with  the  whole  weight  of  the  body  to
lift.  It  should  seem,  also,  from  Gheselden's.  ac-
count, that  the  slipping  and  sliding  of  the  loose
cartilages,  though  it  be  probably  a  small  and  ob-
scure change,  humoured  the  motion  of  the  end  of
the  thigh-bone,  under  the  particular  configuration
which  was  necessary  to  be  given  to  it  for  the  com-
modious action  of,  the  tendons;  (and  which  con-
figuration requires  what  he  calls  a  variable  socket,
that  is,  a  concavity,  the  lines  of  which  assume  a
different  curvature  in  different  inclinations  of  the,
bones.)  *  • .

V.  We  have  now  done  with  the  configuration:
but  there  is  also  in  the  joints,  and  that  common  to ,
them  all,  another  exquisite  provision,  manifestly
adapted  to  their  use,  and  concerning  which  there
can,  I  think,  be  no  dispute,  namely,  the  regular
supply  of  &  mucilage,  more  emollient  and  slippery
than  oil  itself,  which  is  constantly  softening  and
lubricating  the  parts  that  rub  upon  each  other,  and
thereby  dnninisking  the  effect  of  attrition  in  the
highest  possible  degree.  For  the  continual  se-
cretion ox  this  important  liniment,  and  for  the
feeding  of  the  cavities  of  the  joint  with  it.  glands
are  fixed  near  each  joint;  the  excretory  ducts  of
which  glands,  dripping  with  their  balsamic,  con-
tents, hang  loose  like  fringes  within  the  cavity  of
the  joints.  A  late  improvement  in  what  are  called
friction-wheels,  whicn^consist  of  a  mechanism  so
ordered,  as  to  be  regularly  dropping  oil  into  a  box,
which  encloses  the  axis,  the  nave,  and  certain
balls  upon  which  the  nave  revolves,  may  be  said,
in  some  sort,  to  represent  the  contrivance  in  the
animal  joint ;  with  this  superiority,  however,  on
the  part  of  the  joint,  viz.  that  here,  the  oil  is  not
only  dropped,  but  made.

In  considering  the  joints,  there  is  nothing,  per-
haps, which  ought  to'  move  our  gratitude  more
than  the  reflection,  how  well  they  wear.^  A  limb
shall  swing  upon  its  hinge,  or  play  in  its  socket,
many  hundred  times  in  an  hour,  for  sixty  years
together,  without  diminution  of  its  agility :  which
is  a  long  time  for  any  thing  to  last;  for  any  thing
so  much  Worked  and  exercised  as  the  joints  are.
This  durability  I  should  attribute,  in  part,  to  the
provision  which  is  made*  for  the  preventing  of
wear  'and  tear,  first,  bv  the  polish  of  the  cartilagi-
nous surfaces ;  secondly,  by  the  healing  lubrication
of  the  mucilage ;  and,  in  part,  to  that  astonishing
property  of  animal  constitutions,  assimilation,  by
which,  in  every  portion  of  the  body,  let  it  consist
of  what  it  will,  substance  is  restored,  and  waste
repaired.

•  Moveable'  joints,  I  think,  compose  the  curiosity
of  bones ;  but  their  union,  even  where  no  motion
is  intended  or  wanted,  carries  marks  of  mochas
nismandof  mechanical  wisdom.  The  teeth,  espe-
cially the  front  teeth,  are  one  bone  fixed  in  ano-
ther, like  a  peg  driven  into  a  board.  The  sutures
of  the  skull  sic  like  the  edges  of  two  saws  clapped
together,  in  such  a  manner  as  that  the  teeth  of
one  enter  the  intervals  of  the  other.  We  have
sometimes  one  bone  lapsing  over  another,  and


410


NATUEAL  THEOLOGY.


planed  down  at  the  edge* :  sometimes  also  the  thin
lamella  of  one  Bone  deceived  into  a  narrow  furrow
of  another.  In  all  which  varieties,  we  seem  to
discover  the  same  design,  viz.  firmness  of  juncture,
without  clumsiness  in  the


CHAPTER  IX.

j

Qf  the  Muade*.

.  MascLES,  with  their  tendons,  are  the  instru-
ments by  which  animal  motion  is  performed.  It
will  he  our  business  to  point  out  instances  in
which,  and  properties  with  respect  to  which,  the
disposition  of  these  muscles  is  as  strictly  mechani-
cal, as  that  of  the  wires  and  strings  of  a  puppet

I.  We  may  observe,  what  I  believe  is  universal,
an  exact  relation  between  the  joint  and  the  mus-
cles which  more  it  Whatever  motion  the  joint,
by  its  mechanical  construction,  is  capable  of  per-
forming, that  motion,  the  annexed  muscles,  by
their  position,  are  capable  of  producing.  For  ex-
ample j  if  there  be,  as  at  the  knee  and  elbow,  a
hinge-joint,  capable  Of  motion  only  in  the  same
plane,  the  leaders,  as  they  are  called,  i.  e.  the
muscular  tendons,  are  placed  in  directions  parallel
to  the  bone,  so  as,  by  the  contraction  or  relaxation
of  the  muscles  to  which  they  belong,  to  produce
that  motion  and  no  other,  if  these  joints  were
capable  of  a  freer  motion,  there  are  no  muscles  to
produce  it  Whereas  at  the  shoulder  and  the  hip,
where  the  ball  and  socket-joint  allows  by  its  con-
struction of  a  rotatory  or  sweeping  motion,  ten-
dons are  placed  in  such  a  position,  and  pull  in
such  a  direction,  as  to  produce  the  motion  ot  which
the  joint  admits.  For  instance,  the  sartorius  or
tailor's  muscle,  rising  from  die  spine,  running  di-
agonally across  the  thigh,  and  taking  hold  of  the
inside  of  the  main  bone  of  the  leg,  a  little  below
the  knee,  enables  us,  by  its  contraction,  to  throw
one  leg  and  thigh  over  the  other;  giving  effect,
at  the  same  time,  to  the  ball  and  socket-joint  at
the  hip,  and  the  hinge-joint  at  the  knee.  There
is,  as  we  have  seen,  a  specific  mechanism  in  the
bones,  for  the  rotatory  motions  of  the  head  and
hands :  there  is,  also,  in  the  oblique  direction  of
the  muscles  belonging  to  them,  a  specific  provision
for  the  putting  of  this  mechanism  of  the  bones
into  action.  And  mark  the  consent  of  uses.  The
oblique  muscles  would  have  been  inefficient  with-
out that  particular  articulation:  that  particular
articulation  would  have  been  lost,  without  the  ob-
lique muscles,  it  may  be  proper  however  to  ob-
serve, with  respect  to  the  head,  although  t  think
it  does  not  vary  the  case,  that  its  oblique  motions
and  inclinations  are.  often  motions  in  a  diagonal,
produced  by  the  joint  action  of  muscles  lying  in
straight  directions.  But  whether  the  pull  be  sin-
gle or  combined,  the1  articulation  is  always  such,
as  to  be  capable  of  obeying  the  action  of  the  mus-
cles. The  oblique  muscles  attached  to  the  head,
•re  likewise  so  disposed,  as  to  be  capable  of  stea-
dying the  globe,  as.  well  as  of  moving  it,  The
head  of  a  new-born  infant  is  often  obliged  to  be
filleted  hp.  After  death,  the  head  drops  and  rolls
in  every  direction.  So  that  it  is  by  the  equilibre
of  the  muscles,  by  the  aid  of  a  considerable  and
equipollent  muscular  force  in  constant  exertion,
that  the  head  maintains  its  erect  posture.  The
muscles  here  supply  what  would  otherwise  be  a


great  defect  in  the  articulation*:  for  the  joint  In
the  neck,  although  admirably  adapted  to  the  mo-
tion of  the  head,  is  insufficient  for  its  support.  It
is  not  only  by  the  means  of  a'  most  curious  struc-
ture of  the  bones  that  a  man  turns  his  head,  but
by.  virtue  of^an  adjusted  muscular  power,  that  he
even  holds  it  up.  <

As  another  example  of  what  we  are  Ufostrating,
viz.  conformity  of  use  between  the  bones  and  the  -
muscles,  it  has  been  observed  of  the  different  ver-
tebra;, that  their  processes  are  exactly  proportioned
to  the  quantity  of  motion  which  the  other  bones
«llow  of,  and  which  the  respective  muscles  are
capable  of  producing.

II.  A  muscle  acts  only  by  contraction.  Its
force  is  exerted  in  no  other  way.  When  the  ex-
ertion ceases,  it  relaxes  itself,  that  is,  it  returns  by
relaxation  to  its  former  state,  but  without  energy.
This  is  the  nature  of  the  muscular  fibre ;  and
being  so,  it  is*  evident  that  the  reciprocal  energetic
motion  of  the  limbs,  by  which  we  mean  motion
with  force  in  opposite  directions,  can  only  be  pro-
duced by  the  instrumentality  of  opposite  or  anta-
gonist muscles ;  of  flexors  and  extensors  answering
to  each  other.  For  instance,  the  biceps  and  bra-
chiaeus  internum  muscles  placed  in  the  front  part
of  the  upper  arm,  by  their  contraction;  bend  the
elbow;  and  with  such  degree  of  force,  as  the
case  requires,  or  the  strength  admits  of.  The  re-
laxation of  lliese  muscles,  after  the  effort,  would
merely  let  the  fore-arm  drop  down.  For  the  back
stroke,  therefore,  and  that  the  arm  may  not  only
bend  at  the  erbdw,  but  also  extend  and  straighten
itself,  with  force,  other  muscles,  the  longus  and
brevis  brachieus  externum  and  the  anconeus,
placed  on  the  hinder  part  of  the  arms,  by  their  con-
tractile twitch  fetch  back  the  fore-arm  into  a
straight  line  with  the  cnbit,  with  no  less  force
than  that  with  which  it  was  bent  out  of  it.  The
same  thing  obtains  in  all  the  limbs,  and  in  every
moveable  par*  of  the  body.  A  finger  is  not  bent
and  straightened,  without  the  contraction  of  two
muscles  taking  place.  It  is  evident,  therefore,  that
the  animal  functions  require  that  particular  dispo-
sition «f  the  muscles  which  we  describe  by  the
name  of  antagonist  muscles.  And  they  are  ac-
cordingly so  disposed.  Every  muscle  is  provided
with  an  adversary.  They  act,  .like  two  sawyers
in  a  pit,  by  an  opposite  puU :  and  nothing  surely
can  more  'strongly  indicate  design  and  attention
to  an  end,  than  their  being  thus  stationed,  than
this  collocation.  The  nature  of  the  muscular  fibre
being  what  it  is,  the  purposes  of  the  animal  could
.be  answered  by  no  other.  And  not  only  the  ca-
pacity for  motion,  but  the  aspect  and  symmetry  of
the  body,  is  preserved  by  the  muscles  'being  mar-
shalled according  to  this  order ;  e.  g.  the  mouth  is
holden  in  the  middle  of  the  face,  and  its  angles
kept'  in  a  state  of  exact  correspondency;  by  two
muscles  drawing  against,  and  balancing  each  other.
.In  a  hemiplegia,  when  tne  muscle  on  one  side  is
weakened,  the  muscle  on  the  other  side  draws  t}ie
mouth  awry,

III.  Another  property  of  the  muscles,  which
could  only  be  the  result  of  care,  is,  their  being  al-
most universally  so  disposed,  as  not  to  obstruct  or
interfere  with  one  another's  action.  I  know  but
oneinstance  in  which  this  impediment  is  perceived.
We  cannot  easily  swallow  whilst  we  gape.  This.
I  understand,  is  -owing  to  the  muscles  employed
in  the  act  of  deglutition  being  so  implicated  with
the  muscles  of  the  lower  jaw,  that,  whilst  these


NATURAL  THEOLOGY.


ill


last  ere  coinracted,  the  farmer  cannot  act  with
freedom.  The  obstruction  is,  in  this  instance,
attended  with  little  inconveniency;  but  it  shows
what  the  effect  is  where  it  does  exist ;  and  what
loss  of  faculty  there  would  be  if  it  were  more  fre-
quent. Now  when  we  reflect  upon  the  number
of  muscles',  not  fewer  than  four  hundred  and
forty-six  in  the  human  body,  known  and  named,*
how  contiguous  they  lie  to  each  other,  in  layers,
as  it  were,  over  one  another,  crossing  one  another,
sometimes  imbedded  in  one  another,  sometimes
perforating  one  another;  an  arrangement,  which
leaves  to  each  its  liberty,  and  its  full  play,  must
necessarily  require  meditation  and  counsel.

IV.  The  following  is  oftentimes  the. case  with
the  muscles.  Their  action  is  wanted,  where  their
situation  would  be  inconvenient  In  which  case,
the  body  of  the  muscle  is  placed  in  some  commo-
dious position  at  a  distance,  and  made  to  commu-
nicate with  the  point  of  action,  by  slender  strings
or  wires.  If  the  muscles  which  move  the  fingers
had  been  placed  in  the  palm  or  back  of  the  hand,
they  Would  have  swelled  that  part  to  an  awkward
ana  clumsy  thickness.  The  beauty,  the  propor-
tions of  the  -part,  would  have  been  destroyed.
They  are  therefore  disposed  in  the  arm,  and  even
up  to  the  elbow;  and  act  by  long  tendons,  strapped
down  at  the  wrist,  and  passing  under  the  liga-,
ments  to  the  fingers,  and  to  the  joints  of  the  fingers,
which  they  are  severally  to  move.  In  like  man-
ner, the- muscles  which  move  the  toes,  and  many
of  the  joints  of  the  foot,  how  gracefully  are  they
disposed  in  die  calf  of  the  leg,  instead  of  forming
an  unwieldy  tumefaction  in  the  foot  itself?  The
.observation  may  be  repeated  of  the  muscle  which
draws  the  nictitating  membrane  over  the  eye;
its  office  is  in<tbe  front  of  the  eye ;  but  its  body  is
lodged  in  the  back  part  of  the  globe,  where  it  lies
sate,  and  where  it  encumbers  nothing.

.  V.  The  neat  mechanical  variety  of  the  figure
of  the  muscles  may  be  thus  stated.  It  appears  to
be  a  fixed  law,.that  the  contraction  of  a  muscle
shall  be  towards  its  centre.  Therefore  the  subject
for  mechanism  on  each  occasion  is,  so  to  modify
the  figure,  and  adjust  the  position  of  the  muscle,
as  to  produce  the  motion  required,  agreeably  with
this  law.  This  can  only  be  done  by  giving  to
.different  muscles  a  diversity  of  configuration,
suited  to  their  several  offices,  and  to  their  situation
with  respect  to  the  work  which  they  have  to  per-
form. On  which  account  we  find  them  under  a
multiplicity  of  forms  and  attitudes;  sometimes
with  double,  sometimes  with  treble  tendons,  some-
times with  none :  -sometimes  one  tendon  to  seve-
ral muscles,  at  other  times  one  muscle  to  several
tendon*.  The  ahape  of  the  organ  is  susceptible
of  an  incalculable  variety,  whilst  the  original  pro-
perty of  the  muscle,  the  law  and  line  of  its  con-
traction, remains  the  same,  and  is  simple.  Herein
.the  muscular  system- may  be  said  to  bear  a  perfect
resemblance  to  our  works  of  art.  An  artist  does
not  alter  the  native  quality  of  his  materials,  or
their  laws  of  action.  He  takes  these  as  he-finds
them.  His  skill  and  ingenuity  are  employed  in
turning  them,  such  as  .they  aire,  to-  his  account,
by  ginng  to  the  parts  of  his  machine  a  form  and
relation,  in  which  these  unalterable  properties

ay  operate  to  the  .production  of  the  effects  in-


VL  The  ejaculations  can  never  too  often  be


»  KetlTs  Anatomy,  p.  a*ed.&


go  right  for  us
to  be  an  hour  at  ease !  how  many  more  for  us  to
be  vigorous  and  active !  Yet  vigour  and  activity
are,  in  a  vast  plurality  of  instances;  preserved  in
human  bodies,  notwithstanding  that  they  depend
Upon  so  great  a  number  of  instruments  or  motion,
and  notwithstanding  that  the  defect  or  disorder
sometimes  of  a  very  small  instrument,  of  a  single
pair,  for  instance,  out  of  the  four  hundred  and
forty-six  muscles  which  are  employed,  may  be
attended  with  grievous  inconveniency.  There  is
piety  and  good  sense  in  the  following  observation,
taken  out  of  the  Religious  Philosopher:  *With
much  compassion."  says  this  writer,  "as  well  as
astonishment  at  the  goodness  of  our  loving  Cre-
ator, have.  I  considered  the  sad  state  €it  a  certain
gentleman,  who,  as  to  the  rest,  was  in  pretty  good
health,  but  only  wanted  the  use  of  these  two  Ut-
ile muscles  that  serve  to'Iift  up  the  eyietida,  and  so
had  almost  lost  the  use  of  his  sight,  oeing  forced,
as  long  as  this  defect  lastedr  to  shove  up  his  eye-
lids every  moment  with  his  own  hands!" — In
general  we  may  remark  in  how  small  a  degree
those,  who  enjoy  the  perfect  use  of  their  organs,,
know  the  comprehensiveness  of  the  blessing,  the'
variety  of  their  obligation.  They  perceive  a  re-
sult, but  they  think  little  of  the  multitude  of  con-
currences and  rectitudes  which  go  to  form  it

Beside  these  observations,  which  belong  to  the
muscular  organ  as  such,  we  may  notice  some  ad-
vantages of  structure  which  are  more-  conspicuous
in  muscles  of  a  certain  class'  or  description  than
in  others. Thus:

'  I.  The  variety,  quickness,  and  precision,  of-
which  muscular  motion  is  capable,  are  seen,  I
think,  ifl  no  part  so  remarkably  as  in  the  tongue.
It  is  worth  any  man's  while  to  watch  the  agility
of  his  tongue;  the  wonderful  promptitude  witn
which  it  executes  changes  of  position,  and  the
perfect  exactness.  Each  syllable  of  articulated
sound  requires  for  its  utterance  a  specific  action
of  the  tongue  and  of  the  parts  adjacent  to  it  The
disposition  arid  configuration  of  the  mouth,  apper-
taining to  every  letter,  and  word,  is  not  only  pecu-
liar, but,  if  nicely  and  accurately  attended  to,  per-
ceptible to  the  sight ;  in  so  much,  that  curious
persons  have  availed  themselves  of  this  circum-
stance to  teach  the  deaf  to  speak,  and  to  under-
stand what  is  said  by  others.  In  the  same  person,
and  after  his  habit  of  speaking  is  formed,  one,  and;
only  one,  position  of  .the  parts,  will  produce  a
given  articulate  sound  correctly.  How  instanta*
neously  are  these  positions  assumed  and  dismiss-  .
ed;  how  numerous  are  the  permutations,  how
various,  yet  how  infallible !.  Arbitrary  and  antic
variety  is  not  the  thing  we  admire;  but  variety
obeying  a  rule,  conducing  to  an  effect,  and  com-
mensurate with  exigencies  infinitely  diversified.  I
believe  also  that  the  anatomy  of  the  tongue  cor-
responds with  these  observations  upon  its  activity.
The  muscles  of  the  tongue  are  so  numerous,  and
so  implicated  .with  one  another,  that  they  cannot
be  .traced  hy'the  nicest  dissection;  nevertheless,
(which  is  a-  great  perfection  of  the  organ,)  neither
the.  number,  nor  the  complexity,  nor  what  might .
seem  to  be  the  entanglement  of  its  fibres,  in  any
wise  impede  its  motion,  or  render  the  determina-
tion or  success  of  its  efforts-  uncertain.


I  here  entreat  the  reader's
little  out  of  my  way,  to


to  step  a

tte  juris  o/jfc


419


NATURAL  THEOLOGY.


mouth,  in  some  of  their  other  properties.  It  has
been  said,  end  thai  by  an  eminent  physiologist,  that
Whenever  nature  attempts  te  work  two  or  more
purposes  by  one  instrument,  she  does  both  or  all
imperfectly.  Is  this  tree  of  the  tongue*,  regarded
aa  an  instrument  of  speech)  and  of  taste ;  or  re-
garded as  an  instrument  of  speech,  of  taste,  and
of  deglutition  1  So  much  otherwise,  that  many
persons,  that  is  to  say,  nine  hundred  and  ninety-
.  nine  persons  out  of  a  thousand,  by  the  instru-
mentality of  this  one  organ,  talk,  and  taste,  and
swallow,  very  well.  In  fact,  the  constant  warmth
and  moisture  of  the  tongue,  the  thinness  of  the
akin,  the  papilla  upon  its  surface,  qualify  this  or-
gan for  its  office  of  tasting,  as  much  as  its  inex-
tricable multiplicity  of  fibres  do  for  the  rapid
movements  which  are  necessary  to  speech.  Aiii-
msJs  which  feed  upon  grass,  have  weir  tongues
covered  with  a  perforated  skin,  so  as  to  admit  the
dissolved  food  to  the  papilla)  underneath,  which,
in  tbemean  time,  remain  defended  from  the  rough
action  of  the  unbruised  spicule.

There  are  brought  together  within  the  cavity  of
the  mouth -more  distinct  uses,  and  parts  executing
more  distinct  offices,  than  I  think  can  be  found
lying  so  near  to  one  another,  or  within  the  same
compass,  in  any  other  portion  of  the  body:  viz.
teeth  of  different  shape,  first  for  cutting,  secondly
for  grinding;  muscles,  most  artificially  disposed
for  carrying  on  the  compound  motion  of  the  lower
jaw,  half  lateral  and  half  vertical,  by  which  the
mill  is  worked:  fountains  of  saliva,  springing  up
Indifferent  parts  of  the  cavity  for  the  moistening
of  the  food,  whilst  the  mastication  is  going  on :
srkfedsj  to  feed  the  fountains )  a  muscular  constric-
tion ota  very  peculiar  kind  in  the  back  part  of  the
cavity,  for  the  guiding  of  the  prepared  aliment
into  ita  passage  towards  the  stomach,  and  in  many
cases  for  carrying  it  along  that  passage ;  for,  al-
though we  may  imagine  this  to  be  done  simply  by
the  weight  of  the  food  itself,  it  in  truth  k  not  so,
even  in  the  upright  posture  of  the  human  neck ;
and  most  evidently  is  not  the  case  with  quadru-
peds, with  a  horse  tor  instance,  in  which,  when
pasturing,  the  foodie  thrust  upward  by  muscular
strength,  instead  of  descending  of  its  own  accord.

In  the  mean  time,  and  within  the  same  cavity,
is  going  on  another  business,  altogether  different
from  what  is  here  described, — that  of  respiration
and  speech.  In  addition  therefore  to  all  that  has
been  mentioned,  we  have  a  passage  opened,  from
this. cavity  to  the  hings  for  the  admission  of  air,
exclusively  of  every  other  substance*,  we  have
muscles,  some  in  the  larynx,  ana  without  number
in  the  tongue,  for  the  purpose  of  modulating  that
air  in  its  passage,  witH  a  variety,  a  compass,  and
nrejasum,  of  which  no  other  musical  instalment
is  capable.  And,  lastly,  which  in  my  opinidn
crowns  the  whole  as  a  piece  of  machinery,  we  have
a  specific  contrivance  for  dividing  the  pneumatic
part  from  the  mechanical,  and  for  preventing  one
set  of  actions  interfering  with  the  other.  Where
various,  functions  are  united,  the  difficulty  is  to
guard  against  the  inconveniences  of  a  too  great
complexity.  In  no  apparatus  put  together  by  art,
and  for  the  purposes  or  art,  do  I  know  such  multi-
farious'use*  so  aptly -combined,  as  in  the  natural
organization  of  the  human  mouth;  or  where  the
structure  compared  with  the  uses,  is  so  simple.
The  mouth,  with  all  these  intentions  to  serve,  is  a
single  cavity j  »  one  machine:  with  its  parts  nei-
ther crowded  nor  confused,  and  each  unembarrass-


ed by  thereat:  each  at  least  at  libertt  in  a  Jegiw
sufficient  for  the  end  to  be  attained,  n  we  cannot
eat  and  sing  at  the  same  moment,  we  can  eat  one
moment-,  and  sing  the  next:  the  respiration  pro-
ceeding freely  all  the  while.

There,  is  one  case  however  of  this  double  office,
and  that  of  the  earliest  necessity',  which  the  mouth
alone  could  not  perform;  and  that  is,  carrying  on
together  the  two  actions  of  sucking  and  breathing.
Another  rout  therefore  is  opened  for  the  air,  namely
through  the  nose,  Which  lets  the  breath  pass  back-
ward and  forward,  whilst  the  Hps,  in  the  act  of
sucking,  are  necessarily  shut  close  upon  the  body
from  which  the  nutriment  is  drawn.  This  is  a
circumstance  which  always  appeared  to  me  worthy
of  notice.  The  nose  would  have  been  necessary,
although  it  had  not  been  the  organ  of  smelling.
The  making  it  the  seat  of  a  sense  was  superadding
a  new  use  to  a  part  already  wanted;  was  taking
a  wise  advantage  of  an  antecedent  and.  a  constitu-
tional necessity.


But  to  return  to  that  which  is  the  pronersnbject
of  the  present  sections—the  celerity  ana  precision
of  muscular  motion.  These  qualities  may  be  par-
ticularly observed  in  the  execution  of  many  species
of  instrumental  mime,  in  which  the  changes  pro-
duced by  the  hand  of  tnemusician  are  exceedmghr
rapid ;  are  exactly  measured,  even  when  moat  mi-
nute; and  display,  on  the  part  of  the  muscles,  an
i  obedience  of  action,  alike  wonderful  for  ita  quick-
ness and  its  correctness.

-  Or  let  a  person  only  observe  his  own  hand
whilst  he  is  toriting ;  the  number  of  muscles,
which  are  brought  to  bear  upon  the  pen ;  how  the
joint  and  adjusted  operation  of  several  tendons  m
concerned  in  every  stroke,  yet  that  Ave  hundred
such  strokes  are  drawn  in  a  minute.  Not  a  letter
can  be  turned  without  mora  than  one,  or  two,  or
three  tendinous  contractions,  definite,  both  as  to
the  choice  of  the  tendon,  and  as  to  the  apace
through  which  the  .contraction  moves;  yet  how


currently  does  the  work  proceed !  and  when  we
look  at  it,  how  faithful  have  the  muscles  been- to
their  dutv,  how  true  to  the  order  which  endeavour
or  habit  hath  inculcated !  For  let  it  be  remem-
bered, that,  whilst  a  man's  handwriting  is  the
same,  an  exactitude  of  order  is  preserved,  whether
he  write  well,  or  ill.  These  two  instances,  of  mu-
sic and  writing,  show  not  only  the  quickness  and
precision  of  muscular  action,  but  the  docility.

II.  Regarding  the  particular  configuration  of
muscles,  sphincter  or  circular  muscles  appear  to
me  admirable  pieces  of  mechanism.  It  is  the
muscular  power  most  happily  applied ;  the  same
quality  of  the  muscular  substance,  but  under  a
new  modification.  The  circular  disposition  of  the
fibres  is  strictly  mechanical ;  but,  though  the  most
mechanical,  is  not  the  only  thing  in  sphincters
which  deserves  our.  notice.  The  regulated  degree
of  contractile  force  with  which  they  are  endowed,
sufficient  for  retention,  yet  vincible  when  requi-
site, together  with  their  ordinary  state  of  actual
contraction,  by  means  of  which  their,  dependence
upon  the  will  is  not  constant,  but  occasional;  gives
them  a  constitution,  of  which  the  conveniency  is
inestimable.  This  their  semi-voluntary  character,
is  exactly  such  as  suits  with  the  wants  and  func-
tions of  t he  animal.

III.  We  may  also,  upon  the  subject  of  muscles,
observe,  that  many  of  our  most  important  actions


NATURAL  THEOLOGY.


US


Mo  achieved  by  the  combined  help  of  different
muscles.  Frequently,  a  diagonal  motion  is  pro-
duced, bj  the  contraction  of  tendons  pulling  in
the  direction  of  the  sides  of  the  parallelogram.
This  is  the.  case,  as  hath  been  already  noticed,
with  some  of  the  oblique  nutatjons  of  the  head.
Sometimes  the  number  of  co-operating  muscles  is
very  great.  Dr.  Nieuentyt  in  the  Leipsic  Trans-
actions, reckons  up  a  hundred  muscles  .that  are
employed  every  time  we  breathe ;  Tet  we  take  in,
or  let  out,  our  breath,  without  reflecting  what  a
work  is  thereby  performed ;  what  an  apparatus  is
laid  in,  of  instruments  for  the  service,  and  how
many  such  contribute  their  assistance  to  the  effect !
Breathing  with  ease,  is  a  blessing  of  every  moment ;
yet,  of  all  others,  it  is  that  which  we  possess  with
the  least  consciousness.  A  man  in  an  asthma  fa
the  only  man  who  knows  how  to  estimate  it.  *

IV.  Mr.  Home  has  observed,*  that  the  most
important  and  die  most  delicate  actions  are  per-
formed in  the  body  by  the  smallest  muscles :  and
he  mentions,  as  his  examples,  the  muscles  which
have  been  discovered  in  the  iris  of  the  eye,  and  the
drum  of  the  ear.  The  tenuity  of  these  muscles  is
astonishing.  They  are  microscopic  hairs;  must
be  magnified  to  be  visible;  yet  are  they  real,  effect'
ive  muscles:  and  not  only  such,,  but  the  grandest
and1  most  precious  of  our  faculties,  sight  and  hear-
ing, depend  upon  their  health  and  action.

r .  The  muscles  act  in  the  limbs  with  what  is
called  a  mechanical  disadvantage.  The  muscle
at  the  shoulder,  by  which  the  arm  is  raised,  is
fixed  nearly  in  the  same  manner  as  the  load  is
fixed  upon  a  steelyard,  within  a  few  decimals,  we
will  say.  of  an  inch,  from  the  centre  upon  which
the  steelyard  turns.  In  this  situation,  we  find
that  a  very  heavy  draught  is  no  more  than  suffi-
cient to  countervail  the  force  of  a  small  lead  plum-
met,jplaced  rupon  the  long  arm  of  the  steelyard,  at
the  distance  of  perhaps  fifteen  or  twenty  inches
xjocd  the  centre,  and  on  the  other  side  of  it.  And
this  is  the  disadvantage  which  is  meant  And  an
absolute  disadvantage,  no"  doubt,  it  would  be,  if
the  object  were"  to  spare  the  force  pf  muscular
Contraction.  But  observe  how  conducive  is  this
constitution  to  animal  conveniency.  Mechanism
has  always  in  view  one  or  other  of  these  two  pur-
poses; either  to  move  a' great  weight  slowly,  and
through  a  small  space,  or  to  move  a  b'ght  weight
rapidly,  through  a  considerable  sweep.  For  the
former  of  these  purposes,  a  different  species  of
fever,  and  a  different  collocation  of  the  muscles,
might  be  better  than  the  present ;  but  for  the^second,
the  present  structure  is  the  true  one.  Now  so  it  hap-
pens, that  the  .second,  and  not  the  first,  is  that
which  the  occasionr  of  animal  lift  principally  call
for.  In  what  concerns  the  human  body,  it  is  of
.  much  more  consequence  to  any  man  to-  be  able  to
carry  his  hand  to  his  head  with  due  expedition,
than  it  would  be  to  have  the  power  of  raising  from
the  ground  a  heavier  load  (of  two  or  three  more
hundred  weight,  we  will  suppose,)  than  he  can
lift  at  present.  This  last  is  a  faculty,  which,  on
some  extraordinary  occasions,  he  may  desire*  to
possess;  but  the  other  is  what  he  wants  and  uses
every  hour  or  minute.  In  like  manner,  a  husband-
man or  a  gardener  will  do  more  execution,"  by
being  able  to  carry  his  scythe,  his  rake,  or  hirflail,
with  a  sufficient  despatch  through  a  sufficient
'  apace,  than  if,  with  greater  strength,  his  -motions


*  Phil.  Trans,  part.  1. 1800.  p.  &


were  proportionably  more  confined  and  alow.  It
is  the  same  with  a  mechanic  in  the  use  of  his  took.
It  is  the  same  also  with  other  animals  hvthe  use
oF  their  limbs.  In  general,  the  vivacity  of  their
motions  would  be  ill  exchanged  for  greater  fore©
under  a  clumsier  structure.

We '  have  offered'  our  observations  upon  the
structure  of  muscles  in' general ;  we  have  also  no*
ticed  certain  species  of  muscles;  but  there  are
also  single*  muscles  which  bear  marks  of  me*
chanical  contrivance,  appropriate  as  weH  as  par-
ticular. Out  of  many  instances  of  this  kind,  we
select  the  following.

I.  Of  muscular  actions,  even  of  those  which  are
Well  understood,  some  of  the  most  curious"  are  in-
capable of  popular  explanation;  at  least,  without
the  aid  of  plates  and  figures. '  This  is  in  a  great
measure  the  case,  with  a  very  familiar,  but  at  the
same  tune,  a  very  complicate])  motion,— that  of
the  lower  jaw ;  and  with  the  muscular  'structure
by  which  it  is  produced.'  One  of  the  muscles
concerned  may,  however,  be- described  in  such  a
manner,  as  to  be,  I  think,  sufficiently  compre-
hended for  our  present  purpose.  The  problem  is
to  pull  the  lower  jaw  down.  The  obvious  method
should  seem  to  be,  to  place. a  straight  muscle,  viz.
to  fix  a  string  from  the  chin  to  the  breast,  the  coo-
traction  of  which  would  open  the  mouth  and  pro-
duce the  motion  required  at  once.  But  k  is
evident  that  the -form  and  liberty  of  the  neck
forbid  a  muscle  being  laid  in  such  a  position;  and
that,  consistently  with  the  preservation  of  this
form,  the  motion,  which  we  want,  must  be  effec-
tuated-tw  some  muscular  mechanism  disposed
farther  back  in  the  jaw.  The  mechanism  adopt-
ed is  as  follows.  A  certain  muscle*  called  the  dia-
gastric.  rises  on  the  side  of  the  face,  considerably
above  the  insertion'  of  the  lower  jaw,,  and  comas
down,  being  converted  in  its  progress  into,  a  round
tendon.  Now  if  is  manifest  that  the  tendon,
whilst  it  pursues  a  direction  descending  towards
the  jaw,  must,  by  its  contraction,  pull  the  jaw  up.
instead  of  down.  What  then  was  to  be  done  i
This,  we  find,  is  done :  the  descending  tendon,
when  it  is  got  low  enough,  is  passed  through  a
loop,  or  ring,  or  pulley,  in  theos  nyoides,  and  then
made  to  ascend  j  and  having  thus  changed  its  line
of  direction,  is  inserted  into  the  inner  part  of  the
chin :  by  which  device,  viz.  the  turn  at  the.  loop,
the  action  of  the  muscle  (which  in  all  -  muscles  is
contraction)  that  before  would  have,  pulled  the
jaw  up,  now  as  necessarily  draws  it  down.  "  The
mouth,"  says  Heister,  "  is  opened  by  means  of  this
trochlea  in  a  most  wonderful  anil  elegant  man-
ner." -  .

II.  What  contrivance  can  be  more  mechanical
than  the  following,  viz.  a  slit  in  one  tendon  to  let
another  tendon  pass  through  it?  This  structure
is  found  in  the  tendons  which  move  the  toss  and
fingers.  The  long  tendon,  as  it  is  called,  in  the
foot,  which  bends  the  first  joint  of  the  toe,  passes
through  the  short  tendon  which  bends  the  second
joint;  which  course  allows  to  the  sinew  mere
liberty,  and  a  more  commodious  action  than  H
would  otherwise  have  been  capable  of  exerting.*
There  is  nothing,  I  believe,  in.  a  silk  or  cotton
mill,  in  the  belts,  or  straps,  or  ropes,  by  which  mo-
tion is  communicated  from  one  part  of  the  machine
to  another,  that  is  more  artificial!  or  mere  evident-
ly so,  than  this  perforation.


•  Ches.Anatp.U9.
35*


«u


NATURAL  THEOLOGY.


m.  The  rint  ctreomMWH»  which  I  than  men-
tion, under  this  head  of  muscular  arrangement,  is
ao  decisive  a  mark  of  intention,  that  it  always  ap-
peared to  me  to  auperaede,  in  aome  measure,  the
JMeassity  of  seeking  for  any  other  observation
upon  the  subject;  and  that  circumstance  is,  the
tendons,  which  pass  from  the  leg  to  the  foot,  being
bound  down  by  a  ligament  at  the  ankle.  The
mot  is  placed  at  a  considerable  angle  with  the  leg.
It  i|i  manifest,  therefore,  that  flexible  strings,  pass-
lag  along  the  interior  of  the  angle,  if  left  to  thein-
aeivea,  would,  when  stretched,  start  from  it  The
obvious  preventive  is  to  tie  them  down.  And  this
M  done  m  met  Across,  the  instep,  or  rather  just
above  it,  the  anatomist  finds  a  strong  ligament,
under  which,  the  tendons  pass  to  the  foot  The
effect  of  the  ligament  aa  a  bandage  can  be  made
evident  to  the  senses;  -for  if  it  be  cut,  the  tendons
start  op.  The  simplicity,  yet  the  clearness  of  this
contrivance,  its  exact  resemblance  to  established
leaotirces  of  i


fart,  place  it  amongst  the  most  indubi-
table manifestation*  of  design  with  which  we  are


acquaintc

^There  is  also  a  farther  use  to  be  made  of  the
present  example,  and  that  is,  as  it  precisely  con-
tradicts the  opinion,  that  the  parts  of  animals  may
have  been  all  formed  by  what  is  called  appetency,
i.  a.  endeavour,  perpetuated,  and  imperceptibly
working,  its  enect  through  en  incalculable  series
of  generations.  .  We  havehere  no  endeavour,  but
the  nwerse  of  it ;  e  constant  renitencyand  reluct-
ance. '  The  endeavour  is  all  the  other  way.  The
pressure  of  the  flgament  constrains  the  tendons;
the  tendons  re-act  upon  the  pressure  of  the  liga-
ment IUis  impossible  that  the  ligament  should
ever  have,  been  generated  by  the  exercise  of  the
tendon,-or  in  the  course  of  that  exercise,  forasmuch
as  tfcevfosee  vt  the  tendon  perpendicularly  resist*
the  fibre  which  confines  it,  and  is  constantly  en-
dWoqring,  not  to  form,  but  to  rupture  and  dis-
place the  threads  of  which  the  ligament  is  com-


Xkill  has  reckoned  up,  in  the  human  body,
star  hundredand  forty-six  muacles,tliaseetible  and
eVscribeble:  and  hash  assigned  a  use  to  every  one
of  the  number.  -  This  cannot  be  all  imagination.

Bishop  Wilkina  hath  observed  from  Gkfcn,  that
there  rfre,  at  least,  ten  several  qualifications  to  be
attended  to  in  each  particular  muscle ;  viz.  its
just  magnitude ;  its  fulcrum ;  its  point  of  action,
supposing  the  figure  to  be  fixed;  its  collocation,
with  respect  to  its  two  ends,  the  upper  and  the
lower;  the  place ;  the  position  of  the  whole  mus-
ctv,  the  introduction  into  it  o£  nerves,  arteries,
veins.  How  are  things,  including  so  many  ad-
wstmenrs,  to  be  made;  or.  when  made,  how  are
they  to  be  put  together  without  intelligence  ?

I  have  sometimes  wondered  why  we  are  not
•track  with  mechanism  in  animal  bodies,  as  readi-
ly ami  as  strongly  as  we  are  struck  with  it,  at
mat  sight,  in  a  watch  or  a  mill.  One  reason  of
the  difference  may  be,  that  animal  bodies  are,  in
a  great  measure,  made  up  of  soft,  flabby  substances,
each  as  muscles  .and  membranes;  whereas  we
have  been  accuatomed-to  (race  mechanism  in  sharp
ames,  in  the  configuration  of  hard  material*,  in
the  ffionMins;,  chiselling,  and  filing  into  shapes,
of  such  articles  as  metals  or  wood.  There  is
•Mnething  therefore  of  UbU in  the  case;  but  itis-
■tifnaently  evident,  thet  then  can  be  no  proper


f  substance,


for  any  dvtinctkm  of  the  sort
ism  may  be  displayed  in  the  one  kind  of  s
as  Well  aa  in  the  other.

Although  the  few  instances  we  have-selected,
even  as  they  stand  in  our  description,  are  nothing
abort  .perhaps  of  logical  proofs  of  design,  vet  it
must  not  be,  forgotten,  that,  in  every  part  of  ana-
tomy, description  is  a  poor  substitute  for  inspec-
tion. It  is  well  said  by  an  able  anatomist,*  and
said  in  reference  to  the  very  part  of  the  subject
which  we  have  been  treating  of :—"  Imperfecta
hoc  musculorum  descriptio,  non  minus  arida  eat
legentibua,  quam  inspectantibus  fuerit  jucunda
eorundem  prsparatio.  Elegantissima  enim  me-
-ehariices  artificia,  creberrime  in  illis  obria,  verbis
nonnisi  obscure  exprimunnir:  carnium  autem
ductu,  tendinum  colore,  insertionum  prdportione,
et  trochkarium  distributione.  oculis  exposita,  onv
nem  superant  admirationem/1


CHAPTER  X.

Qf  the  VesttUtf  Animal  bodies.

The  circulation  of  the  blood,  through  the  bodies
of  men  and  quadrupeds,  and  the  apparatus  by
which  it  is  carried  on,  compose  a  system,  and  tea*
tiry  a  contrivance,  perhaps  the  best  understood  of
any  part  of  the  animal  frame.  The  lymphatic
system,  or  the  nervous  system,  may  be  move  sub-
tile ana  intricate:  nay,  it  impossible,  that  in  their
structure  they  may  be  even  more  artificial  than
the  sanguiferous,  but  we  do  not  know  so  inach
about  them.

-  The  utility  of  the  circulation  of  the  blood  I  as-
sume aa  an  acknowledged  paint  One  grand  pur-
pose is  plainly  answered  by  it ;  the  distributing  to
every  part,  every  extremity,  every  nook  and  cor-
ner of  the  body,  the  nourishment  which  is  receiv-
ed into  it  by  one  aperture.  What'  enters  at  the
mouth,  finds  its  way  to  the  fingers'  ends.  A  more
difficult  mechanical  problem  could  hardly  I  think
be  proposed,  than  to  discover  a  method  of  con-
stantly repairing  the  waste,  and  of  supplying  an
accession  of  substance  to  every  part  of  a  Compli-
cated machine,'  at  the  same  time.

This  system  presents  itself  under  two  views:
first,  the  disposition  of  the  blood-vessels,  i  e.  the
laying  of  the  pipes;  and,  secondly,  the  construc-
tion of  the  engine  at  the  centre,  viz.  the  heart,
for  driving  the  blood  through  them.

I.  The  disposition  of  the  blood-vessels,  as  for  at
regards  the  supply  of  the  body,  is  like  that  of  the
water-pipes  in  a  city,  viz.  large  and  main  trunks
branching  off  by  smaller  pipes'  (and  these  again
by  still  narrower  tubes}  in  every  direction,  and
towards  ey.ery  part  in  which  the  fluid,  which  they
convey,  can  be  wanted-.  So  fat  the  water  pipes
which  serve  a  town  may  represent  the  vessels
which  carry  the  blood  from  the  heart:  But  there
Is  another  thing  necessary  to'  the  blood,  which  is
not  wanted  for  trie  water-,  and  that  is,  the  carry-
ing of  it  back  again  to  its  source.  For  this  office,
a  reversed  system,  of  vessels  is'  prepared,  which,
uniting  at  their  extremities  with  the  extremities
of  the  first  system,  collects  the  divided  and  subdi-
vided streamlets,  first  by  capillary  ramifications
into  ^larger  branches,  secondly,  by  tfrese  branches


>  Btsno,  in  Bias.  Anat  Anuaai.  p.4  c  4.


NATURAL  THEOLOGY.


415


Into  cranks;  and  thus  returns  the  blood  (almost
exactly  inverting  the  older  in  which  it  went  out)
Co  the  fountain  whence  its  motion  proceeded  AD
which  ir  evident  mechanism:
"  The  body,  therefore,  contain*  two -systems  of
blood-vessels,  arteries,  and  veins.-  Between  the
constitution  of  the  system*  there  are  also  two  dif-
ferences, suited  to  the  functions  which  the  sys-
tems have  to  execute.  The  blood,  in  going  out,
pasting  always  from  wider  into  narrower  tubes ;
and,  in  coming  back,  from  narrower  into  wider ;
it  is  evident,  that  the  impulse  and  pressure  upon
the  sides  of  the'blood- vessel,  will  be  much  greater
in  one  case  than  the  other.-  Accordingly  the  ar-
teries which  carry  out  the  blood;  are  farmed  of
much  tougher  and  stronger  coats,  than  the  veins
which  bring  it  back.  That  is  one  difference:  the
other  is  still  more  artificial^  or.  if  I  may  so-  speak,
-indicates;  still  more  clearly,  the  care  and  anxiety
of  the  artificer.  Forasmuch  as  in  the  arteries,  by'
reason  of  the  greater  force  with  which  the  blood
is  Urged  along  them,  a  wound  or  rupture  would
be  more  dangerous  than  in  the  veins,  these  vessels
•re  defended  from  injury,  not  only  by  their  tex-
ture, but  by  their  situation ;  and  by  every  advan-
tage of  situation  which  can  be  given  to  them.
They  are  buried  in  sinuses,  or  they  creep  along'
grooves,  made  for  them  in  the  bones.*  for  instance.
toe  under  edge  of  the  ribs  is  sloped  and  furrowed
solely  for  the  passage  of  these  vessels.  Sometimes
they  proceed  m  channels,  protected  by  stout  para-
pets on  each  side;  which  last  'description  is  re-
markable in  the  bones  of  the  fingers,  these  being
hollowed  out  on  the  under-side,  Ti^e  a  scoop,  and
with  such  a  concavity,  that  the  finger  may  be  cut
•cross  to  the  bone,  Without  hailing  the  artery
which  runs  along  it. At  other  times,  the  arteries


pass  in  canals  wrought  in  the  substance,  and  in
the  very  middle  of  the  substance;  of  the  bone :
this  takes  place  in  the  lower  jaw;  and  is  found
where  there  would  otherwise  be  danger  of  com-
pression by  sudden  curvature.  All  this  care  is
wonderful,  yet  not  more  than  what  the  import-
juice  of  the  case  required.  To  those  who  venture
their  lives  in  a  ship',  it  has' been  often  said,  that
there  is  only  an  inch-board  between  them  and
death;  but  in  the  bodv  itself,  especially  in  the  ar-
terial system,  there  is,  in  many  pans,  only  a
membrane,  a  skin,  a  thread.  For  which  reason,
system  lies  deep  under  the  integuments  f
ireas  the  veins,  In  which  the.  mischief  .that  en-
sues from  injuring  the  coats  is  much  less,  tie  in
general  above  the  arteries;  come' nearer  to  the
surface;  are  more  exposed.
•  It  may  be  farther  observed  concerning  the  two
systems  taken  together,  that  though  the  arterial,
with  its  trunk  and  branches  and  small  twigs,  may
be  imagined  to  issue  or  proceed,  in  other  words,
to  grow  from,  the  4seart :,  like  a  plant  from  its
loot,  or  the  fibres  of  a  leaf  from  its  foot-stalk/
(which,  however,  were  it  so,  would  be  only  to  re-.
solve  one  mechanism -into  another,)  jet  the  vena.1,
the  returning  system,  can  never  be  formed  in  this
manner.  The-  arteries  might  go  on  shooting  out
from  their  extremities,  i.  e.  lengthening  and  sub-
dividing indefinitely ;  but  an  inverted  system,  con-
tinually uniting  its  streams,  instead  of  dividing,
and  thus  carrying  back  what  the  other  system
carried  out,  could  not  be  referred  to  the  same  pro-

II.  The  next  thing  to  be  considered  ut 'the  en-
gme  wbaah  woriu  this  machinery,  viz.  tb*  heart.


For  our  purpose  it  is  rjnrecessary  to  ascertain  the
principle  upon  which  the  heart  acts.  Whether  it
be  irritation  excited  by  the  contact  of  the  blood,
by  the  influx  of  the  nervous .  fluid,  or  whatever
else  be  the  cause  of  its  motion,  it  is  something
which  is  capable  of  producing,  in  a  living  muscu-
lar fibre,  reciprocal  contraction  and-  relaxation.
This  is  the  power  we  have  to' work  with :  and  the
inquiry  is,  how  this  power  is  -applied  in  the  in-
stance before  usl  There  is  provided,  in  the  cen-
tral part  otihe  body,  t  hollow  muscle,  invested
with  spiral  fibres,  running  in  both  directions,  the
layers  intersecting  one  another;  in  some  animals,
however .appearing,  to  be  semicircular  rather  than
spiral  By  the*  contraction  6t  these  fibres,  the
sides  of  the  muscular  cavities  are  necessarily
squeezed  together,  so  as  to  ferae  out  from,  them
-any  fluid  which  they  may  at  that,  time  contain :
by  the 'relaxation  of  the  same  fibres,  the  cavities
are  in  their  turn  dilated,  and,  of  course,  prepared
to  admit  every  fluid  which  may  be  poured  into
them.  Into  these  cavities  are  inserted  the  great
trunks,  both  of  the  arteries  which  carry  out  the
blood,  and  of  the  veins  which  bring  it  back.  This
is  a  general  account  of  the  apparatus;  and  the
simplest  idea  of  its  action  is,  that,  by  each  con-
traction, a  portion-of  blood  is  forced  by  a  syringe
into  the  arteries;  and, -at  each  dilatation,  an  equal
portion  is  received  from  the  veins.  This  produces,
at  each  pulse,  a -motion,  and  change  in  the  mass
of  blood,  to  the  amount  of  what  the  cavity  con-
tains, which,  in  a  full-grown  human  heart,  I  un-
derstand is  about  nn  ounce,  or  two  taUe-spooas
full.  How  quickly  these  changes  succeed  one
another,  and  by  this  succession  how  sufficient
they  are  to  support  a  stream  or  circulation  through-
out the  system,  may  be  understood  by  the  follow-
ing computation,  abridged  from  Weill's  Anatomy,
p.  117.  ed.  3;  "Each  ventricle  will  at  least  con-
tain one  ounce  of  bteod.  The  heart  contracts'  four
thousand  times  in  one  hour;  from  which  it  fol-
lows, that  there  pass  through  the- heart,  every  .
hour,  four  thousand  ounces,  or  three  hundred  and
fifty  pounds  of  blood.  Now  the  whole  mass  of
blood  is  said  to  be  about  twenty-five  pounds;  so
that  a  quantity  of  Wood,  equal  to  the  whole  mass
of  blood,  passes  through  the  heart  fourteen  times
'in  one  hour ;  which  is  about  once  every  four  mi-
nutes." Consider  what  an  affair  this  is,  when  we
come  to  very  large  animals.  The  aSrta  of  &  wha*)
is  larger  in  the  bore  than  the  main  pipe  of  the
water-works  at  London  Bridge;  and  the  water
roaring  in  its  passage  through  that  pipe  is  inferior,
in  impetus  and  velocity,  to  the  blood  gushing  from
the  whale's  heart.  Hear  D*.  Hunter^  account
of  the  dissection  of  a  whale:—1'  The  aorta  meav
sursd  a  foot  diameter.  Ten  of  fifteen  gallons  of
blood  are  thrown  out  of  the  heart  at  a  stroke,  with
an  immense  velocity,  through  a  tube  of  a  foot
diameter.  The  whole  idea  fills  the  mind  with
wonder."*

The  account  which  we  have  here  stated,  of  the
injection  of  blood  into  the  arteries  by  the  con-
traction, and  of  the  corresponding  reception  of  it
from  the  veins  by  the  dilatation,  of  the  cavities  of
the  heart,  and,  of -the  circulation  being  thereby
maintained  through  thcblood-vessels  ofthe  bsdy,
is  true,  but  imperfect.  The  heart  performs  this
office,  but  it  is  in  conjunction  with  another  of


,«  Dr.  Hosier's  Account  of  the  Dissection  of  a  Waste.
•*-Phu.  Trans*-


416


NATURAL  THEOLOGY.


eqoitcnrioritr  aid  importance.  It  was  necessary
thai  the  blood  should  be  successively  brought  into
contact,  or  contiguity,  or  proximity,  with  the  air.
I  do  not  know  that  the  chemical  reaaon,  upon
which  tfu*  necessity  Is  founded,  has  been  yet  suf-
ficiently explored.  It  seems-  to  be  made  appear,
that  the  atmosphere  which  we  breathe  is  a  mix-
ture of- two  kinds  of  air;  one  pure  and  vital,  the
other;,'  for  the  purposes  of  life,  effete,  Ibui,  and
noxious :  that  when  we  have  drawn  iff  our  breath,
the  blood  in  the  lungs  imbibes  from  the  air,  thus
brought  into  contiguity  with  it,  a  portion  of  its
pure  ingredient,  Ana,  at  the  same  time,  gives  out
the  effete  or  corrupt  air  which  it  contained,  and
which  »  carried  away,  along  with  the  halitus,
every  time  we  expire.  At  least;  by  comparing
the  air  which  is  breathed  from  the  lungs,  with

.  the  air  which  enters  the  lungs,  it  is  found  to  have
lost  some  of  its  pure  part,  and  to  have  brought
away  with  it  an 'addition  of  its  impure  part.
Whether  these  experiments,  satisfy  the  question,
as  to  the  need  which  the  blood  stands  in  of  being
visited  by  continual  accesses  of  air,  is  not  for  us
to  inquire  into,  nor  material  to  our  argument:  it
if  sufficient  to.  know,  that,  in  the  constitution  of
most  animals,  such  a  necessity  exists,  and  that

.  the  air,  by  some  means,  or  other,  must  be  intro-
duced into  a  near  conununication  with  the  blood.
The  longs  of  animals'  are  constructed  for  this  pur-

.  pose.  They  consist  of  blood-vessels,  and  air-ves- .
.sals-,  lying  dose  to  each  other ;  and  wherever  there
is  a  branch  of  the  trachea  or  windpipe,  there  is  a
araneh  accompanying  it,  of  the  vein  and  artery,
and  the  air-vessel  is  always  urthe  middle  between

.  the  Wood-vessels  *  The  internal  surface  of  these
vessels,  upon  which  the  application  of  the  ajr  to
-the  blood  depends;  would,  if  collected  and  expand-
ed, be,  in  a  man^ual  to  superficies  of  fifteen
feet  square.  Now,  in  order  to  give  the  blood  in
its  course  the  benefit  of  this  organization,  (and
ibis  is  the  part  Of  the  subject  with  which  we  are
chiefly  concerned,)  the  following  operation  takes
place.  As  soon  as  the  blood  is  received  by  the
neart  from  the  veins  of  the  body,  and  before  that
if  sent  out  again  into  its  arteries,  it  is  carried,  by
the  force  of  the.  contraction  of  the  heart,  and  by
means,  of  a  separate  and  supplementary  artery,  to
the  lungs;  and  .made  to  enter  the  vessels  of  the
lungs;  from  which,  after  it  has  undergone  the  ac-
tion, whatever  it  be,  of  that  viscus,  it  is  brought
back  by  a  large  vein  obcejmore  to  the  heart,  in
cfdsT,  when  thus  concocted  and  prepared,  to  be
thence  distributed  anew  into  the  system.  This
assigns  to  the  heart  a  double  office.  The  pulmo-
nary circulation  is  a  system  within  a  system;
and  one  action  Qf  the  heart  is- the  origin  of  both.

For  this  complicated  function,  four  cavities  be-
come necessary;  and  four  are  accordingly- pro-
vided :  two,  called  ventricles,  whiqfi  send  out  the
blood,  vi*.  one  into  the  lungs,  in  the  first  instance ;
the  other  into  the  mass,  alter  it  has  returned  from'
the  lungs,:  two  others  ,also,  called  auricles,  which
receive  the  blood  from  the  veins;  viz.  one,  as  it
comes  immediately  from  the  body;  the  other  as
the  samehlood  comes  a  second  time  after  its  circu-
lation through  the  lungs.  So  that  there  are  two
receiving  cavities,  and  two- forcing  cavities-.  The
•tincture  of  the  heart  has  reference,  to  the  lungs ;.
foi  without  the  lungs,  one  of  each  would  have
been  sufficient. The  translation  of  the  blood  hi


•  KeiH's  Anatomy,  p.  121,


the  heart  itself  is  after  this  maimer.  The  receiv-
ing cavities  respectively  comrrtunicate  wish  the
forcing  cavities,  and,  by  their* contraction,  unload
the  received  blood  into  them.  The  forcing  cavi-
ties, when  it  is  their  torn  to  contract,  compel  the
same  blood  into  the  mouths  of  the  arteries.

The  account  here  given  will  not  convey  to  a
reader,  ignorant  of  anatomy,  any  thing  like  an
accurate  notion  of  the  form,  action,  or  use,  of.  the  •
parts,  (nor  can  ally  short  and  popular  accdunt  do
this ;)  but  it  is  abundantly  sufficient  to  testify  con-
trivance; and  although  imperfect,  being  true  as
far  as  it  goes,  maybe  relied  upon  for  the  only  pur-
pose for  which  we  offer  it,  the  purpose  of  this  con-
clusion.

"  The  wisdom  of  the  Creator,"  aaith  Hajnbtrrgh-
er,  "  is  in  nothing  seen  more  gloriously  than  in  the
heart."  And  how  well  doth  it  execute  Ha  office !
An  anatomist,  who  understood  .the  structure  of
the  heart,  might  say  beforehand  that  it  would
play ;  but  he  would  expect,  I  think,  from  the  com-
plexity of  its  mechanism,  and  the  debcaty  of  many
of  its  parts,  that  it  should  always  be  liable  to  de-
rangement, or  that  it  would  soon  work  itself  oat.
Yet  shall  this  wonderful  machine  go,  night  an3
day,  for  eighty  years  together,  at  the  rate  of  a
hundred  thousand  strokes  every  twenty-four  hours,
having,,  at  every  stroke,  a  great  resistance  to  over-
come j  and  shall  continue  this  action  for  this  length
of  time,  without  disorder  and  without  weariness!
.  But  farther:.  From  the  account  which  baa  been
riven  of  the  mechanism  of  the  heart,  it  is  evident
that  it  must  require  the-  interposition -of  valves;
that  the  success  indeed  of  its  action  must  depend
upon  these;  for  when  any  one  of  its  cavities  con-
tracts, the  necessary  tendency  of  the  force  will  be
to  drive  the  enclosed  blood,  not  only  into  the  month
of  the  artery  where  it  ought  to  go,  but  also  back
again  into  .the  mouth  of  the  vein  from  which  it
flowed.  -  In  like  manner,,  when  by  the  relaxation
of  the  fibres  the  same  cavity  is  dilated,  the  blood
would  not  only  run  into  it  from  the  vein,  which
was  the  course  intended,  but  back  from  the  arte-
ry, through  which  it  ought  to  be  moving  forward.
The  way  of  preventing  a  reflux  of  the  fluid,  in
both  these  cases,  is  to  Ax  valves,  which,  like  flood-
gates, may  open  a  way  to  the  stream  in  one  direc-
tion, and  shut  up  the  passage  against  it  in  another.
The  heart,  constituted  as  it  is,  can  no  more  work
without  valves,  than  a  pump  can.  -  When  the  pis-
ton descends  in  a  pump,  if  it  were  not  for  the
stoppage  by  the  valve  beneath,  the  motion  would
only  thrust  down  the  water  which  it  had  before
drawn  up.v  A  similar  consequence  would  frus-
trate the  action  of  the  heart.  Valves,  therefore,
properly  disposed,  i.  e.  properly  with  respect  te-the
course, of  the  blood  which  it  is  necessary  to  pro-
mote, are  essential  to  the  contrivance.'  And  vmve*
so  disposed,  are  accordingly  provided.  A  valve
is  placed  in  the  communication  between  each  au-
ricle and  its  ventricle,  lest  when  the  ventricle  con-
tracts, part  of  the  blood  should  get  back  again  in
to  the  auricle,  instead  of  the  whole  entering,  as  it
ought -to  do,  the  mouth  of  the  artery.  ■"  A  valve  is
also  fixed  at  the  mouth  of  each  of  the  great  arte-
ries which  take  the  blood  from  the. heart ;  leaving
the  passage  free,  so  long  as  the  blood  holds  its  pro-
per course  forward ;  closing  it,  whenever  the  blood,
in  consequence  of  the  relaxation  of  the  ventricle,
would  attempt  to  flow  back.  There  is  some  varie-
ty in  the  construction  of  these  valves,  though  all
the  valves  of  the  body  act  nearly  upon  the  i


NATURAL  THEOLOGY.


417


principle,-  and  are  destined  to  the  same  use.  In
geoecml  they  consist  of  a  thin  membrane,  lying
dose  to  the  side  of  the  vessel,  and  consequently
allowing  an  open  passage  whilst  the  stream  runs
one  way,  but  thrust  out  from  the  side  by  the  fluid
getting  behind  it,  and  opposing  the  passage  of  the
blood,  when  it  would  flow  the  other  way.  Where
more  than  one  membrane  is  employed,  the  differ-
ent membranes  only  compose  one  valve.  Their
joint  action  fulfils  the  office  of  a  valve:  for  in-
stance; over  the  entrance  of  the  right  auricle  of
the  heart  into  the  right  ventricle,  three  of  these
skins  or  membranes  are  fixed,  of  a  triangular  figure,
the  bases  of  the.  triangles  fastened  to  the  flesh;
the  sides  and  summits  loose ;  but,  though  loose,
connected  by  threads  of  a  determinate  length,  with
certain  small  fleshy  prominences  adjoining.  The
effect  of  this  construction  is,  that  when  the  ven-
tricle contracts,  the  blood  endeavouring  to  escape
jn  all  directions,  and  amongst  other  directions,
pressing  upwards,  gets  between  these  membranes
and  the  sides  of  tne  passage. ;  and  thereby  forces
them  up  into  such  a  position,  as  that,  together,  they
constitute,  when  raised,  a  hollow  cone,  (the  strings,
before  spoken  of,  hindering  them  from  proceeding
or  separating  farther;)  which  cone,  entirely  occu-

Othe  passage,  prevents  the  return  of  the
into  the  auricle.  A  shorter  account  of  the
natter  may  be  this:  so  long  as  the  blood  proceeds
in  its  proper  course,  the  membranes  which  com-
pose the  valve  are  pressed  close  to  the  side  of  the
▼easel,  and  occasion  no  impediment  to  the  circula-
tion :  when  the  blood  would  regurgitate,  they  are
raised  from  the  side  of  the  vessel,  and,  meeting  in
the  middle  of  its  cavity,  shut  up  the  channel.
Can  any  one  doubt  of  contrivance  here :  or  is  it
possible  to  shut  our  eyes  against  the  proof  of  it?

This  valve,  also,  is  not  more  curious  in  its  struc-
ture, than  it  is  important  in  its  office.  Upon  the
play  of  the  valve,  even  upon  the  proportioned
length  of  the  strings  or  fibres  which  check  the  as-
cent of  the  membranes,  depends,  as  it  should
Mem,  nothing  less  than  the  life  itself  of  the  ani-
mal. We  may  here  likewise  repeat,  what  we  be-
fore observed  concerning  some  of  the  ligaments  of
the  body,  that  they  could  not  be  formed  by  any
action  of  the  parts  themselves.  There  ate  cases
in  which,  although  good  uses  appear  to  arise  from
the  shape  or  configuration  of  a  part,  yet  that  shape
or  configuration  itself  may  seem  to  be  produced
by  the  action  of  the  part,  or  by  the  action  or  pres-
sure, of  adjoining  parts.  Thus  the  bend  and  the
internal  smooth  concavity  of  the  ribs,  may  be  at-
tributed to  the  equal  pressure  of  the  soft  bowels ;
the  particular  shape  of  some  bones  and  joints,  to
the  traction  of  the  annexed  muscles,  or  to  the  po-
sition of  contiguous  muscles.  But  valves  could
not  be  so  formed.  Action  and  pressure  are,all
against  them.  The  blood,  in  its  proper  course,
has  no  tendency  to  produce  such  things;  and  in  its
improper  or  reflected  current,  has  a  tendency  to
prevent  their  production.  Whilst  we  see,  there-
lore,  the  use  and  necessity  of  this  machinery,  we
can  look  to  no  other  account  of  its  origin  or  forma-
tion than  the  intending  mind  of  a  Creator.  Nor
can  we  without  admiration  reflect,  that  such  thin
such  weak  and  tender  instruments  /
ves  are,  should  be  able  to  hold  out  for
seventy  or  eighty  years.

Hare  also  we  cannot  consider  but  with  grati-
tude, how  happyit  is  that  our  vital  motions  are
try. We  should  have  enough  to  do,  if
3d


we  had  to  keep  our  hearts  beating,  and  our  sto-
machs at  work.  Did  these  things  depend,  we  will
not  say  upon  our  eflbrt.  but  upon  our  bidding,  our
care,  or  our  attention,  they  would  leave  us  leisure
for  nothing  else.  We  must  have  been  continually
upon  the  watch,  and  continually  in  fear ;  nor  would
this  constitution  have  allowed  of  sleep. '

It  might  perhaps  be  expected,  that  an  organ  so
precious,  of  such  central  and  primary  importance
as  the  heart  is,  should  be  defended  by  a  case.  The
fact  is,  that  a  membranous  purse  or  bag,  made  of
strong,  tough  materials,  is  provided  for  it ;  holding
the  heart  within  its  cavity;  sitting  loosely  ana
easily  about  it;  guarding  its  substance,  without
confining  its  motion;  and  containing  likewise  a
spoonful  or  two  of  water,  just  sufficient  to  keep
tne  surface  of  the  heart  in  a  state  of  suppleness
and  moisture.  How  should  such  a  loose  covering
be  generated  by  the  action  of  the  heart  1  Does
not  the  enclosing  of  it  in  a  sack,  answering  no
other  purpose  but  that  enclosure,  show  the  care
that  has  been  taken  of  its  preservation  1

One  use  of  the,  circulation  of  the  blood  probably
(amongst  other  uses)  is,  to  distribute  nourishment
to  the  different  parts  of  the  body.  How  minute
and  multiplied  the  ramifications  of  the  blood-ves-
sels, for  that  purpose,  are;  and  how  thickly  spread,
over  at  least  the  superficies  of  the  body,  is  proved
by  the  single  observation,  that  we  cannot  prick
the  point  of  a  pin  into  the  flesh,  without  drawing
blood,  i  e.  without  finding  a  blood-vessel.  Nor,
internally,  is  their  diffusion  less  universal.  Bloodr
vessels  run  along  the  surface  of  membranes,  per-
vade the  substance  of  muscles,  penetrate  the  bones.
Even  into  every  tooth,  we  trace,  through  a  small
hole  in  the  root,  an  artery  to  feed  the  bone,  as
well  as  a  vein  to  bring  back  the  spare  blood  from
it ;  both  which,  with  the  addition  or  an  accompany-
ing nerve,  form  a  thread  only  a  little  thicker  than
a  horse-hair.

Wherefore,  when  the  nourishment  taken  in  at
the  mouth  has  once  reached,  and  mixed  itself  with
the  blood,  every  part  of  the  body  is  in  the  way  of
being  supplied  with  it  And  this  introduces  an-
other grand  topic,  namely,  the  manner  in-  which
the  aliment  gets  into  the  blood  ;  which  is  a  subject
distinct  from  the  preceding,  and  brings  lis  to  the
consideration  of  another  entire  system  of  vessels.

II.  For  this  necessary  part  of  the  animal  econo-
my, an  apparatus  is  provided,  in  a  great  measure
capable  of  being  what  anatomists  call  demonstrated,
that  is,  shown  in  the  dead  body ; — and  a'  line  or
course  of  conveyance,  which  we  can  pursue  by
our  examinations.

First,  the  food  descends  by  a  wide  passage  into
the  intestines,  undergoing  two  great  preparations
on  its  way:  one,  in  the  mouth  by  mastication  and
moisture— (can  it  be  doubted  with  what  design
the  teeth  were  placed  in  the  road  to  the  stomach,
or  that  there  was  choice  in  fixing  them  in  this
situation  Vs  the  other,  by  digestion  in  the  stomach  •
itself.  Of  this  last  surprising  dissolution  I  say
nothing ;  because  it  is  chymistry,  and  I  am  endea-
vouring to  display  mechanism.  The  figure  and
position  of  the  stomach  (I  speak  all  along  with  a
reference  to  the  human  organ)  are  calculated  for
detaining  the  food  long  enough  for  the  action  of
its  digestive  juice.  It  has  the  shape  of  the  pouch
of  a  bagpipe ;  lies  across  tho  body ;  and  the  pylorus,
or  passage  by  which  the  food  leaves  it,  is  some-
what higher  in  the  body  than  the  cardia,  or  orifice
by  which  it  enters  so  that  it  is  by  the  contraction


418


NATURAL  THEOLOGY.


of  the  muscular  coat  of  the  stomach,  that  the  con
tents,  after  having  undergone  the  application  of
the  gastric  menstruum,  are  gradually  pressed  out.
In  dogs  and  cats,  this  action  of  the  coats  of  the
stomach  has  been  displayed  to  the  eye.  It  is  a
alow  and  gentle  undulation,  propagated  from  one
orifice  of  the  stomach  to  the  other.  For  the  same
reason  that  I  omitted,  forthe  present,  offering  any
observation  upon  the  digestive  fluid,  I  shall  say
nothing  concerning  the  bfle  or  the  pancreatic  juice,
farther  than  to  observe  upon  the  mechanism,  viz.
that  from  the-glands  in  which  these  secretions  are
elaborated,  pipes  are  laid  into  the  first  of  the  intes-
tines, through  which  pipes  the  product  of  each
glana  flows  into  that  bowel,  and  is  there  mixed
with  the  aliment,  as  soon  almost  as  it  posses  the
stomach ;  adding  also  as  a  remark,  how  grievously
this  same  bile  offends  the  stomach  Itself,  yet
cherishes  the  vessel  that  lies  next  to  it.
•  Secondly,  We  have  now  the  aliment  in  the  in-
testines, converted  into  pulp;  and,  though  lately
consisting  often  different  viands,  reduced  to  nearly
a  uniform  substance,  and  to  a  state  fitted  for  yield-
•  ing  its  essence,  which  is  called  chyle,  but  which
is  milk,  or  more  nearly  resembling  milk  than  any
other  liquor  with  which  it  can  be  compared.  For
the  straining  of  this  fluid  from  the  digested  aliment
in  the  course  of  its  long  progress  through  the
body,  myriads  of  capillary  tubes,  i.  e.  pipes  as
•mall  as  hairs,  open  tneir  orifices  into  the  cavity
of  every  part  of  the  intestines.  These  tubes,
which  are  so  fine  and  slender  as  not  to  be  visible
unless  when  distended  with  chyle,  soon  unite  into
larger  branches.  The  pipes,  formed  by  this  union,
terminate  in  glands,  from  which  other  pipes  of  a
■till  larger  diameter  arising,  carry  the  chyle  from
ail  parts,  into  a  common  reservoir  or  receptacle.
This  receptacle,  is  a  bag  of  size  enough  to  hold
about  two  table-spoons  full ;  and  from  this  vessel
a  duct  or  main  pipe  proceeds,  climbing  up  the
back  fpart  of  the  chest,  and  afterward  creeping
along  the  gullet  till  it  reach  the  neck.  Here  it
meets  the  river:  here  it  discharges  itself  into  a
large  vein,  which  soon  conveys  the  chyle,  now
flowing  along  with  the  old  blood,  to  the  heart.
This  whole  route  can  be  exhibited  to  the  eye ;  no-
thing is  left  to  be  supplied  by  imagination  or  con-
jecture. Now,  beside  the  subserviency  of  this
structure,  collectively  considered,  to  a  manifest
and  necessary  purpose,  we  may  remark  two  or
three  separate  particulars  in  it,  which  show,  not
only  the  contrivance,  but  the  perfection  of  it.  We
may  remark,  first,  the  length  of  the  intestines,
which,  in  the  human  subject,  is  six  times  that  of
the  body.  Simply  for  a  passage,  these  voluminous
bowels,  this  prolixity  of  gut,  seems  in  no  wise  ne-
cessary; but  in  order  to  allow  time  and  space  for
the  successive  extraction  of  the  chyle  from  the
digested  aliment,  namely,  that  the  chyle  which
escapes  the  lacteals  of  one  part  of  the  guts  may  be
taken  up  by  those  of  some  other  part,  the  length
of  the  canal  is  of  evident  use  and  conduciveness.
Secondly,  we  must  also  remark  their  peristaltic
motion;  which  is  made  up  of  contractions,  follow-
ing one  another  like  waves  upon  the  surface  of  a
fluid,  and  not  unlike  what  we  observe  in  the  body
of  an  earth-worm  crawling  along  the  ground ;  and
which  is  effected  by  the  joint  action  of  longitudinal ,
and  of  spiral,  or  rather  perhaps  of  a  great  number
of  separate  semicircular  fibres.  This  curious  ac-
tion pushes  forward  the  grosser  part  of  the  ali-
inent,  at  the  same  time  that  the  more  subtile  parts,


which  we  call  chyle,  are,  by  a  series  of  gentfe
compressions,  squeezed  into  the  narrow  orifices
of  the  lacteal


veins. Thirdly,  it  <
that  these  tubes,  which  we  denominate  lacteals,
or  their  mouths  at  least,  should  be  made  as  nar-
row as  possible,  in  order  to  deny  admission,  into
the  blood  to  any  particle  which  is  of  size  enough
to  make  a  lodgment  afterward  in  the  smaM  arteries,
and  thereby  to  obstruct  the  drcujation:  and  it  wis
also  necessary  that  this  extreme  tenuity  should  be
compensated  by  multitude ;  for  a  large  quantity  of
chyle  (in  ordinary  constitutions,  not  less,  it  his
been  computed,  than  two  or  three  quarts  in  a  oW)
is,  by  some  means  or  other,  to  be  passed  through
them. Accordingly,  we  find  the  number  of  the
lacteals  exceeding  all  powers  of  computation;  and
their  pipes  so  fine  and  slender,  as  not  to  be  visible,
unless  filled,  to  the  naked  eye;  and  their  orifices,
which  open  into  the  intestines,  so  small,  as  not
to  be  discernible  even  by  the  beet  microscope.
Fourthly,  the  main  pipe  which  carries  the  chyle
from  the  reservoir  to  the  blood,  viz.  the  thoracic
duct,  being  fixed  in  an  almost  upright  position,
and  wanting  that  advantage  of  propulsion  which
the  arteries  possess,  is  furnished  with  a  succession
of  valves  to  check  the  ascending  fluid,  when  once
it  has  passed  them,  from  falling  back. These
valves  look  upward;  so  as  to  leave  the  ascent  free,
but  to  prevent  the  return  of  the  chyle,  if,  for  want
of  sufficient  force  to  push  it  on,  its  weight  should
at  any  time  cause  it  to  descend, fifthly,  the
chyle  enters  the  blood  in  an  odd  place,  but  perhaps
the  most  commodious  place  possible,  viz.  at  a  lane
vein  in  the  neck,  so  situated  with  respect  to  the
circulation,  as  speedily  to  brings  the  mixture  to  the
heart. And  this  seems  to  be  a  circumstance  of
great  moment;  for  had  the  chyle  entered  the  blood
at  an  artery,  or  at  a  distant  vein,  the  fluid,  com-
posed of  the  ohhand  the  new  materials,  must  have
performed  a  considerable  nart  of  the  circulation,
before  it  received  that  churning  in  the  lungs,
which  is,  probably,  necessary  for  the  intimate  and
perfect  union  of  the  old  blood  with  the  recent
chyle. Who  could  have  dreamt  of  a  comniunica-
tion  between  the  cavity  of  the  intestines  and  the
left  great  vein  of  the  neck  ? Who  could  have
suspected  that  this  communication  should  be  the
medium  through  which  all  nourishment  is  derived
to  the  body ;  or  this  the  place,  where,  by  a  side-inlet,
the  important  junction  is  formed  between  the
blood  and  the  material  which  feeds  it  1

We  postponed  the  consideration  of  digettton,
lest  it  should  interrupt  us  in  tracing  the  course  of
the  food  to  the  blood ;  but  in  treating  of  the  a>
mentary  system,  so  principal  a  part  of  tfte  process
cannot  be  omitted.

Of  the  gastric  juice,  the  immediate  agent  by
which  that  change  which  food  undergoes  in  our
stomachs  is  effected,  we  shall  take  our  account
from  the  numerous,  careful,  and  varied  experi-
ments of  the  Abbe  Spallanzani.

1.  It  is  not  a  simple  diluent,  but  a  real  solvent.
A  quarter  of  an  ounce  of  beef  had  scarcely  touch-
ed the  stomach  of  a  crow,  when  the  solution  be-
gun.

2.  It  has  not  the  nature  of  saliva;  it  has  hot
the  nature  of  the  bile;  but  is  distinct  from  both.
By  experiments  out  of  the  body  it  appears,  that
neither  of  these  secretions  acts  upon  alimentary
substances,  in  the  same  manner  as  the  gastric
juice  acts.

3.  Digestion  is  not  putrefaction:  for  the  digest-


NATURAL'  THEOLOGY.


-419


ing  fluid  resists  putrefaction  most  pertinacioroty ;
nay,  not  only  check*  its  father  progress,  but  re-
stores putrid  substances.

4.  It  is  not  a  fermentative  process:  for  the  so-
lution begins  at  the  surface,  and  proceeds  towards
the  centre,  contrary  to  the  order  in  which  ferment-
ation acts  and  spreads.

5.  It  is  not  the  digestion  <f  heat :  for  the  cold
maw  of  a  cod  or  sturgeon  will  dissolve  the  shells
of  crabs  or  lobsters,  harder  than  the  sides  of  the
stomach  which  contains  them.

In  a  word,  animal  digestion  carries  about  it  the
marks  of  being  a.  power  and  a  process  completely
sui  generis ;  distinct  from  every  other;  4t  least
from  every  chymical  process  with  which  we  are
acquainted.  And  the  most  wonderful  thing  about
it  is  its  appropriation ;  its  subserviency  to  the  par-
ticular economy  of  each  animal  The  gastric
juice  of  an  owl,  falcon,  or  kite,  will  not  touch  grain ;
no,  not  even  to  finish  the  macerated  and  half-di-
gested pulse  which  is  left  in  the  crops  of  the  spar-
rows that  the  bird  devours.  In  poultry,  the  tritu-
ration of  the  gizzard,  and  the  gastric  juice,  con-
spire in  the  work  of  digestion.  The  gastric  juice
will  not  dissolve  the  grain  whilst  it  is  whole.  En-
tire grains  of  barley,  enclosed  in  tubes  or  sphe-
rules, are  not  affected  by  it.  But  if  the  same
grain  be  by  any  means  broken  or  ground,  the  gas-
tric juice  immediately  lays  hold  otit^  Here  then
is  wanted,  and  here  we  find,  a  combination  of
mechanism  and  chymistry.  For  the  preparatory
grinding,  the  gizzard  lends  its  milL  And  as  all
mill-works  should  be  strong,  its  structure  is  so,  be-
yop4  that  of  any  other  muscle  belonging  to  the
animal  (  The  internal  coat  also,  or  lining  of  the
gizzard,  is,  for  the  same  purpose,  hard  and  carti-
laginous. But,  forasmucn  as  this  is  not  the  sort
or  animal  substance,  suited  for  the  reception  of
glands  or  for  secretion,  the  gastric  juice,  in  this
family,  is  not  supplied,  as  in  membranous  sto-
machs, by  the  stomach  itself,  but  by  the  gullet,  in
which  the  feeding  glands  are  placed,  and  from
which  it  trickles  down  into  the  stomach.

In  sheep,  the  gastric  fluid  has  no  effect  in  di-
gesting plants,  unless  they  have  been  previously
masticated.  IX  only  produces  a  slight  maceration,
nearly  such  as  common  water  would  produce,  in
a  degree  of  heat  somewhat  exceeding  the  medium
temperature  of  the  atmosphere.  But  provided
that  the  plant  has  been  reduced  to  pieces  by  chew-
ing, the  gastric  juice  then  proceeds  with  it,  first
by  softening  its  substance ;  next  by  destroying  its
natural  consistency;  and  lastly,  by  dissolving  it
soy completely,  as  -not  even  to  spare  the  toughest
and  most  stringy  parts,,  such  as  the  nerves  of  the
leaves. .

So  tar  dur  accurate  and  indefatigable  Abbe*. —
Dr.  Stevens,  of  Edinburgh,  in  1777J  found,  by  ex-
periments tried  with  perforated  balls,  that  the  gas-
tric juke  of  the  sheep  and  the  ox  speedily  dissolved
vegetables,  but  made  no  impression  upon  beef,
mutton,  and  other  animal  bodies.  Dr*  Hunter
discovered  a  property  of  this  fluid,  of  a  most  cu-
rious kind;  viz.  that  in  the  stomachs  of  animals
which  feed  upon  flesh,  irresistibly  as  this  fluid  acts
upon  animal  substances,  it  is  only  upon  the  dead
substance  that  it  operates  at  all.  The  living  fibre
sutlers  no  injury  from  lying  in  contact  with  it.
Worms  and  insects  are  found  alive  in  the  sto-
machs of  such  animals.  The  coats  of  the  human
stomach,  in  a  healthy  state,  are  insensible  to  its
e  j  yet  in  cases  of  sudden  death,  (wherein


the  gastric  Juice,  not  having  been  weakened  by
disease,  retains  its  activity,}  it  has  been  known  to
eat  a  hole  through  the  bowel  which  contains,  it*
How  nice  is  this  discrimination  of  action,  yet  how
necessary!

But  to  return  to  our  hydraulics.

HI.  The  gall-bladder  is  a  veiy  remarkable  con-
trivance^ It  is  the  reservoir  of  a  canaj.  It  does
not  form  the  channel  itself,  i.  e.  the  direct  com-
munication between  the  liver  and  the  intestine,
which  is  by  another  passage,  viz.  the  ductus  hepa-
ticus,  continued  under  the  name  of  the  ductus.com*
munis ;  but  it  lies  adjacent  to  this  channel,  join*
ing  it  by  a  duct  of  its  own,  the  ductus  cystous :
by  which  structure  it  is  enabled,  as  occasion  may
require,  to  add  its  contents  to,  and  increase  the
flow  of  bile  yito  the  duodenum.  And  the  posi-
tion of  the  gall-bladder  is  such  as  to  apply  this
structure  to  the  best  advantage.  In  its  natural
situation,  it  touches  the  exterior  surface  of  the
stomach,  and  consequently  is  compressed  by  the
distention  of  that  vessel :  the  effect  of  which  com-
pression is  to  force  out-from  the  bag,  and  send  in-
to the  duodenum,  an  extraordinary  quantity  of
bile,  to  meet  the  extraordinary  demand  which  the
repletion  of  the  stomach  by  food  is  about  to  occa-
sion.t  Chesejden  describes?  the  sail-bladder  as
seated  against  the  duodenum,  and  thereby  liable
to  have  its  fluid  pressed  out,  by  the'passage  of  the
aliment  through  that  cavity ;  which  likewise  will
have  the  effect  of  causing  it  to  be  received  into  the
intestine,  at  a  right  time,  and  in  a  due  proportion.

There  may  be  other  purposes  answered  by  this
contrivance;  and  it  is  probable  that  there  are.
The  contents  of  the  gall-bladder  are  not  exactly
of  the  same  kind  as  what  passes  from  the  liver
through  a  direct  passage.S  It  is  possible  that  the
gall-  may  be  changed,  and  for  some  purposes  me-
liorated, by  keeping.

The  entrance  of  the  gall -duct  into  the  duode-
num furnishes  another  observation^  Whenever
either  smaller  tubes  are  inserted  into  larger  tubes,
or  tubes  into  vessels  and  cavities,  such  receiving
tubes,  vessels,  or  cavities,  being  subject  to  muscu-
lar constriction,  we  .always  find  a  contrivance  to
prevent  regurgitation .  In  some  cases,  valves  are
used ;  in  other  cases,  amongst  which  is  that  now
before  us,  a  different  expedient  is  resorted  to,  which
may  be  thus  described:  The  gall-duct  enters  the
duodenum  obliquely :  after  it  has  pierced  the  first
coat,  it  runs  near  two  fingers'  breadth  between  the
coats,  before  it  opens  into  the  cavity  of  the  intes-
tine. II  The  same  contrivance  is  used  in  another
part,  where  there  is  exactly  the  same  occasion  for
it,  viz.  in  the  insertion  of  the  ureters  in  the  blad-
der. These  enter  the  bladder  near  its  neck,. run-
ning obliquely  for  the  space  of  an  inch  between
its  coats.1T  It  is,  in  both  cases,  sufficiently  evi-
dent, that  this  structure  has  a  necessary  mecha-
nical tendency  to  resist  regurgitation :  for  whatever
force  acts  in  such  a  direction  as  to  urge  the  fluid
back  into  the  orifices  of  the  tubes,  must,  at  |he
same  time,  stretch  the  coats  of  the  vessels,  and
thereby- compress  that  part  of  the  tube  which  is
included  between  them.

IV.  Amongst  the  vessels  of  the  human  body
the  pipe  which  conveys  the  saliva  from  the  place
where  it  is  made,  to  the  place  where  it  is  wanted,


•  Phil.  Trans,  vol.  lxii.  p.  **7. t  KeuTs  Anat.  p.  64.
t  Anat.  p.  164.  §  Keill,  (from  Malpighius,)  p.  63.

||  Kern's  Anat.  p.  68. V  GfceseUten's  Anat.  p.  2GQ.


490


tiwCTW  to  be  reckoned  amongst  the  n
gftjle  pieces  of  mechanism  with  which  we  are  ac-
quainted. The  saliva,  we  all  know,  is  used  in
foe  mouth :  but  much  of  it  is  produced  on  the
outside  of  the  cheek,  by  the  parotid  gland,  which
pes  between  the  ear  and  the  angle  of  the  lower
Jaw.  In  order  to  effrry  the  secreted  juice  to  its
destination,  there  is  laid  from  the  gland,  on  the
outside,  a  pipe,  about  the  thickness  of  a  wheat
straw,  and  about  three  fingers'  breadth  in  length ;
which,  after  riding  over  the  masseter  muscle,  bores
lor  itself  a  hole  through  (he  very  middle  of  the
cheek ;  enters  by  that  hole,  which  is  a  complete
perforation  of  the  buccinator  muscle,  into  the
mouth;  and  there  discharges  its  fluid  very  co-
piously.

y.  Another  exquisite  structure,  differing  in-
deed from  the  four  preceding  instances,  in  that  it
does  not , relate  to  the  conveyance  of  fluids,  but
still  belonging,  Kke  these,  to  tne  class  of  pipes  or
conduits  of  the  body,  is  seen  in  the  larnyx.  We
all  know  that  there  go  down  the  throat  two  pipes,
one  leading  to  the  stomach,  the  other  to  the  lungs;
the  one  being  the  passage  for  the  food,  the  other
for  the  breath  and  voice :  we  know  also  that  both
these,  passages  open  into  the  bottom  of  the  mouth;
the  gullet,  necessarily,  for  the  conveyance  of  food ;
and  the  wind-pipe,  for  speech  and  the  modulation
of  sound,  riot  much  less  so :  therefore  the  difficulty
was,  the  passages  being  so  contiguous,  to  prevent
the  food,  especially  the  liquids,  which  we  swal-
low into  the  stomach,  from  entering  the  wind-
pipe, i.  e.  the' road  to  the  lungs;  the  conse-
quence of  which  error,  when  it  does  happen,  is
perceived  by  the  convulsive  throes  that  are  instant-
ly produced.  This  business/which  is  very  nice,  is
managed  in  this  manner.  The  gullet  (the  pas-
sage for  food)  opens  into  the  mouth  like  the  cone
or  upper  part  of  a  funnel,  the  capacity  of  which
forms  indeed  the  bottom  of  the  mouth.  Into  the
side  of  this  funnel,  at  the  part  which  lies  the
lowest,'  enters  the  wind-pipe,  by  a  chink  or  slit,
with  a  lid  or  flap,  like  a  little  tongue,  accurately
fitted  to  the  orifice.  The  solids  or  liquids  which
we  swallow,-  pass  over  this  lid  or  flap,  as  they  de-
scend by  the  funnel  into  the  gullet.  Both  the
weigh!  of  the  food,  and  the  action  of  the  muscles
concerned  in  swallowing,  coritribute  to  keep  the
fid  close  down  upon  the  aperture,  whilst  any  thing
is  passing ;  whereas,  by  means  of  its  natural  carti-
laginous spring,  it  raises  itself  a  little,  as  soon  as
the  food  is  passed,  thereby  allowing  a  free  inlet
and  outlet  for  the  respiration  of  air  by  the  lungs.
Such  is. its  structure:  and  we  may  here  remark
the  almost  complete  success  of  the  expedient,  viz.
how  seldom  it  fails  of  its  purpose,  compared  with
the  number  of  instances  in  which  it  fulfils  H.
Reflect  how  frequently  we  swallow,  how  con-
stantly we  breathe.  In  a  city  feast,  for  example,
what  deglutition,  what  anhelation !  yet  does  this
little  cartilage,  the  epiglottis,  so  effectually  inter-
pose its  office,  so  securely  guard  the  entrance  of
the  wind-pipe,  that  whilst  morsel  after  morsel,
draught  after  draught  are  coursing  one  another
over  it,  an  accident  of  a  crumb  or  a  drop  slipping
into  this  passage  (which  nevertheless  must  be
opened  for  the.  breath  every  second  of  time,)
excites  in  the  whole  company,  not  only  alarm  by
its  danger,  but  surprise  by  its  novelty.  Not  two
guests  are  choked  in  a  century.

There  is  no  room  for  pretending  that  the  action
of  the  parts  may  have  gradually  formed  the  epi-


NATURAL  THEOLOGY.


individual,  fat


saiM  torn  vidua!,  bat
i. Not  only  these*


glottis:  I  do  not  mean  in  the
ma  succession  of  generation
tion  of  the  parts  has  no  such  tendency,' but  the
animal  could  not  live,  nor  consequently  the  parts
act,  either  without  H,  or  with  it  in  a  half  farmed
state.  The  species  was  not  to  wait  for  the
gradual  formation  or  expansion  of  a  part  which
was,  from  the  first,  necessary  to  the  fife  of-the  in-
dividual.

Not  only  is  the  larynx  curious,  but  the  whole
wind-pipe  possesses  a  structure  adapted  to  its  pe-
culiar office.  It  is  made  up  (as  any  one  mar  per-
ceive by  potting  his  fingers  to  his  throat)  of  stout
cartilaginous  ringlets,  placed  at  small  and  equal
distances  from  one  another.  Now  this  is  not  the
case  with  any  other  of  the  numerous  conduits  of
the  body.  The  use  of  these  cartilages  is  to  keen
the  passage  for  the  air  constantly  open;  which
they  do  mechanically.  A  pipe  with  soft  -mem-
branous coats,  liable  .to  collapse  and  dose  when
empty,  would  not  have  answered  here  i  although
this  be  the  general  vascular  structure,  and  a  struc-
ture which  serves  very  well  for  these  tubes  which
are  kept  in  a  state  of  perpetual  distension  by  the
fluid  they  enclose,' or  which  afford  a  passage  to
solid  and!  protruding  substances.

Nevertheless  (which  is  another  particularity
well  worthy  of  notice,)  these  rings  are  not  com-
plete, that  is,  are  not  cartilaginous  and  stiff  all
round;  but  their  hinder  part,  which  is  contiguous
to  the  gullet,  is  membranous  and  soft,  easily  yield*
ing  to  the  distensions  of  that  organ  occasioned  by
the  descent  of  solid  food.  The  same  rings  are  also
bevelled  off  at  the  upper  and  lower  edges,  the  better
to  close  upon  one  another,  when  the  trachea  if
compressed  or  shortened.

The  constitution  of  the  trachea,  may  i
likewise  another  reflection.  The  met
which  lines  its  inside,  is,  perhaps,  the  most  i
ble,  irritable  membrane  of  the  body.  It  rejects
the  touch  of  a  crumb  of  bread,  or  a  drop  of  water,
with  a  spasm  which  convulses  the  whole  frame;
yet,  left  to  itself,  and  its  proper  office,  the  intro-
mission of  air  alone,  nothing  can  be  so  quiet.  It
does  not  even  make  itself  felt ;  a  man  does  not
know  that  he  has  a  trachea.  This  capacity  of .
perceiving  with  such  acuteness,  this  impatience  of
offence,  yet  perfect  rest  and  ease  when  let  alone.
are  properties,  one  would  have  thought,  not-likely
to  reside  in  the  same  subject  It  is  to  the  junc-
tion, however,  of  these  almost  inconsistent  quasi*
ties,  in  this,  as  well  as  in  some  other  delicate  parts
of  the  body,  that  we  owe  our  safety  and  oar  com-
fort ; — our  safety  to  their  sensibility,  oar  comfort
to  their  repose.

The  larynx,  or  rather  the  whole  wind-pipe
taken  together,  f  for  the  larynx  is  only  the  upper
part  of  the  wind-pipe,)  besides  its  other  uses,  is
also  a  musical  instrument,  that  is  to  say,  it  is
mechanism  expressly  adapted  to  the  modulation
of  sound ;  for  it  has  been  found  upon  trial,  that,
by  relaxing  or  tightening  the  tendinous  bands  at
the  extremity  of  the.  wind-pipe,  and  Mowing  in -at
the  other  end,  all  the  cnes  and  notes  might  be
produced  of  which  the  living  animal  was  capable.
It  can  be  sounded,  just  as  a  pipe  or  flute  is
sounded.

Birds,  says  Bonnet,  have,  at  the-  lower  end  of
the  wind-pipe,  a  conformation  like  the  reed  of -a
hautboy,  for  the  modulation  of  their  notes.  A
tuneful  bird  is  a  ventriloquist.  The  seat  of  the
song  is  in  the  breast


NATURAL  THEOLOGY.


«U


-The  use  of  the  longs  in  the  system  has  been
■rid  to  be  obscure ;  one  use  however  jw  plain,
though  tn  some  sense  external  to  the  system,  and
that  is,  the  formation;  in  conjunction  with  the
larynx,  of  voice  and  speech.  They  are,  to  animal
utterance,  what  the  bellows  are  to  the  organ.

For  the  sake  of  method^  we  have  considered
animal  bodies  under  three  divisions;  their  bones,
their  muscles,  and  their  vessels:  and  we  have
stated  our  observations  upon  these  parts  separately.
But  this  is  to  diminish  the  strength  of  the  argue
ment  The  wisdom  of  the  Creator  is  seen,  not  in
their  separate  but  their  collective  action ;  in  their
mutual  subserviency  and  dependence ;  in  their  con-
tributing together  to  one  effect,  and  one  use.  It
has  been  said,  that  a  man  cannot  lift  his  hand  to
bis  head,  without  "finding  enough  to  convince  him
of  the  existence  of  a  God.  And  it  is  well  said;
for  he  has  only  to  reflect,  familiar  as  this  action  is,
and  simple  as  it  seems  to  be,  how  many  things
are  requisite  for  the  performing  of  it :  how  many
thingB  which  we  understand,  to  say  nothing  of
many  more,  probably,  which  we  do  not;  eir.  first,
a  long,  hard,  strong  cylinder,  in  order  to  give  .to
the  arm  its  firmness  and  tension;  but  which,
being  rigid,  and,  in  its  substance,  inflexible,  can
only  turn  upon  joints:  secondly,  therefore,  joints
for  this  purpose ;  one  at  the  shoulder  to  raise  the
arm,  another  at  the  elbow  to  bend  it ;  'these  joints
continually  fed  with  a  soft  mucilage  te  make  the
parts  slip  easily  upon  one  another,  and  holden
together  by  strong  braces,  to  keep  them  in  their
position:  theft,  thirdly,  strings  and  wires,  i.  e.
muscles  and  tendons,  artificially  inserted  for  the
purpose  of  drawing  the  boner  in  the  directions  in
which  the  joints  allow  them  to  move.  Hitherto  we
seem  to  understand  the  mechanism  pretty  well ;
and,  understanding  this,  we  possess  enough  for
our  conclusion:  nevertheless,  we  have  hitherto
only  a  machine  standing  still ;  a  dead  organization,
— an  apparatus.  To  pit  the  system  in  a  state  of
activity ;  to  set  it  at  work ;  a  farther  provision  is
pocossary,  viz.  a  communication  with  the  brain
by  means  of  nerves.  We  know  the  existence  of
this  communication,  because  we  can  see  the  com-
municating threads,  and  can  trace  them  to  the
brain:  its  necessity  we  also  know,  because  if  the*
thread  be  cut,  if  the  communication  be  intercepted, .
'  the  muscle  becomes  paralytic :  but  beyond  this  we
luH»wUttk;theoTganipUionDemgtoonunuteand
subtile  for  our  inspection.

To  what  has  been  enumerated,  as  offidatingin
the  single  act  of  a  man's  raising  nis  hand  to  nis
bead,  must  be  added  likewise,  all  that  is  necessary,
and  aJl  that  contributes  to  the  growth,  nourishment,
and  sustentation,  of  the  limb,  the  repair  of  its
waste,  the  preservation  of  its  health:  such  as  the
circulation  of  the  blood  through  every  part  of  it ;
Its  lymphatics,  exhalants,  absorbents;  its  excre-
tion* and  integuments.  All  these  share  in  the
result:  join  in  the  effect:  and  how  all  these,  or
any  or  them,  come  together  without  a  designing,
Au^mg  intelligence,  it  is  impossible  to  conceive.

CHAPTER  XL

Qf  the  Animal  Structure  regarded  a*  a  Man.

Contemplating  an  animal  body  in  its  collect-
ive capacity,  we  cannot  forget  to  notice  what  a
r  of instruments  art  might  together,  and


often  within  how  small  a  compass.  It  is
of  contrivances.  In  a  canary-bird,- for  instance,
and  in  the  single  ounce  of  matter  which  composes
his  body,  (but  which  seems  to  be  all  employed,)
we  have  instruments  for  eating,  for  digesting,  for
nourishment,  fat  breathing,  for  generation,  for
running,  for  flying,  for  seeing,  for  hearing,  for
smelling;  each  appropriate,  each  entirely  differ-
ent  from  all  the  rest

The  human,  or  indeed  the  ainmal^rame,  con-
sidered as  a  mass  or  assemblage,  exhibits  in  its
composition  three  properties,  which  have  long
struck  my  mind  as  indubitable  evidences,  not  only
of  design,  but  of  a  great  deal  of  attention  and  ac-
curacy m  prosecuting  the  design.

I.  The  first  is,  the  exact  correspondency  of  the
two  sides  of  the  same  animal :  the  right  hand  an-
swering to  the  left,  leg  to  leg,  eye  to  eye,  one  side
of  the  countenance  to  the  other';  and  with  a  pre-
cision, to  imitate  which  in  any  tolerable  decree
forms  one  of  the  difficulties  of  statuary,  and  requires
on  the  part  of  the  artist,  a  constant  attention  to
this  property  of  his  work,  distinct  from  every  other.

It  ia'the  most  difficult  thing  that  can  be  to  get
a  wis  made  even;  yet  how  seldom  is  the  face
awry!  And  what  care  is  taken  that  it  should  not
be  so,  the  anatomy  of  its  bones  demonstrates.  The
upper  part  of  the  face  is  composed  of  thirteen
bones,  six  on  each  side,  answering-  each  to  each,
and  the  thirteenth,  without  a  fellow,  in  the  mid-
dle; the  lower  part  of  the  face  is  in  like  manner
composed  of  six  bones,  three  on  each  side  respect-
ively corresponding,  and  the  lower  jaw  in  the
centre.  In  building  an  arch,  could  more  be  done  in
order  to  make  the  curve  true}  i.  e/the  parts  equt-djs-
tant  from  the  middle,  alike  in  figure,  and  position -7

The  exact  resemblance  of  the  eye*,  onnsjrtering
how  compounded  this  organ  is  in  its  structure,
how  various  and  how  delicate  are  the  shades  ef
colour  with  which  its  iris  is  tinged:  how  differ-
ently, as  to  effect  upon  appearance,  the  eye  may
be  mounted  in  its  socket,  and  how  differently  in
different  heads  eyes  actually  are  set, — is  a  proper-
ty of  animal  bodies  much  to  be  admired.  Of  ten
thousand  eyes,  I  do  not  know  'that  it  would  be
possible  to  match  one,  except  with  its  own  Yellow :  or
to  distribute  them  into  suitable  pairs  by  any  other
selection  than  that  which  obtains.

This  regularity  of  the  animal  structure  is  ren-
dered more  remarkable  by  the  three  following  con-
siderations. First  the  limbs,  separately  taken,
have  not  this  correlation  of  parts,  but  the  contrary
of  it  A  knife  drawn  down  the  chine,  cuts  the
human  body  into  two  parts,  externally  equal  and*
alike:  you  cannot  draw  a  straight  line  which
will  divide  a  hand,  a  foot,  the  kg,  the  thigh,  the .
cheek,  the  eye,  the  ear,  into  two  parts  equal  and
alike.  Those  parts  which  are  placed  upon  the
middle  or  partition  line  of  the  body,  or  which
traverse  that  line,  as  the  nose,  the  tongue,  the  lips,
may  be  so  divided,  or,  more  properly  speaking,  are
double  organs:  but  other  parts  cannot  This
shews  that  the  correspondency  which  we  have
been  describing.' does  not  arise  by  any  necessity
in  the  nature  of  the  subject:  for,  if  necessary,  it
would  be  universal ;  whereas  it  is  observed  only
in  the  system  or  assemblage:  it  w  not  true  of  the
separate  parts;  that  is  to  say,  it  is  found  where  it
conduces  to  beauty  or  utility;  it  is  not  found,
where  it  would  subsist  at  the  expense  of  both.
The  two  wings  of  a  bird  always  correspond :  the
fwo  sides  of  a  feather  £e<raenUydo  not,  IncennV


NATURAL  THEOLOGY.


pedes,  mfflepadea,  and  the  whole  tribe  of  insects,  no
two  legs  on  the  same  side  an  alike:  yet-there  is
the  most  exact  parity  between  the  legs  opposite  to
one  another

3.  The  next  circumstance  to  be  remarked  is,
that,  whilst  the  cavities  of  the  body  are  so  confi-
gurated, as  externally  to  exhibit  the  moat  exact
comspondeacy  of  the  opposite  aides,  the  contents
of  these  cavities  have  no  such  correspondency.  A
fine  diawn  dawn  the  middle  of  the  breast,  divides
the  thorax  into  two  sides  exactly  similar;  jet
these  two  sides  enclose  very  duferent  contents.
The  heart  has  on  the  left  aide ;« lobe  of  the  kings
on  the  right;  balancing  each  other,  neither  in
si2e  nor  shape.  The  earns  thing  holds  of  the  ab-
domen. Tne  fiver  ties  on  the  right  aide,  without
any  similar  viscns  opposed  to  it  on  the  left.  The
spleen  indeed  is  situated  over  against  the  liver ;
but  agreeing  with  the  liver  neither  in  bulk  nor
farm.  There  is  no  equipollency  between  these.
The  stomach  is  a  .vessel,  both  irregular  in  its
shape,  and  oblique  in  its  position.  The  foldings
and  doubting*  of  the  intestines  do  not  present  a
parity  of  aides.  Yet  that  symmetry  which  depends
upon  the  correlation  of  the  sides,  is  externally  pre-
served throughout  the  whole  trunk;  and  m  the
more  remarkable  in  the  lower  parts  of  it,  as  the
integuments  are  soft ;  and  the  shape,  consequent-
ly, is  not}  aa  the  thorax  is  by  its  ribs,  reduced  by
natural  stays.  It  is  evident,  therefore,  that  the
external  proportion  does  not  arise  from  any  equafi-
tyUi  the  shape  or  pressure  of  the  internal  contents.
What  is  it  indeed  but  a  correction  of  inequalities  1
an  adjustment,  by  mutual  compensation,  of  ano-
malous forms  into  a  regular  congeries  1  the  effect,
in  a  word,  of  artful,  ana,  if  we  might  be  permitted
so  to  •peak,  of  studied  collocation!

3.  Similar  also  to  this,  is  the  third  observation ;
that  an  internal  inequality  in  the  feeding  vessels
is  so  managed,  as  to  produce  no  inequality  in  parts
which  were  intended  to  correspond.  The  right
arm  answers  accurately  to  the  left,  both  ln  size
and  shape ;  but  the  arterial  branches,  which  sup-
ply the  two  arms,  do  not  go  off  from  their  trunk,
in  a  pair,  in  the  same  manner,  at  the  same  place,
or  at  the  same,  angle.  Under  which  want  of  si-
militude, it  is  very  difficult  to  conceive  hoW  the
same  quantity  of  blood  should  be  pushed  through
.each  artery :  yet  the  result  is  right ;  the  two  limbs,
which  are  nourished  by  them,  perceive  no  differ-
ence'of  supply,  no  effects  of  excess  or  deficiency.

Concerning  the  difference  of  manner,  in  which
the -subclavian  and  carotid  arteries,  upon  the  dif-
ferent sides  of  the  body,  separate  themselves  from
the  aorta,  Gheselden  seems  to  have  thought,  that
the  advantage  which  the  left  gain  by  gofiig  off  at
an  angle  much  more  acute  than  the  right,  is  made
up  to  the  right,  by  their  going  off  together  in  one
branch  *  It  is  very  possible  that  this  may  be  the
compensating  contrivance ;  and  if  it  be  so,  how  cu-
rious, how  hydrostatical !

II.  Another  perfection  of  the  animal  mass  is
the  package.  I  know  nothing  which  is  so  sur-
prising. Examine  the  contents  of  the  trunk  of
any  large  animal.  Take  notice  how  soft,  how
tender,  now  intricate  they  are ;  how  constantly  in
action,  how  necessary  to  life  1  Reflect  upon-  the
'  danger  of  any  injury  to  their  substance,  any  'de-
rangement of  their  position,  any  obstruction  to
their  office. Observe  the  heart  pumping  at  the

♦  Cbes.  Anal  p.  181  ad.  T. .


oentre  at  the  rate  of  eighty  strokes  in  a  i
one  .set  of  pipes  carrying  the  stream  away  from  it,


4  bringing,  in  its  course,  the  fluid  back
to  it  again ;  the  lungs  performing  their  elaborate
office,  viz.  distending  and  contracting  their  many
thousand  vesicles,  by  a  reciprocation  which  cannot
cease  for  a  minute;  the  stomach  exercising  its
powerful  chymktry;  the  bowels  silenUy  propelling
the  changed  aliment;  collecting  from  it  as  tt  pro-
ceeds, and  transmitting  to  the  blood,  an  incessant
supply  of  prepared  and  assimilated  nourishment ;
that  blood  pursuing  its  course :  the  liver,  the  kid-
neys, the  pancreas,  the  parotid,  with  many  other
known  ana  distinguishable  glands,  drawing  off
from  it,  all  the  while,  their  proper  secretions.
These  several  operations,  together  with  others
more  subtile  but  lees  capable  of  being  investigated,
are  going  on  within  us,  at  one  and  tne  same  tune,
Think  of  this;  and  then  observe  how  the  body
itself,  the  case  which  holds  this  machinery,  is  rolled,
and  jolted,  and  tossed  about,  the  mechanism  re-
maining unhurt,  and  with,  very  little  molestation
even  ofits  nicest  motions.  Observe  a  ropedancer,
a  tumbler,  or  a  monkey ;  the  sudden  inversions
and  contortions  which  the  internal  parts  sustain
by  the  postures  into  which  their  bodies  are  thrown ;
or  rather  observe  the  shocks  which  these  parts,
even  in  ordinary  subjects,  sometimes  receive  from
falls  and  bruises,  or  by  abrupt  jerks  and  twists,
without  sensible,  or  with  soon-recovered,  damage.
Observe  this,  and  then  reflect  how  firmly  every
part  must  be  secured,  how  carefully  Burroundeo,
now  well  tied  down  and  packed  together.

This  property  of  animai  bodies  has  never,  I
think,  been  considered  under  a  distinct  head,  or
so  fully  as  it  deserves.  I  nnay  be  allowed  there-
fore, in  order  to  verify  my  o»bservation  concerning
it,  to  set  forth  a  short  anatomical  detail,  though
it  oblige  me  to  use  more  technical  language  thin
I  should  wish  to  introduce  into  a  work  of  this  kind.

1.  The  heart  (such  cares  is  taken  of  the  cento
of  life)  is  placed  between  two  soft  lobes  of  the
lungs:  is  tied  to  the  mediastinum  and  to  the
pericardium;  which  pericajrdiumis  not  only  itself
an  exceedingly  strong  membranet  but  adhere*
firmly  to  the  dupticature  of  the  mediastinum,  and,
by  its  point,  to  the  middle  tendon>of  the  diaphragm.
The  heart  is  also  sustained  in  its  place  by  the
great  blood-vessels  which  issue  from  it.*  »

2.  The  lungs  are  tied  to  the  sternum  by  the
mediastinum,  before  ;  to  the  vertebra  by  the
pleura,  behind.  It  seems  indeed  to  be  the  very
use  of  the  mediastinum  (which  is  a  membrane
that  goes  straight  through  the  middle  of  the  tho-
rax, from  the  breast  to  the.  back)  to  keep  the  con-
tents of  the  thorax  in  their  places;  in  particular
to.  hinder  one  lobe  of  tbe  lungs  from  incommoding
another,  or  the  parts  of  the  lungs  from  pressing
upon  each  other  when  we  lie  on  one  sidct

3.  The.  liver  is  fastened  in  the  body  by  two
ligaments :  the  first,  which  is  Urge  and  strong,
comes  from  the  covering  of  the  diaphragm,  and
penetrates  the  substance  of  the  liver ;  the  second
is  the  umbilical  vein,  which,  after  birth,  degene-
rates into  a  ligament.  The  first,  which  is  the
principal,  fixes  the  liver  in  its  situation,  whilst
the  body  holds  an  erect  posture.;  the  second  pre-
vents it  from  pressing  upon  the  diaphragm  when
we  lie  down :  and  both  together  sling  at  suspend
the  liver  when  we  lie  upon  our  backs,  so  that  a


*  Kears  Anat.  p.  107.  ed.  3. t  Aid.  p.  119.  ed.  &


NATURAL  THEOLOGY.


may  not  compress  or  obstruct  the  ascending  vena
cava,*,  to  which  belongs  the  important  office  of
returning  the  blood  from  the  body  to  the  heart.  '

4.  The  bladder  is  tied  to  the  naval  by  the
machus,  transformed  into  a  lig^ament:  thus,  what
was  a 'passage  for  urine'  to  the  fast  us,  becomes,
after  birth,  a  support  or  stay  to  the  bladder.  The
peritonaeum  also  keeps  the  viscera  from  confound-
ing themselves  with,  or  messing  irregularly  upon,
the  Madder;  for  the  kidneys  and  bladder  are  con-
tained in  a  distract  duplicative  of  that  membrane,
being  thereby  partitioned  off  from  the  other  con-
tents of  the  abdomen.

5.  The  kidneys  are  lodged  in  a  bed  of  fat.

6.  The  pancreas,  or  sweetbread,  is  strongly
tied  to  the  peritoneum,  which  is  the  great  wrap-
ping-sheet, that  encloses  all  the  bowels  contained
in  the  lower  belly  .t

7.  The  spleen  also  is  confined  to  its  place  by  an
adhesion  to  the  peritoneum  and  diaphragm,  and
by  a  connexion  with  the  omentum.*  It  is  possi-
ble, in  my  opinion,,  that  the  spleen  may  be  merely
a  stuffing,  a  soft  cushion  to  fill  up  a  vacancy  or
hollow,  which,  unless  occupied,  would  leave  the
package  loose  and  unsteady :  for  supposing  that
it  answers  no  other  purpose  than  this,  it  must  be
vascular,  and  admit  of  a*circulation  through  it,
in  order  to  be  kept  alive,  or  be  a  part  of  a  living
body.

8.  The  omentum,  epiploon,  or  cawl,  is  an
apron  tucked  up,  or  doubling  upon  itself  at  its
lowest  part.  The  upper  edge  is  tied  to  Che  bot-
tom of  the  stomach, -to  the  spleen,  as  hath  already
been  observed,  and  to  part  of  the  duodenum.  The
reflected  edge  also,  after  forming  the  doubling,
comes  up  behind  the  front  flap,  and  is  tied  to  the
colon  and  adjoining  viscera.!

9.  The  septa  of  the  brain  probably  prevent  one
part  of  that  organ  from  pressing  with  too  great  a
weight  upon  another  part.  The  processes  of  the
dura  mater  divide  the  cavity  of  the  skull,  like  so
many  inner  partition  walls,  and  thereby  confine
each  hemisphere  and  lobe  of  the  brain  to  the
chamber  which  is  assigned  to  it,  without  its  being
liable  to  rest  upon,  or  intermix  with,  the  neigh-
bouring parts.  The  great  art  and  caution  of
packing,  is  to  prevent  one  thing  hurting  another.
This,  in  the  head,  the  chest,  and  the  abdomen,  6f
an  animal  body,  is,  amongst  other  methods,  pro-
vided for  by  membranous  partitions  and  wrap-
pings, which  keep  the  parts  separate.

The  above  may  serve  as  a  short  account  of  the
manner  in  which  the  principal  viscera  are  sus-
tained, in  their  places.  But  of  the  provisions  for
this  purpose,  by  far,  in  my  opinion,  the  most
curious,  and  where  also  such  a  provision  was
most  wanted,  is  in  the  guta.  It  is  pretty  evident,
that  a  long  narrow  tube  (in  man,  about  five  times
the  length  of  the  body)  laid  from  side  to  side  in
folds  upon  one  another,  winding  in  oblique  and
circuitous  directions,  composed  also  of  a  soft  and
yielding  'substance,  must,  without  some  extraor-
dinary precaution  for  its  safety,  be  continually
displaced  by  the  various,  sudden,  and  abrupt  mo-
tions of  the  body  which  contains  it.  I  should
expect  that,  if  not  bruised  or  wounded  by  every
mil,  or  leap,  or  twist,  it  would  he  entangled,  or  be
involved  with  itself;  or,  at  the  least,  supped  and
shaken  out  of  the  order  in  which  it  is  disposed,


*  Ches.  Anat.  p.  168.
JCbes.  Anat.  M67.


tKeiir»Anat.i».CT.
§  Ibid.


and*  which  order  is  necessary  to  be  preserved,  for
the  carrying  on  of  the  important  mictions  which
it  has  to  execute  in  the  animal  economy.  Let  us
see,  therefore,  how  a  danger  so  serious,  and  yet
so  natural  to  the  length,  narrowness,  and  tubular
form,  of  the  part,  is  provi<]ed  against  The  ex-
pedient is  admirable :  and  it  is  this.  The  intesti-
nal canal,  throughout  its  whole  process,  is  knit  to
the  edge  of  a  broad  fat  membrane  called  the
mesentery.  It  forms  the  margin  of  this  mesentery,
beingstitched  and  fastened  to  it  like  the  edging  of
a  ruffle :  beirig  four  tknes«  as  long  as  the  mesen-
tery itself,  it  is  what  a  sempstress  wool*}  call,
"  puckered  or  gathered  on"  to  it.  This  is  the
nature  of  the  connexion  of  the  gut  with  the  me-
sentery ;  and  being'thus  joined  to,  or  rather  made
a  part  of,  the  mesentery,  it  is  folded  and  wrapped
up  together  with  it.  Now  the  mesentery  having
a  considerable  dimension  in  breadth,  being  in  its
substance,  withal,  both  thick  and  suety,  is  capa-
ble of  a  close  and  safe  folding,  in  comparison  of
what  the  intestinal  tube  would  admit  of,  if  it  had
remained  loose.  The  mesentery  likewise  not
only  keeps  the  intestinal  canal  in  its  proper  place*
and  position  under  all  the  turns  and  windings  of
its  course,  but  sustains  the  numberless  small  ves-
sels, the  arteries,  the,  veins,  the  lvmpheducts,  and
above  all,  the  lacteals,  which  lead  from  or  to  al-
most every  point  of  its  coats  and  cavity.  This
membrane,  which  appears  to  be  the  great  support
and  security  of  the  aTimentary  apparatus,  ia  itself
strongly  tied  to  the  first  three  vertebra  of  the
loins.*

III.  A  third  general  property  of  animal  forms
is  beauty.  I  do  not  mean  relative  beauty,  or  that  of
one  individual  above  another  of  the  same  species,
or  of  one  species  compared  with  another  species ;
but'  I  mean,  generally,  the  provision  which  is
made  in  the  body  of  almost  every  animal,  to  adapt
its  appearance  to  the  perception  of  the  animals
with  which  it  converses.  In  our  own  species,  for
example,  only  consider  what  the  parts  and  mate-
rials are,  of  which  the  fairest  body  is  composed*;
and  no  farther  observation  will  be  necessary  to
show  how  well  these  things  are  wrapped  up,  so
as  to  form  a  mass  which  shaU  be  capable  of  sym-
metry in  its  proportion,  and  of  beauty  in  *  its
aspect :  how  the  oones  are  covered,  the  bowels
concealed,  the  roughnesses  of  the  muscle  smoothed
and  softened ;  ana  how  over  the  whole  is  drawn
an  integument,  which  converts  the  disgusting
materials  ef  a  dissecting-room  into  an  object  of
attraction  to  the  sight,  or  one  upon  which  it  rests,
at  least,  with  ease  and  satisfaction.  Much  of  this
effect  is  to  be  attributed,  to  the  intervention  of  the  cel-
lular or  adipose  membrane,  which  lies  immediately
under  the  skin ;  is  a  kind  of  lining  to  it ;  is  moist,
soft,  slippery,  and  compressible;  every  where
filling  up  the  interstices  of  the  muscles,  and
forming  thereby  their  roundness  and  flowing  line,
as  wallas  the  evenness  and  polish  of  the  whole
surface.

All  which  seems  to  be  a  strong  indication  of
design,  and  of  a  design  studiously  directed  to  this
purpose.  And  it  being  once  allowed,thal  such  *
purpose  existed  with  respect  to  any  of  the  produc-
tions of  nature,  we  may  refer,  with  a  considerable
degree  of  probability,  other  particulars  to  the  same
intention;  such  as  the  teints  of  flowers,  the
plumage  of  birds,  the  furs  of  beasts,  the  bright

*KeuTsAluU.p.4&


m


NATURAL  THEOLOGY.


scales  of  flshes,  the  painted  wings  of  butterflies
and  beetles,  the  rich  colours  and  spotted  lustre  of
many  tribes  of  insects.

There  are  parts  also  of  animals  ornamental,
and  the  properties  by  which  they  are  so,  not  sub-
servient, that  we  know  of,  to  any  other  purpose.
The  irides  of  most  animals  are  very  beautiful,
without  conducing  at  all,  by  their  beauty,  to  the
perfection  of  vision;  and  nature  could  in  no,  part
have  employed  her  pencil  to  so  much  advantage,
because  no  part  presents  itself  so  conspicuously
to  the  observer,  or  communicates  so  great  an  effect
to  the  whole  aspect.

In  plants,  especially  in  the  flowers  of  plants,  the
principle  of  beauty  holds  a  still  more  considerable
place  in  their  composition ;  is  still  more  confessed
than  in  animals.  Why.  for  one  instance  out  of  a
thousand,  does  the  corolla  of  the  tulip,  when  ad-
WAnced.to  its  size  and  maturity,  change  its  colour  1
The  purposes,  so  far  as  we  can  see,  of  vegetable
nutrition,  might  have  been  carried  on  as  well  by
its  continuing  green.  Or,  if  this  could  not  be  con-
sistently with  the  progress  of  vegetable  life,  why
break  into  such  a  variety  of  colours  1  This  is  no
proper  effect  of  age,  or  of  declension  in  the  ascent
of  the  sap;  tor  that;  like  the  autumnal  teints,
would  have  produced  one  colour  on  one  leaf,  with
marks  of  fading  and  withering.  It  seems  a  lame
account  to  call  it,  as  it  has  been  called,  a  disease
of  the  plant  Is  it  not  more  probable,  that  this
property,  which  isindependent,  as  it  should  seem,
of  the  wants  and  utilities  of  the  plant,  was  calcu-
lated for  beauty,  intended  for  display.

A  ground,  Iknow,  of  objection,  has  been  taken
against  the  whole  topic  of  argument,  namely,  that
there  is  no.  such  thing  as  beauty  at  all  j  in  other
words,  that  whatever  is  useful  and  familiar,  comes
of  course  to  be  thought  beautiful ;  and  that  things
appear  to  be  so,  only  by  their  alliance  with  these
qualities.  Our  idea  of  beauty  is  capable  of  being
in  so  great  a  degree  modified  by  habit,  by  fashion,
by  the  experience  of  advantage  or  pleasure,  and
by  associations  arising  out  of  that  experience,  that
a  question  lias  been  made,  whether  it  be  not  alto-
gether generated  by  these  causes,  or  would  have
any  proper  existence  without  them.  It  seems,
however,  a  carrying  of  the  conclusion  too  far,  to
deny, the  existence  of  the  principle,  viz.  a  native
capacity  of  perceiving  beauty,  on  account  of  an
influence,  or  of  varieties  proceeding  from  that  in-
fluence, to  which  it  is  subject,  seeing  that  princi-
ples the  most  acknowledged  are  liable  to  be  affect-
ed in  the  same  manner.  I  'should  rather  argue
thus:  The  question  respects  objects  of  Bight
Now  every  other  sense  hath  its  distinction  of
agreeable  and  disagreeable.  Some  tastes'  offend
the  palate,  others  gratify  it.  In  brutes  and  insects,
this  distinction  is  stronger  and  more  regular  than
la  man.  Every  horse,  ox,  sheep,  swine,  when  at
liberty  to  choose,  and  when  in  a  natural  state,
that  is,  when  not  vitiated  by  habits  forced  upon  it,
eats  and  rejects  the  same  plants.  Many  insects
which  feed  upon  particular  plants,  will  rather  die
than  change  their  appropriated  leaf:  All  this  looks
like  a  determination  in  the  sense  itself  to  particu-
lar tastes.  In-  like  manner,  smells  affect  the  nose
with  sensations  pleasurable  or  disgusting.  Some
sounds,  or  compositions  of  sound,  delight  the  ear;
others  torture  it.  Habit  can  do  much  in  all  these
cases,  (and  it  is  well  for  us  that  it  can;  for  it  is
this  power  which  reconciles  us  to  many  necessi-
ties:) but  has  the  distinction,  in  the  mean  time,  of


agreeable  and-  disagreeable^no  foundation  in  the
Sense  itself  1  What  .is  true  of  the  other  senses,  is
most  probably  true  of  the  ere,  (the  analogy  is  ir-
resistible,) viz:  that  there  belongs  to  it  an  original
constitution,  fitted  to  receive  ^pleasure  from  same
impressions,  and  pain  from  others.

I  do  not  however  know,  that  the  argument
which  alleges  beauty  as  a  final  caussyjests  upon
this  concession.  We  possess  a  sense  of  beauty,
however  we  come  by  it  It  in  fact  exists.  Things
are  not  indifferent  tathis  sense;  all  objects  do  not
suit  it;  many  which  we  see,  are  agreeable  to  it;
many  others  disagreeable,  ft  is  certainly  not  the
effect  of  habit  upon  the  particular  object,  because
the  most  agreeable  objects  are  often  the  moat  rare;
many,  which  are  very  common,  continue  to  be  of-
fensive. If  they  be  -made  supportable  by  habit,  it
is  all  which  habit  can  do;  they  never  become
agreeable.  If  this  sense,  therefore,  be  acquired,  it
is  a  result;  the  produce  of  numerous  and  compli-
cated actions  of  external  objects  upon  the  senses,
and  of  the  mind  upon  its  sensations.  With  this
result,  there  must  be  a  certain  eongruity  to  ena-
ble any  particular  object  to  please :  and  that  eon-
gruity, we  contend,  is  consulted  in  the  aspect
which  is  given  to  animal  and  vegetable  bodies,

IV.  The  skin  and  severing  of  animals  is  that
upon  which  their  appearance  chiefly  expends;
and  it  is  that  part  which,  perhaps,  in  all  animals
is  most  decorated,  and  most  free  front  impurities.
But  were  beauty,  or  agreeableness  of  aspect,  en-
tirely out  of  the  question,  there  is  another  purpose
answered  by  this  integument,  and  by  the  colloca-
tion of  the  parts  of  the  body  beneath  it,  which  is
of  still  greater  importance;  and  that  panose  is
concealment.  Were  it  possible  to  view  ttooach
the  skin  the  mechanism  of  our  bodies,  the  tight
would  frighten  us  out  of  our  wits.  "  Durst  we
make  a  single  movement,"  asks  a  lfrely  French
writer,  "or  stir  a  step  from  the  place  we  weae in,
if  we  saw  our  blood  circulating,  the  tendons  pull-
ing, the  lungs  blowing,  the  numours  filtrating,
and  all  the  incomprehensible  assemblage  of  fibres^
tubes,  pumps,  valves,vcurrents,  pivots,  which  sus-
tain an  existence  at  once  so  frail,  and  so  presump-
tuous?"

V.  Of  animal  bodies,  considered  as  masses,
there  is  another  property,  more  curious  than  it  is
generally  thought  to  be;  which  is  the  faculty  of
standing :  and  it  is  more  remarkable  in  two-leg-
ged animals  than  in  quadrupeds,  and,  moat  of  all,
as  being  the  tallest,  and  resting  upon  the  smallest
base,  in  man.  There  is  more,  1  think,  in  the  mat-
ter than  we  are  aware  of.  The  statue  of  a  man,
placed  loosely  upon  its  pedestal,  would  not  be  se-
cure of  standing  half  an  hour.  You  are  obliged
to  fix  its  feet  to  the  block  by  bolts  and  solder;  of
the  first  shake,  the  first  gust  of  wind,  is  sore  to
throw  it  down.  Yet  this  statue  shall  express  all
the  mechanical  proportions  of  a  living  model.  It
is  jiot,  therefore,  the  mere  figure,  or  merely  placing
the  centre  of  gravity  within  the  base,  that  is  suffi-
cient: Either  the  law  of  gravitation  is  suspended
in  favour  of  living  substances,  or  something  mors
is  done  for  them,  in  order  to  enable  them  to  up-
hold their  posture.  There  is  no  reason  whatever
to  doubt,  but  that  their  parts  descend  by  gravita-
tion in  the  same  manner  as  those  of  dead  master.
The  gift,  therefore,  appears  to  me  to  consist  in  a
faculty  of  perpetually  shifting  the  centre  of  gra-
vity, by  a  set  of  obscure,  indeed,  but  of  quick
balancing  actions,  so  as  to  keep  the  line  of  di-


NATURAL  THEOLOGY.


49*


lection,  which  1*  a  Hne  drawn  from  that  centre  to,
*  the  ground,  within  its  prescribed  limits.  Of  these
Actions  it  may  he  observed,  first,  that  they  in  part
constitute  what  we  call  strength.  The  dead  body
drops  down.  The  mere  adjustment,  therefore,  of
weight  and  pressure,  which  may  be  the  same  the
moment  after  death  as  the  moment  before,  does
not  support  the  column.  In  cases  also  of  extreme
weakness,  the  patient  cannot  stand  upright.  Se-
condly, tttat  these  actions  are  only  in-  a  small  de-
feres  Voluntary;  A.  man  is.  seldom  .conscious  of
Eis  voluntary  powers  in  keeping  himself  upon  his
legs..  A  child  learning  to  walk  is  the  greatest
gokure-maker  in  the  world  :  but  art,  if  it  may  be
so  called,  sinks  into  habit;  and  he  is  soon  able  to
jprise  himself  in  a  great  variety  of  attitudes,  with-
out being  sensible  -either  of  caution  or  effort.  But
■till  there  must  be  an  aptitude  of  parts,  upon
whkh  habit  can  thus  attach ;  a  previous  capacity
of  motions  whkh  the  animal  is  thus  tanght  to  ex-
ercise :  and  the  facility  with  which  this  tixereise
U  acquired,  forms  one  object  of  our  admiration.
What  part*  are  principally  employed,  or  in  what
manner  each  contributes  its  office,  is,  as  hath  al-
ready been  confessed,  dimcult  to  explain.  Per-
haps the  obscure  motion  of  the  bones  of  the  feet
may  have  their  share  in  this  effect  They  are  put
In  action  by  every  slip  or  vacillation  of  the  body,
and  seem  to  assist  in  restoring  its-balance.  Cer-
tain it  is,  that  this  circumstance  in  the  structure
of  the  foot,  viz.  its  being  composed  of  many  small
bones,  applied  to  and  articulating  with  one  ano-
ther^by  diversely  shapedsurfaces,  instead  of  being
made  of  one  piece,  like  the  last  of  a  shoe,  is  very
remarkable.  I  suppose  also. that  it  would  he  diffi-
cult to  stand  firmly  upon  stilts  or  wooden  legs,
though  their  base  exadtly  imitated  the  figure  and
dimensions  of  the  sole  of  the  foot. .  The  alteration
of  the  joists,  the  knee-joint  bending  backward,
the  hip-joint  forward ;  the  flexibility,  m  every  di-
rection, of  the  tpine.  especially,  in  the  loins  and
aeck,  appear  to  be  of  great  moment  in  preserving
the  equffibnum  of -the  body.  With  respect  to  tms
last  circumstance,  it  is  observable,  that  the  verte-
bra *are*  so  oonfined  by  ligaments  as  to  allow  no
more  slipping  upon  their  bases,  than  what  is  just
sufficient  to  break  the  shock,  which  any  violent
motion  may  occasion  to  the  body.  A  certain  de-
gree also  of  tension  of  the  sinews  appears  to  be
essential  to  an  erect  posture ;  for  it  is -by  the  loss
of  this,  that  the  dead  or  paralytic  body,  drops  down.
The  whole  is  a  wonderful  result  of-  combined
powers,  and  of  very  complicated  operations. ,  In-
deed, that  standing  is  not  so  simple  a  business  as
we  imagine  it  to  be,  is  evident  from  the  strange
gesticulations  of  a  drunken  man,  who  has  lost  the
government  of  the  centre  of  gravity.
,  We  have  said  that  this  property  is  the  most  wor-
my of  observation  in  the  human  body :  but  a  bird-
jesting  upon  its  perch,  or  hopping  upon  a  spray,
affords  no  mean  specimen  of  the  same  faculty.  A
chicken  runs  off  as  soon  as  it  is  hatched  from  the
egg;  ye*  a  chicken,  considered  geometrically,  and
with  relation  to  its  centra  of  gravity,  its  line  of  di-
rection, and  its  equilibrium,  is  a  very  irregular  so-
lid. Is  this  gift,  therefore,  or  instruction  ?  May
It  not  be  said  to  be  with  great  attention,  that  na-
ture hath  balanced  the  body  upon  its  pivots  1

I  observe  also  in  the  same  bird  a  piece  of  use-
mi  mechanism  of  this  kind. In  the  trussing  of  a
fowl,  upon  bending  the  legs  and  thighs  up  towards
me  body,  the  cook  finds  that  the  daws  close  of
3H


their  own  accord. -  Now  let  it  be  remembered,
that  this  iasthe  position  of  the  limbs,  in  which  the
bird  rests  upon  its  perch.  And  in  tins  position  it
sleeps  in  safety ;  tor  the  daws  do  their  office  in
keeping  hold  of  the  support,  not  by  any  exertfon
of  voluntary  power,  which  sleep  might  suspend,
but  by  the  traction  of  the  tendons  in  consequence
of  the  attitude  which  the  lees  and  thighs  take  by
the  bird  sitting  down-,  and  to  which  the  mete
weight  of  the  body  gives  the  force  that  is'neces-

VI.  Regarding  the  human  body  as  amass;  re-
garding the  general  conformations  which  obtain
in  it;  regarding  also  particular  parts  in  respect
to  those  conformations;  we  shall  be  led  to  ob-
serve what  1  call  "  interrupted  analogies."  The
following  are  examples  of  what  I  mean  by  these
terms;  and  I  do  notTtnow  how  such  critical  de-
viations can,  by  any  possible  hypothesis,  be  ac-
counted for  without  design.

1.  All  the  bones  of  the  body  are  covered  with  a
periosteum,  except  the  teeth ;  where  it  ceases,  and
an  enamel  of  ivory  which  saws  arid  files  will  hard*
ly  touch,  comes  into  its  place.  No  one  can  doubt
of  the  use  and  propriety  of  this  difference ;  of  the'
"  analogy"  being  thus  "  interrupted ;"  of'the  rule,  -
which  belongs  to  the  conformation  of  the  bones,
stopping. where  it  does-stop:  for  had  so  exquisitely-
sensible  a  membrane  as  the  periosteum  invested
the*  teeth,  as  it  invests  every  other  bone  of  the  body,
their  action,  necessary  exposure,  and  irritation,
would  have  subjected  the  animal  to  continual  pain.
General  as  it  is,  it  was  not  the  sort  of  integument
which  suited  the  teeth;  what  they  stood  in  need
of,  was  a  strong,  hard,  insensible,  defensive  coat :
and  exactly  such  a  covering  is  given  to  them,-  in
the  ivory  enamel  which  adheres  to  their  surface;

£  Tto  scarf-skin,  which  clothes  all  the  rest  of
the  body,  gives  way,  at  the  extremities  Of  the  toes
and  fingers,  to  nails.  A  man  has  only  to  look  at
bis  band  to  observe  with  what  nicety  and  pred-
sion  that  covering,  which  extends  over  every  other
part,  is'  here  superseded  by  e  different  substance,
and  a  different  texture.  .Now,  if  either  the  rule,
had  been  necessary,  of  the  deviation  from  it  acci-
dental, this  effect  would  not  be  seen. '  When  I
speak  of  the  rule  being  necessary,  I  mean  the
formation  of  the  skin  upon  the  surface  being  pro-
duced by  a  set  of  causes  constituted  without  de-
sign ana  acting,  as  all  ignorant  causes  must  act;
by  a  genera]  operation.  Were  this  the  case,  no
account  could  be  given  of  the  operation  being  sus-
pended at  the-fingers'  ends.  or. on  the  back  next  of
the  .fingers,  and  hot  en  the  fore  part.  On  the
other  hand :  if  the  deviation  were  accidental,  an
error,  an  anomalism ;  were  it  any  thing  else  than
settled  by  intention ;  we  should  meet  with  nails
upon  other  parts  of  the  body.  They  would  be  scat-
tered over  the  surface,  like  warts  or  pimples. '

3.  All  the  great  cavities  of  the  body  are  enclosed
by  membranes,  except  the  skull.  Why.  should
not  She  brain'  be-  content  with  the  same  covering
as  that  which  serves  for  the  other  principal  organs
of  the  body  1  The  heart,  the  lungs,  the  liverv  the
stomach,  the  bowels,  have -all  soft  integuments,
and  nothing  else.  The  muscular  coats  are  all  soft
and  membranous.  I  can  see  a  reason  for  this  dis-
tinction in  the  final  cause,  but  in  no  other.  The
importance  of  the  brain  to  life,  (which  experience
proves  to  he  immediate,)  And  the  extreme  tender-
ness of  its  substance,  make  a  solid  case  more  ne-
cessary for  it,  than  for  any  other  part;  and  such  a


496


NATURAL  THEOLOGY.


ease  tfce  baldness  of  the  skull  supplies.  When
the  smallest  portion  of  this  natural  casket  is  lost.
how  carefully,  yet  how  imperfectly,  is  it  replaced
by  a  plate  of  metal !  If  an  anatomist  should  say,
that  this  bony  protection  is  not  confined-to  the
brain,  hut  is  extended  along  tip  course*  of  the
■pine,  I- answer  that  he  adds  strength  to  fhe  argur
ment.  If  he  remaik,  that  the  chest  also  is  forti-
fied by  bones;  I  reply,  that  I.  should  have  alleged
this  instance  myself,  if  the  rib*  had  not  appeared
subservient  to  the  pocpose  of  motion,  as  well  as
of  defence.  What  distinguishes  the  skull  from
every  other  cavity  is,  that  the  'bony  covering  com-
pletely surrounds  its  contents,  and  la  calculated,
not  for  motion,  but  solely  for  defence.  Those  hol-
lows, likewise,  and  inequalities,  which  we  observe
in  the  inside  of  the  skull,  and  which  exactly  fit
the  folds  of  the  brain,  answer  the  important  de-
sign of  keeping  the  substance  of  the  brain  steady,
and  of  guarding  it  against  conclusions.


CHAPTER  XIL

Comparative  Anatomy.

WhSNSVer  we  find  a  general  plan  punned,
yet  with  such  variations  in  it  as  are,  in  each,  case,
required  by  the  particular  exigency  of  the  subject
to  which  it  ia  applied,  we  possess,  in  such  plan
and  such  adaptation,  the  strongest  evidence  that
can  be  afforded  of  -intelligence  and  design ;'  an  evi-
dence which,  most,  completely  excludes  every
other  hypothesis.  If  the  general  plan  proceeded
from  any  fixed  necessity -hy  the  nature  of  things,
how  could  it-  accommodate  itself  to  the  various
wants  and  uses  which  it  had  to  serve  under  differ-
ent -circumstances,  and  on  different  occasions?
Arkwright*  mill  was  invented  for  the  spinning
ef  cotton.  We  see  it  employed  for  the  spinning
of  wod;  flax,  and  \hemp,  with  such  modincations
of  the  original  principle,  *such  variety  in  the  same
plan, -as-  toe  texture  of  those  different  materials
rendered  necessary.  Of  the  machine's  being  put
together  with  design,  if  H  were  possible  to  doubt,
whilst  we  saw  it  only  under  one  mode,  and  in  one
form;  whan  we  came  to  observe  it  in  its  different
amplications,  with  such  changes  of  structure,  such
additions  and  supplements,  as  the  special  and  par-
ticular use  in  each  case  demanded,  we  could  not
refuse  any  longer  our  assent  to  the  proposition,
"  that  intelligence,  properly  and  strictly  no  called,
(including  under  that  name,  foresight,  considera-
tion, reference  to  utility,)  had  been  employed,  as
well  in  the  primitive  plan,  as  in  the  several  changes
and  accommodations  which  it  is  made  to  undergo."
t  Very  much  of  this  reasoning  is,  applicable  to
what  has  been  called  Comparative  Anatomy.  In
their  general  economy,  in  the  outlines  of  the  plan,
in  the  construction  as  well  as  offices  of  their  prin-
cipal parts,  there -exists  between  all  large  terres-
trial animals  a  close  resemblance.  In  all,  life  is
sustained,  and  the  body  nourished,  by  nearly  the
same  apparatus.  The  heart,  the  lungs,  the  sto-
mach, the  Jiver,  the  kidneys,  are  much  alike  in  all.
The  same  fluid  (for  no  distinction  of  blood  has
been  observed)  circulates  through  their  vessels,
and  nearly,  in  the  same  order.  The  same  cause
therefore,  whatever  that  cause  was,  has  been  con-
cerned in  the  origin,  has  governed  the  production,
of  these  different  acimaltonm *


When  we  pass  on  to  srnaDer  animals^orto  the
inhabitants  of  a  different  element,  the  resemblance
becomes  more  distant  and  more  obscure j  but  still
the  plan  accompanies  ua.

And,  what  we  can  never  enough  commend,  and
which  it  is  our  business  at  present  to  exemplify,
the  plan  is  attended,  through  all  its  varieties  and
deflections,  by  subserviences  to  special  occasions
and  utilities.

1.  The  covering  of  different  animals  (though
whether  I  am  correct  in  classing  this  under  their
anatomy,  I  do  not  know,)  is  the  first  thuuj  which
presents  itself  to  our  observation,;  ami  is,  in  truth,
both  for  its  variety  and  its  suitableness  to  their
several  natures,  as  much  to  be  admired  aa  any
part  of  their  structure.  We  have  bristles,  hair,
wool,  furs,  feathers,  quills,  prickles,  scales ;  yet  in
this  diversity  both  of  material  and  form,  we  can-
not change  one  animal's  coat  for  another,  without
evidently  changing -it  for  the  worse;  taking  care
however  to  remark,  that  these  coverings  *rev  in
many  eases,  armour  as  well  as  dothing?  intended
forprotection  as  well  as .  warmth.

The  human  animal  is  the  only  ene  which  w
naked,  and  the  only  one  which  can  clothe  itself.
This  ia  one  of  the  properties  which  render*  him
an  animal  of  all  donates,  and  of  all  seasona  Ha
can  adapt  the  warmth  or  lightness  of  his  covering
to  the  temperature  of  his  habitation.  Had  he
been  born  with  a  fleece  upon  his  back,  although
he  might  have  been  comforted  by  its  warmth  m
high  latitudes,  it  would  have  oppressed  him  by  Ha
weight,  and  heat,  as  the  species  spmad  towards
the  equator.

What  art,  however,  does,  for  men,  nature  has,
in  many'instances,  done  for  those  animals  which
are  incapable  of  art.  •  Their  clothing,  of  its  own
accord,  changes  with  their  necessities.  This  is
particularly  the  case  with  that  large  tribe  of  qua-
drupeds which  are  covered  with  fur*.  Every
dealer  in  hare-skins, 'and  rabbit-skins,  knows  how
much  the  fur  is  thickened  by  the  approach  of
winter.  It  seems  to  be  a  part  of  the  same  consti-
tution 4md  the  same  design,  that  wool,  in  hot
countries,  degenerates,  as  it  is  called,  but  in  truth
(most  happily  for  the  animal's  ease)  passes  into
hair;  whilst,  on  the  contrary,  that  .hair,  ia  the
dogs  of  the  polar  regions,  is  turned  into  wool,  or
something  very  like  it.  To  which  may  be  refer-
red, what  naturalists  have  remarked,  that  bears,
wolves,  foxes,  hares,  which  do  not  take  the  water,
have  the  fur  much  thicker  on  the  back  than  the
belly-:  whereas  in  the  beaver  it  is  the  »hjfkwit
upon  the  belly ;  as  are  the  feathers  in  water  fowl.
We  know  the  final  cause  ctf  all  this;  and  we
know  no  other.  ~ •

The  covering  of  birds  cannot  escape  the  'moat
vulgar  observation.  .  Its  lightness,-  its  smooth-
ness, its  warmth; — Che  disposition  of  the  feathers
all  inclined  backward,  the  down  about  their  stena*
the  overlapping  .of  their  tips,  their  different  con-
figuration in  different  parts,  not  to  mention  the
variety  of  their  colours,  constitute  a  vestment  for
the  body,  so  beautiful,  and  so  appropriate  to  the
life  which  the  animal  is  to  lead,  as  thatl  I  think,
we  should  have  had  no  conception  of  any  thing
equally  perfect,  if  we  had  never  seen  it,  or  can
now  imagine  any  thing  more  so.  Let  us  suppose
(what  is  possible  only  in  supposition)  a  person
who  had  never  seen  a  bird,  to  be  presented  with
a  {tracked  pheasant,  and  bid  to  set  his  wits  to*
work,  how  to  contrive  for  it  a  covering  which


NATURAL  THEOLOGY.


497


shall  unite  the  equalities  of  warmth,  levitjL  and
least  resistant  to  the  air,  and  the  highest  degree
of  each ;  giving  it  also  as  much  of  beauty  and  ox-
v  nament  as  he  could  afford.  Ho  is  the  person  to
behold  the  work  of  the  Deity,  in  jtfds  part  of  his
creation,  with  the  sentiment*  which  are  due
to  it.

The  commendation,  which  the  general  aspect
of  the  feathered  world  seldom  fails  of  exciting,
will  be  increased  by  farther  examination.  It  is
one  ofthose  cases  in  which  the  philosopher  has
more  to  admire,  than  the  common  observer.  Ij>ery
feather.  \b  a  mechanical  Wonder.  If  we  look  at
the  quill  we  find  properties  not,  easily  brought
together — strength  and  lightness.  I  Know  few
things  more  remarkable  Ian  the  strength  and
lightness  of  the  very  pen  with  which  I -am  writing.
If  we  cast  our  eye  to  the  upper  part  of  the  stem,
we  see  a  material  made  for  the  purpose,  usee1  in
no  other  class  of  animals,  and  in  no  other  part  of
birds ;  tough,  light,  pliant,  elastic.  The  pith,  afco,
Vhich  feeds  tlie  feathers,  is,  amongst  animal  sub-
stances, sui  generis;  neither  bone,  flash,  mem-
brane, nor  tendon.*

But  the  artificial  part  of  the  feather  is  the  beard,
or,  as  it  is  sometimes,  I  believe,  called;  the  vaJ\e.
By  the  beards  are  meant,  what  are  fastened  on
.each  side  of  the  stem,  and  what  constitute  the
breadth  of  the  feather ;  what  we  usually  strip  off
from  one  side  or  both,  when  we  make  a  pen.  The
separate  pieces  or  lamina?,  of  which  the  beard  i»
oomposed,  are  called  threads,  sometimes  filaments,
or  rays.  Now  the  first  thing  which  an'  attentive
observer  will  remark  is,  how  much  stronger
the  beard  of  the  feather  shows  itself  to  be,  when
„  pressed  in  a  direction  perpendicular  to  its  plane,
than  when  rubbed,  either  up  or  down,  in  the
line  of  the  stem;  and  he  will  soon  discover  the
structure  which  occasions  this  difference,  viz.  that
the  lamins  whereof  these  beards  are  composed,
are  ti&L  and  placed  with  their  flat  side  towards
each  other;  by  which  means,  whilst  they  easily
bend  for  the  approaching  of  each  other,  as  any  one
may  perceive  by  drawing  his  finger  ever  so  lightly
upwards,  they  are  much  harder  to  bend  out  of
their  plane,  which  is  the  direction  in  which  they
have  to  encounter  die  impulse  and  pressure  of  the
air,  and  in  which  their  strength  is  wanted,  and
put  to  the  trial

This  is  one  particularity  in  the  structure  of  a
leather;  a  second  is  still  'more  extraordinary.
Whoever  examines  a  feather,  cannot  help  taking
notice,  that  the  threads  or  lamins  of  which  we
have  been  speaking,  in  their  natural  state,  unite ;
that  their  union  is  something  more  than  the  mere
apposition  of  loose  surfaces;  that  they  are  not
parted  asunder  without  some  degree  of  force;
that  nevertheless  there  k '  no  glutinous  cohesion
between  them ;  that  therefore,  by  some  mechani-
cal ineans  or  other,  they  catch  or  clasp  among
themselves,  thereby  giving  to  the  beard  or  vane
its  closeness  and  compactness  of  texture.  Nor  is
this  all :  when  two  laminaa,  which  nave  been  scpa>
lated  by  accident  or  <  force,  are  brought  together
again,  they  immediately  reclasp :  the  connexion,
Whatever  it  was,  is  perfectly  recovered,  and  the
beard  of  the  feather  oecomes  as  smooth  and  firm

+  The  quill  part  of  a  feather  is  composed  of  circular
and  longitudinal  fibres.  In  making  a  pen  you  must
■crape  off  toe  coat  of  circular  fibres,  or  the  quill  will
split  la  a  ragged,  Jagged  manner,  making  what  boys  call
certfssO.


as  if  nothing,  had  happened  to  it  Draw  you*
finger  down  the  feather,  which  is  against  the
gram,  and  you  break,  probably,  the  junction  of
some  of  the  contiguous  '  threads ;  *  draw  your
finger  up  the  feather,  and  you  restore  all  things
to  their  former  state.  This  is  no  common-  con-
trivance :  and  now  for  the  mechanism  by  wtnoh.it
is  effected.  The  threads  or  lamina)*  above-men-
tioned are  interlaced  with  one  another:  and  the
interlacing  is  performed  by  means  of  a  wist  nutnber
of  fibres,  or  teeth,  which  the  lamina?  shoot  forth  on
each  aide,  and  which  hook  and  grapple  together.
A  friend  of  mine  counted  fifty  of  these  fibres  in»
one  twentieth  of  an  inch.  These  -  fibres  are
crooked ;  but  curved  after  a  "different  manner:  lor
those  which  proceed  from  the  thread  on  the  side
towards  the -extremity  of  the  feather,  are  longer,
more  flexible,  and  bent  downward^  whereas  those
which  proceed  from  the  side  towards  the  begin-
ning, or  quill-end  of  the  feather,  are  shorter,  firmer,
and  turn  upwards.  The  process  then  which  takes
place,  is  as  follows:  when  two  lamina?  are  press-
ed-together,  so  that  these  long  fibres-  are  forced
lac  enough  over  the  short  ones,  their  crooked
parts  fajl  into  the  cavity  made  by.  the  crooked
parte  of  the  others ;  just  as  the  latch  that  is  festen-
ed  to  a  door,  enters  into  the.  cavity. of  the  catch  -
fixed  to  the  door-post,  and  there  hooking  itself,
fastens  the  door ;  lor  it  is  properly  in  this-  manner,
that  one  thread  of  a  feather  is  fastened  to  the
other. .

This  admirable  structure  of  the  feather,  which
it  is  easy  to  see  with  the  microscope,  succeeds  per-
fectly for  the  use  to  which  naturahas  designed  it,;
which  use  was  not  only  that  the  fctmina>  might  he
united,  but  that  when  one  thread  or  lamina  has
been  separated  'from  another  by  some  external
violence,  it  might  be  reclasped  with  sufficient  faci-
lity and  expedition.*

In  the  ostrich,  this  apparatus  of  crochets  and
fibres,  of  hooks  and  teeth,  is  wanting:  and  we  see
the  consequence  of  the  want.  The  fflaments
hang  loose  and  separate  from  one  another,  forming
only  a  kind  of  down;  which  constitution  of  the
feathers,  however  it  may  fit  them  for  the  flowing
honours  of  a  lady's  head-dress,  may  be  reckoned
an  imperfection  in  the  bird,  inasmuch  as  wings,
composed  of  these  feathers,  .although  they  'may

atly  assist  it  in.  running,  <do  not  serve  for

ht. *  ^

But  under  the  present  division  of  oui  subject,
our  business  with  feathers,  is,  as  they  are  the  co-
wring-  of  the  bird.  And  herein  a  singular  circum-
stance occurs.  In  the  small  order  of  birds  which
winter  with  us,  from  a  snipe  downwards,  let  the
external  colour  of  the  feathers  be  what  it  wilL
their  Creator  has  universally  given  them  a  bed  01
black  down  next  their  bodies.  Black,  we  know,
is  the  warmest  colour :  and  the  purpose  here  is,  to
keep  ire  the  heat,  arising  from  the  heart  and  circu-
lation of  the  blood.  It  is  farther  likewise  remark-
able, that  this  is  not  found  in  larger  birds;  for
which  there  is  also  a 'reason: — small' birds  are
much  more  exposed  to  the  cold  than  large  ones;
forasmuch  as  they  present,  in  proportion  to  their
bulk,  a  much  larger  surface  to  the  air.  If  a  turkey
were  divided  into  a  number  of  wrens  (supposing
the  shape  of  the  turkey  and  the  wren  to  be  smu-


*  The  above  account  it  taken  from  Memoirs  fhr  a
Natural  History  of  Animals,  by  the  Royal  Academy  of
Paris,  published  in  1701,  p.  219.


408


NATURAL  THEOLOGY.


lax,)  the  surface  of  all  the  wren*  would  exceed
the  surface  of  the  turkey,  in  the  proportion  of  the
length,  breadth  (or,  of  any  homologous  line,  J  of  a
turkey  to  that  of*  wren ;  which  would  be,  perhaps,
'a  proportion  of  ten  to  one.  It  was  necessary
therefore  that  small  birds  should  be  more  warmly
clad  than^Jarge  ones :  and  this  seems  lo  be'  the
expedient  by  which,  that  exigency  is  provided
for.

II.  In  comparing  different  animals,  I  know  nopart
of  their  structure  which  exhibits  greater  variety,
or  in  that  variety,  a  nicer  accommodation  to  their
respective  cojnveniency,  than  that  which  is  seen
in  the  different  formation*  of  their  mouths.  Whe-
ther the  purpose  be  the  reeepuWof  aliment  mere-
ly, or  the  catching  of  prey,  the  picking  up  of  seeds,
ine  cropping  of  herbage,  the  extraction  of  juices,
the  suction  of  liquids,  the  breaking  and  grinding
Of  food,  the  taste  of  thai  food,  together  with  the
respiration  of  air,  and,  in  conjunction  with  it,  the
utterance  of  sound ;  these  various  offices  are  as-
signed to  this  one  part,  and  in  different  species,
provided  for,  as  they  are  wanted,'  by  its  different
constitution.  In  the  human  species,  forasmuch
as  there  are  harids  to  convey  the  food  to  the  mouth,
the' mouth  is  flat,  and  by  reason  of  its  flatness,
fitted  only  for  reception ;  whereas  the  projecting
jaws,  the  wide  rictus,  the  pointed  teeth  of  the  dog
and  his  affinities,  enable  them  to  apply  their
months  to  snatch  and  seize  the  objects  of  their
pursuit  The  full  lips,  the  rough  tongue,  the
corrugated  cartilaginous  palate,  the  broad  cutting
teeth  of  the  ox.  the  deer,  the  horse,  and  the  sheep,
qualify  this  tribe  for  browing  upon  their  pasture ;
either  gathering  large  moutnfuls  at  -once,  where
the  grass  is  long,  which  is  the  case  with  the  ox
in  particular;  or  biting  close,  where  it  is  short,
which  the  horse  and  the  sheep  are  able  to  do,  in  a
degree  that  one  could  hardly  expect.  '  The  retired
under-jaw  of  a  swine  works  in  the  ground,  after
the  protruding  snout,  like  a  prong  or  plough-share,
has  made  its  way  to  the  roots  upon  which  it  foods.
A  conformation  so  happy,  was  not  the  gift  of
chance.

-  In  birds,  this  organ  assumes  a  new  character;
new  both  in  substance  and  in  form :  but  in  both,
wonderfully  adapted  to  the  wants  and  uses  of  a
distinct  mode  of  existence.  We  have  no  longer
the  ieshy  lips,  the  teeth  of  enamelled  bone;  but
we  have,  in  the  place  of  these  two  parts,  and.  to
perform  the  office  ot  bath,  a  hard  substance  (of  the
same*  nature  with  that  which  composes  the  nails,
clawB^and  hoofs,  of  quadrupeds,)  cut  out  into
proper  shapes,  and  mechanically  suited  to  the  ac-
tions which  are  wanted.  The  sharp  edge  and
tempered  point  of  the  sparrow's  bill  picks  almost
every  kino  of  seed  from  its  concealment  in  the
plant :  and  not  only  so,  but  hulls  the  grain,  breaks
and  shatters  the  coats  of  the  seed,  in  order  to  get
at  the  kernel.  The  hooked  beak  of  the  hawk
tribe  separates  the  flesh-  from  the  bones  of -the  ani-
mals which  it  feeds  upon,  almost  with  the  clean-
ness and  precision  or  a  dissector's  knife.  The
butcher-bird  transfixes  its  prey  upon  the  spike  of
a  thorn,  whilst  it  picks  its  hones.  In  some  birds
of  this  class,  we  have  the  cross-bill,  i.  e.  both  the
upper  and  lower  bill  hooked,  and  their  tips  cross-
ing. The  spoon-bill  enables  the  goose  to  graze,
to  collect  its  food  from  the  bottom  of  pools,  or  to
seek  it  amidst  the  soft  or  liquid  substances  with
which  it  is  mixed.  The  long  tapering  bill  of  the
snipe  and  woodcock,  penetrates  still  deeper  in$o


moist  earth,  which  is  the  bed  in  which  the  feod  of
that  species  is  lodged.  This  is  exactly  the  instru-
ment which  the  animal  wanted.  It  did  not  want
strength  in  its  bill,  which  was  inconsistent  with
the  slender  form  of  the  animal's  neck,  as  Well  as
unnecessary  for  the  kind  of  aliment  upon  which
it  subsists ;  but  it  wanted  length  to  reach  its  ob-
ject

But  the  species  of  bill  which  belongs  to  the  birds
that  live  by  suction,  deserves  to  be  described  in  its
relation  to  that,  office.  They  are  what  naturalists
call  serrated  or  dentated  bills ;  the  inside  of  them
towards  the  edge,  being  thickly  set  With  parallel
or  concentric  rows  of  short,  strong,  sharp-pointed
prickles.  These,  though  they  should  he -called
teeth,  are  not  for  the  purpose  of  mastication,  like
the  teeth  of  quadnrpeds ;  nor  yet,  as  in  fish,  for
the  seizing  and  retaining  of  their  prey;  but  for  a
quite  different  use.*  They  form  a  filter.  The
duck  by  means  of  them  discusses  the  mud;  exa-
mining with  great  accuracy  the  puddle,  the  brake,
every  mixtnre  which  is  likely  to  contain  her  food.
Tbe  operation  is  thus  carried  on : — The  liquid  or
semi-liquid  substances,  in  which  the  animal  has
plunged  her  bill, 'she  draws,  by  the  action  of  her
lungs,  through  the  narrow  interstices  which  lie
between  these  teeth ;  catching,  as  the  stream  passes
across  her  beak,  whatever  it  may  happen  to  bring
along  with  it,  that  proves  agreeable-to  her  choice,
and  easily  dismissing  all  the  rest.  Now,' suppose
the  purpose  to  have  been  out  of  a  mass  of  confused
and  heterogeneous:  substances,  to  separate  for  the
use  of  the  animal,  or  rather  to  enable  the  animal
'to  separate  for.  its  own,  those  few  particles  which
suited  its  taste  and  digestion ;  what  more  artificial,
or  more  commodious,  instrument  ^  of  selection,
could  have  been  given  to  it,  than  this  natural
filter  1  It  has  been  observed  also  (what  must  en-
able the  bird  to  choose  and  distinguish  with  greater
acutencss,  as  well,  probably,  as  what  greatly  in-
creases its  luxury,)  that  the  bills  of  tms  species
are  furnished  with  large  nerves, — that  they  are
covered  with  a  skin,— and  that  the  nerves  ron
down  to  the  very  extremity.  In  the  curlew,  wood-
cock, and  snipe,  there  are  three  pairs  of  nerves,
equal  almost  to  the  optic  nerve  in  thickness,  which
pass  first  along  the  roof  of  (he  mouth,  and  then
along  the  upper  chap  down  to  the  paint  of  the
bill,  long  as  the  bill  is.

But  to  return  to  the  train  of  our  observations. —
The  similitude  between  the  bills  of  birds  and  the
mouths  of  quadrupeds,  is  exactly  suctL  as,  for  the
sake  of  the  argument,  might  be  wished  for.  It  is
near  enough  to  show  the  continuation  of  the  same
plan':  it  is  remote  enough  to  exclude  the  supposi-
tion of  the  difference  being  produced  by  action  or
use.  A  more  prominent  contour,  or  a  wider  gap.
might  be  resolved  into  the"  effect  of  continued
efforts,  on  the  part  of  the  species,  to  thrust  out  the
mouth,  or  open  it  to  the  stretch.  But  by  what
course  of  action,  or  exercise,  or  endeavour,  shall
we  get  rid  of  the  lips,  the  gums,  the  1eeth;  and
acquire,  in  the  place  of  them,  piifcers  of  horn  1  By
what  habit  shall  we  so  completely  change,  not
only  the  shape  of  the  part,  but  the  substance  of
which  it  is  composed  1  m  The  truth  is,  if  we  had
seen  no  other  than  the  mouths  of  quadrupeds,  we
should  have  thought  no  other  could  have  been
formed :  little  could  we  have  supposed,  that  all  the
purposes  of  a  month,  famished  with  lips,  and
armed  with  teeth,  could  be  answered  by  an  instru-
ment  which  had  none  of  these;  could  be  supplied,


NATURAL  THEOLOGY.


end  Chat  with  many  additional  advantages,  by  the
fetidness,  and  sharpness,  and  figure^,  of  the  bilk
ofbtrde.  Every  thing  about  the  animal's  mouth
is  mechanical.  The  teeth  of  fish'  have  their  points
turned  backward,  like  the  teeth  of  a  wool  or  cotton
card.  The  teeth,  of  lobsters  work  one  against  an-
other, like  the  sides  of  a  pair  ofsheart.  In  many
insects,  the  month  is~  converted  into  a  pomp  or
■acker,  fitted  at  the  end  sometimes  with  a,  wimble,
■ometunes'with'a  forceps;  by  which  double  pro-
visions, viz.  of  the  tube  and  the  penetrating  form
of  the  point,  the  insect  first  bores  through  the  in-
teguments of  its  prey,  and  then  extracts  the  juices.
And,  what  is  most  extraordinary  of  all,  one  sort
of  mouth  as  the  occasion  requires,  shail  be  changed
into  another  sort  The  caterpillar  could  not  five
without  teeth;  in  several  species,  the  butterfly
famed  from  it,  could  not  use  them.  The  old
teeth  therefore  are  cast  off  with  the  exuvis  of  the
grub;  a  new  and  totally  different  apparatus  as-
sumes their  place  in  the  fly.  Amid  these  novelties
of  form,  we  sometimes  forget  that  it  is,  all  the
while,  the  animal'*  mouth  <:  that  whether  it  be  lips,
or  teeth,  or  bill,  or  beak,  or  shears,  or  pump,  it  is
theeame  part  diversified :  and  it  is  also  remarkable,
that,  under  all  the  varieties  of  configuration  with
which  we  areacquainted,  and  which  are  very  great,
the  organs  of  taste  and  smelling  are  situated  near .
each  other.

III.  To  the  mouth  adjoins  the  gullet:  in  this
part  also,  comparative  anatomy  discovers  a  differ-
ence of  structure,  adapted  to  the  difierent  necessir
ties  of  the  animal  In  brutes,  because  the  posture
oftheir  neck  conduces  little  to  the  passage  of  the
aliment,  the  fibres  of  the  gullet^  which  act  in  this
business,  run'  in  'two  close  spiral  lines,  crossing
each  other:  in  men,  these  fibres  run" only  a  little
obliquely  from  the  upper  end  of  the  oesophagus  to
the  stomach,  into  which,  by  a  gentle  contraction,
they  easily  transmit  the  descending  morsels ;  that
Is  to  say.  iorthe.mere  laborious  deglutition  of  ani-
mals, which  thrust  their  food  up  instead  of  down,
end  also  through  a  longer  passage,  a  pxoportionably

.more  powerfulapparatus  of  muscles  is  provided;
more  powerful,  not  merely  by  the  strength  of  the
fibres,  wjrich  might  be  attributed  to  the  greater
exercise  of  their  force,  but  in  their  collocation,
which  id  a  determinate  circumstance,  and  must
have  been  original.

IV.  The  gullet  leads  to  the  intestines:  here,
likewise,  as  before,  comparing'  quadrupeds  with
man,  under  a  general  similitude  we  meet  with
appropriate  differences.  .The  valvules  eonnitentes,
oT)  as  they  are  by  some  called,  the  semilunar  valves,
found  in  the  human  intestine,  are  wanting  in  that
of  brutes.  These  are  wrinkles  or  plates  of  the
innermost  coat  of  the  guts,  the  effect  of  which  is
to  retard  the  progress  of  the  food  through  the  ali-
mentary canal.  It  is  easy  to  understand  how
much  mere  necessary  such  a  provision  may  be  to
the  body  of  an  animal  of  an  erect  posture,  and  in
which,  consequently,  the  weight  of  the  food  is
added  to  the  action  of  the  intestine,  than  in  that
of  a  quadruped,  in  which  -the  course  of  the  food,
from  its  entrance  to  its  exit,  is  nearly  horizontal :
hut  it  is  impossible  to  assign  any  cause,  except  the
final  cause,  for  this  distinction  actually  taking
place.  So  for  as  depends  upon  the  action  of  the
part  Una  structure  was  more  to  be  expected  in  a
quadruped  than  in  a  man.  In  truth,  it  must  in
both  have  been  formed,  not  by  action,  but  in  direct
opposition  to  action  and  to  pressure;  but  the  op-


position whicjrwould  arise  from  pressure,  is  greater
m  the  upright  trunk  than,  in  any  other.  That
theory  therefore  is  pointedly  .contracted  by  the
example  before  us.  The  structure  is  fouftd  where
its  generation,  according  to  the  method  by  which
the  theorist  would*  have  it  generated,  ia  the  most
difficult ;  but  {observe)  it  is  found  where  its  effect
is  most  useful.

The  different  length  of  the  intestines  in  cafnk
vorous  and  herbivorous  animals,  has  been  noticed
on  a  former  occasion.  The  shortest,  I  believe,  ia
that  of  some  birds  of  prey,  in  which  the  intestinal
canal  is  little  more  than  a  straight  passage  from
tj»e  mouth  to  the  vent'  The  longest  is  in  the
deer  kind.  The  intestines  of  a  Canadian  stag,
four  feet  high,-  measured  ninety-six  feet*  The
intestine  of  a  sheep,  unravelled,  measured  thirty,
times  the  length  orthehody.  ,  The  intestine  of  a
wild  cat  is  only  three  times  the  length  of  .the
body.  Universally,  where  the  substance  upon
which  the  animal  reeds  is  of  slow  concoction,  or
yields  Kb  chyle  with  more  difficulty,  there  the
passage  is  circuitous  and  dilatory,  that  tone  and
space  may  be  allowed  for  the  change  and  the  ab-
sorption which  are  necessary.  Where  the. food
is  soon  dissolved,  or  already  half  assimilated,  an
unnecessary  or,  perhaps,  hurtful  detention  ia
avoided,  by  giving  to  it  a  shorter  and  a  readier
route.

*  V.  In  coniparing  the  bonesof  difierent  animals,
we  are  struck,  in  the  bones  of  birds,  with  a  pro-
priety, which  could  only  proceed  from  the  wisdom
of  an  intelligent  and  designing  Creator.  In  the
hones  of  an  animal  which  is  to  fly,  the  two  quauV
ties  required  are  strength  and  lightness.  Wherein,
therefore,  do  the  bones  of  Birds  (I  apeak  of  the
cylindrical  bones)  differ,  in  these  respects,  from
the  bones  of  quadrupedal  In  these  properties:
first,  their  cavities  are  much  larger  in  proportion
to  the  weight  of  the  bene,  than  in  those  of  qua-
drupeds; secondly,  these  cavities  are  empty;
thirdly,  the  shell  is  of  a  firmer  texture,  than  if
the  substance  of  other  bones.  It  is  easy  to  ob-
serve these  TMrticulars.  even- in  picking  the  wing
or  leg  of  a  chicken.  '.Now,  the  weight  being  the
same,  the  diameter,  it  is  evident,  wiH  be  greater
in  a  hollow  bone  than  in  a  solid  one;  and  with  the
diameter,  aa  every  mathematician  can  prove,  if
increased,  ceteris  paribus,  the  strength  of  the
cylinder,  or  its  resistance  to  breaking.  In  a  word,
a  bone  of  the  same  weight  would  not  have  been
so  strong  in  any  other  form  ;  and  to  have  made  it
heavier, .  would  have  facommoded  the  animaTe
flight  Yet  this  form  could  not  he  acquired  by
use,  or  the  bone  become  hollow  and  tubular  by
exercise.  What  appetency  could  excavate  a  bone?

VI.  The  lung*  also  of  tyros,  as  compared  with
the  lungs  of  quadrupeds,  contain  in  thema  provi-
sion, distinjrmsningly  calculated  for  this  same  pur-
pose of  levitation;  namely,  a  communication  (not
found  in  other  kinp>  of  animals)  between  the  air-
vessels  of  the  lungs  and  the  cavities  of  the  body :
so  that  by  the  mtromission  of  air  from  one  to
the  other  (at  the  will,  as  it  should  seem,  of  the
animal,)  its  body  can  be  occasionally  purled  out,
and  its  tendency  to  descend  in  the  air,  or  ite
specific  gravity,  made  less.  The  bodies  of  birds
are  blown  up  from  their  lungs,  f which  no  other
animal  bodies  are,)  and  thus  rendered  buoyant

VII.  All  birds  are  oviparous. This  likewise


.Acad.  Paris,  1701,  p.  17*


430


NATURAL,  THEOLOGY.


carries  on  the  work  of  gestation  with  as  lHtla  in-
crease as  possible  of  the  weight  of  Uje  body.  A
grand  uterua  would  haveheen  a  troubtasomv  bur-
ied lo  a  bird  in  its  flight  The  advantage,  in
thia  respect,  of  an  oviparous  procreation,  is,  that,
Whilst  the  whole  brood  are  hatched  together,  the
egg*  are  excluded  aingly,  and  at  jconsiderable
intervals.  Ten,  fifteen,  or  twenty  young  bird*
may  be  produced  in  one  cletch  or  covey,  yet  the
parent  bud  have  never  bean  encumbered  by  the
load  of  more  than  one  full-grown  egg  at  one  time.

VIII.  A  principal  topic  of  comparison  between
animate,  is  their  instrument*  qf  motion.  These
come  before  us  under  three  division! ;  feet,  wings,
and  fins.  I  desire  any  man  to  say,  which  of  the.
three  is  best  fitted  for  Us  use?  or  whether  the
aame  consummate  art  be  not  conspicuous  in  them
all.  The  constitution  of  the  elements,  in  whichthe
motion  is  to  be  performed  is  very  different  -  The
animal  action  must  necessarily  follow  that  consti-
tution. The  Creator,  therefore,  if  we  might  so
speak,  had  to  prepare  for  different  situation*,  for
different  difficulties :  yet  the  purpose  is  accom-
plished not  less  successfully  in  one  case  than  in
the  other.  And,  as  between  tsings  and  the  cor-
responding hmbs  of  quadrupeds,  it  la-accomplished
Without  deserting  the  general  idea.  The  idea  is
modified,  not  deserted.  Strip  a  wing  of  its  feathers,
and  it  bears  an  obscure  resemblance  to  the  fore-
leg of  a  quadruped.  The  articulations  at  the
shoulder,  and  the  cubitus  am  much  alike ;  and,
what  is  a  closer  circumstance,  in  both  cases  the
tipper  pact  of  the  limb  consists  of  a  single-bone,
the  lower -part  of  two.

But,  fitted  up  with  its  Furniture  of  feathers  and
quills, /it  becomes  a  wonderful  instrument  more
artificial  than  its  first  appearance  indicates,  though
that  be  very  striking :  at  least,  the  use  which
the  bird  makes  of  its  wings  in  flying,  is  more
complicated,  and  more  curious,  than  is  generally
blown.  One  thing  is  certain,  that  rf  the  napping
of  the  wings  in  flight  were  no  more  than  the.re-
dprocal  motion  of  the.  same  surface  in  opposite
olfactions,  either  upwards. and  downwards,  or
estimated  in  any  obfiqne  line,  the  bird  would  lose
as  much  by  one  motion  as  she  gained  by  another.
The  skylark  could  never  ascend  by  such  an  ac-
tion as  this.;  .for.  though  the  stroke  upon  the  air
by  the  under-  side  of  net  wing  would  carry  her
up,  the  stroke  ^rom  the  upper  aide,  when  she
nosed  her  wing  again,  would  bring  her  down.  In
■order,  therefore,  to  account  for  the  advantage
which  the  tdrd  derives  from  her  wing,  it  is  neces-
sary to  suppose,  that  the  surface  of  the  wing,
measured  upon  the  same  plane,  is  contracted,
whilst  the  wing  is  drawn  up;  and  let  out  to  its
full  expansion,  when  it  descends  upon  the  air  for
the  purpose  of  moving  the  body  by  the  reaction
of  that  element  Now,  'the.  form  and  structure  of
the  wing,  its  external  convexity,  the  disposition,
and  particularly  the  overlapping,  of  its  larger  fea-
thers, the  action  of  the  muscles,  and  joints  of  ther
piniona,  are  ail  adapted  to  this  alternate  adjust-
ment of  its  shape  and  dimensions.  Such  a  twist,
for  instance,  or  semirotatory  motion,  is  given  to
the  great  feathers  of  the  wing,  that  they  strike  the
air  with  their  flat  side,  but  rise  from  the  stroke
slantwise.  The  turning  of  the  oar  in  rowing,
whilst  the  rower  advances  his  hand  for  a  new
stroke,  is  a  similar  operation  to  that  of  the  feather,
and  takes  its  name  from  the  resemblance.  I  be-
Kev©  that  thia  feculty  is  noVfound  in  the  great


feathers  of  the  fair.  This  is  the  place  also  for
observing,  that  the  piniona  are  so  set  upon  the
body,  as  to  bring  down  the  wings  not  vertically,
but -in  a  direction  obliquely  tending  towards  the
taj);  which  motion,  by  virtue  of  the  common
resolution  of  forces,  does  two  things  at  the  same
time ;  supports  the  body  in  the  air,  and  carries  it
fqrward.  ^he  steerage  of  a  bird  in  its  flight  is
effected  partly  by  the  wings,  but  in  a  principal
degree  by  the  tan.  And  herein  we -meet  with  a
circumstance  not  a  tittle  remarkable.  Birds  with
long  legs  have'  short  tails ;  and  in  their  .flight,
place  their  legs  close  to  their  bodies,  at  the  same
time  stretching  them  out  backwards  as  for  as  they
can.  In  this  position^he  legs  extend  beyond  the
rump,  and  become  the  rudder :  supplying  that
steerage  which/ the  tail  could  not.

From  the  wings  of  birds,  the  transition  is  easy
to  the  Jin*  of  fish.  They,  are  both,  to  their  re-
spective tribes,  the  instruments  of  their  motion;
but,  in  the  work  whioh  they  have  to  do,  there  is
a  considerable  difference,  founded  in  this  circum-
stance. Fish,  unlike  birds,  have  very  nearly  the
aame'  specific  gravity  with  the  element  in  which
they  move.  In  the  case  of  fish,  therefore,  there
is  little  or  no  weight  to  bear  up ;  what  is  wanted,
is  only  an  impulse  sufficient  to  carry  the  booy
through  a  resisting  medium,  or  to,  maintain  the
posture,  or  to  support  or  restore  the  balance  of  the
body,  which  is  always  the  most  unsteady  where
there  is  no  weight. to  sink  it  For  these  offices,
the  fins  are- as  large  as  necessary s  though  much
smaller  than  wings,  their  action  mechanical^  their
position,  and  the  muscle*  by  which  they  are
moved,  in  the  highest  degree  convenient.  The
following  short  account  of  some  experiments  upon
fish,  made  for  the  purpose  of  ascertaining  the
use  of  their  fins,  will  be  the  best  confirmation  of
what  we  assert.  In  most  fish,  besidd  the  great
fin  the  tail,  we  find  .two  pairs  of  fins  upon  the
sides,  two  single  fips  upon  the  bacfc,  and  one  upon
the  belly,  or  rather  between  the  belly  and^  the  tail.
The  .balancing  use  of  these  organs  is  proved  in
this  manner.  Of  the  large-headed  fish,  if  you
cut  off  the  pectoral  fins,  i.  e.  the  pair  which  lies
close  behind  the  nils,  .the  head  falls  prone  to  the
bottom :  if  the  right  pectoral  fin  only  be  cut  off,
the  fish  leans  to  that  side ;  if  the  ventral  fin  on
the  same  side  be  cut  away,  tnen  it  loses  its  equili-
brium entirely ;  if  the  dorsal  and  ventral  fins  be
cut  off.  the  fish  reels  to  the  right  and  left  When
.the  fish  dies,  that  is,  when  the  fins  cease  to  play,
the  belly  turns  Upwards. .  The  use  of  the  aame
parts  for  motion  is  seen  in  the  following  observa-
tion upon  them  when  put'  ki  action.  The  pecto-
ral, and  more  particularly  the  ventral  fins,  serve
to  roue  and  depress  the  fish;  when  the  fish
desires  to  have  a  retrograde  motion,  a  stroke
forward  with  {he  pectoral  fin  effectually  produces
it ;  if  the  fish'  desircito  turn  either  way,  a  single
blow  with  the  tail  theoppoMte  way,  sends  it  round
at  once :  if  the  tail  strike  both  ways,  the  motion
produced  by  the  double  lash  is  progressive^  and
enables  the  fish  to  dart  forwards  with  an  astonish-
ing velocity.*  The  result  is,  not  only  in  some
cases,  the  most  rapid,  but  In  all  cases,  the  most
gentle,  pliant,  easy,  animal  motion,  with  which
we  are  acquainted.  However,  when  the  tail  is
cut  off,  the  fish  loses  all  motion,  and  gives  itself
up  to  where  the  water  impels  it The  rest  of  the


•Goldsmith,  Hist  of  An.  Hat.  voL  vi.  p*  ISL


NATURAL  THEOLOGY.


431


ftotf,'  therefere,  to  far  as  respects  motion,  seem  to
be  merely  subsidiary  to  this.  In  their  mechani-
cal use,  the  anal  fin  may  be  reckoned  the  keel;
the  ventral  fins,  out-riggers;  the  pectpral  mus-
cles, the  oars ;  and  if  there  be'  any  similitude  be-
tween these  parts  of  a  boat- and  a  nsh,*obaerve,
that  it  is  not  the  resemblance  of  imitation,  but
the  likeness  which  arises  from- applying  similar
mechanical  means  to  the  same  purpose.

We  have  seen  that  the  tail  in  the  fish  is  the
great  instrument  of  motion*  Now,  in  cetaceous
or  warm-blooded  fish,  which  are  obliged  to  rise
every  two  or  .three  minutes  to  the  surface  to  take
breath,  the  tail,  unlike  what  it  is  in  other  fish,  is
horizontal ;  its- stroke  consequently,  perpendicular
to  the  horizon,  which  is  'the  right  direction-  fbr
sending  the  fish  to  the  top,  or  carrying  it  down  to
the  bottom.

( -Regarding  animals  in  their  instruments  .of  mo-
tion, we  have  only  followed  the  comparison  through-
tile  first  great  division  of  animals  into  beasts,  birds,
and  fish.  If  it  were  our  intention  to  pursue  the
consideration  farther,  I  should  take  in  that  generic
distinction  amongst  birds,  the  web  foot  of  water-
fowl. It  is'an  instance  which  may  be  pointed  out
to  a  child.  The  utility  of  the  web  to  water-fowl,
the 'inutility  to  land-fowl,  are  so -obvious,  that  it
seems  impossible  to  notice  the  difference  without
acknowledging  the  design.  I  .am  at  a  loss  to
know,,  how  those  who  deny  the  agency  of  an  in-
telligent Creator,  dispose  of  this  example. .  There
»  nothing  in  the  action  of  swimmings  as  carried
on  by  a  bird  upon  the  surface  of  the  water,  that
should  generate  a  membrane  between  the  -toes.
As  to  that  membrane,  it  is  an  exercise  of  constant
resistance.  The  only  supposition  1  can  think  of
is,  that  all  birds  have  been  originally  water-fowl,
and  web-footed;  that  sparrows, '  hawks,  linnets,
cYc.  which  frequent  the  land,  have  hr  process  of
time,  and  in  the  coarse  of  many  generations,  had
this  part  worn  away  by  treading  upon  hard
ground.  To  such  ev.asiye  assumptions  most  athe-
ism always  have  recourse!'  and,  after  all,  it  con-
fesses that  the  structure  of  the  feet  of  birds,  in
their  original  form,'  was  critically  .adapted  to.  {neir
original  .destination !  The  web-feet  of  amphibious
quadrupeds,  seals,  otters,  etc.  fall  under  toe  same
observation.  -

IX.  The  JEm  sense*  are  common  to  most  large
animals :  nor  have  we  much  difference  to  remark
in  their  constitution ;  or  much,  however,  which  is
referable  to  mechanism.  -

The  superior  sagacity  of  animals  which  hunt'
their  prey,  and  which,  consequently,  depend  for
their  livelihood  upon  their  nose,\a  well  known,  in
its  use;  but  not  at  all  known  in  the  organization
which  produces  it.  v  ■' •

a  The  external  ears  of  beasts  of  prey,  of  lions,
timers,  wolves*,  have  their  trumpet-part,  or  conca-
vity, standing  forwards,  to  seize  the  sounds  which
are  before  them,  viz.  the  sounds  of  the  animals
which  they  pursue  or  watch.  The  ears  of  ani-
mals oii&ght  are  turned  backward,  to  give  notice
of  the  approach  of  their  enemy  from  behind,
whence  he  may  steal  upon  them  unseen.  This  is
a  critical  distinction';  and  is  mechanical:  but  it
may  be  suggested,  and,  I  think,  not  without  pro-
bability, that  it  is  the  effect  of  continual  habit.

The  eyes  of  animals  which  follow  their  prey  by
night,  as  cats,  owls,  dec.  possess  a  faculty  not

S'ven  to  those  of  other  species,  namely,  of  closing
e  pupil  entirely. The  final  cause  of  which


seems,*)  be  tmsi—Jt  was  necessary  fb?  such  ani-
mals to-be  able  to  descry  objects  with  very  small
degrees  of*  light  This  capacity  depended'  upon
the  superior  sensibility  of  the  retina*  that  is,  upon
its  being  affected  by  the  most  feeble  impulses.
But  that  tenderness  of  structure,  which  rendered
the  membrane  thus  exquisitely  sensible,  rendered
it  also  liable  to  be  offended  by  the  access  of  strong-
er degrees  of  light  The  contractile  range  there*
fore  of  the  pupil  is  increased  in  these  animals,  so
as  to  enable  them  to  dose  the  aperture  entirely:
winch  includes  the  power  of  diminishing  it  nt
every  degree :  whereby  at  all  times  such  portions,
and  only  such  portions,  of  light  are  admitted,  as)
may  be  received  without  injury  to  the  sense.

There.appears  to  be  also  in  the  figure,  and  in
some  properties  of  the  pupil  of  the  eye,  an  appro-
priate relation  to  the  wants  of  different  animals.
In  horses,  oxen,  goats,  sheep,  the  pupil  of  the  eye
is  elliptical ;  the  transverse  axis  being  horiaontal;
by  which  structure,  although  the  eye  be  placed  on
the  side  of  the  head,  the  anterior  elongation  oftho
pupil  catches- the  forward  rays,  or  those  which
come  from  objects  immediately  in  front  of  the  aju>
inal'e  face.


CHAPTER  XIH.  \

Peculiar  Organization*.

I  believe  that  all  the  instances  which  I  shall
collect  under  this  title,  might,  consistently  enough'
with  technical  language,  have  been  placed  under
the  head  of  Comparative  Anatomy.  But  there
appears  to  me  an  impropriety  in  the  use  which
that  term  hath  obtained ;  it-  being,  in  some  sort,
absurd  to  call  that  a  ease  of  comparative  anatomy,
in  which  there  is  nothing  to. "  compare ;"  in  which
a  conformation  is  found  in  one  animal,  which  hath
nothing  properly  answering  to  it  in  another.  Q€
this  kind  are  the  examples  which  I  have  to  pro-
pose in  the  present,  chapter;  and  the  reader  wilf
see  that,  though  some  of  them  be  the  strongest
perhaps,  he  will  meet  with  undernny  division  of
our  subject,  they  must  necessarily  be  of  an  uncon-
nected and  miscellaneous  nature.  To  dispose
them,  however,  into  some  sort  of  order,  we  will  no-
tice, first,  particularities  of  structure  which  belong
to  quadrapeds,  birds,  and  fish,  as  such,  or  to  many,
of  the  kinds  included  in  these  classes  of  animals ;
and  then,  such  particularities,  as  are  confined  to
one  or  two  species.  '

I.  Along  each  side  of.  the  neck;  of  large  otto-  ■
drupeds,  runs  a  stiff,  jobust  cartilage,  winch  butch-
ers call  the  paxwax.  No  person  can  carve  the
upper  end  of  a  crop  of  beet  without  driving  his
knife  against  it  It  is  a  tough,  strong,  tendinous
substance,  braced  from -the  head  to  the  middle  of
the  back:  its  office  is  to  assist  in  supporting  the
weight  of  the  head.  'It  is  a  mechanical  provision,
of  which  this  is  the  undisputed  use*,  ana  it  is  suf»
ficient,  and  not  more  than  sufficient,  for.  the  pur-
pose which  it  has  to  execute.  The  head  of  an  ox
or  a  horse  is  a  heavy  weight,  acting  at  the  end  of
a  long  lever  (consequently  with  a  great  purchase)
and  ih  a  direction  nearly  perpendicular  to  the
joints  of  the  supporting  neck.  From  such  a  force,
so  advantageously  applied,  the  Ixmea  of  the  neck
would  be  in  constant  danger  of  dislocation,  if  they
were  not  fortified  by  thia  strong  tape. No  such


439


NATURAL  THEOLOGY.


organ  if  found  in  the*  human  subject)  because,
from  the  erect  position  of  the  head  (the  pressure
of  it  acting  nearly  in  the  direction  of  the  spme.)
the  junction  of  the  vertebra  appears  to  be  suffi-
ciently secure  without  it.  This  cautionary  expe-
dient, therefore,  is  limited  to  quadrupeds:  the  can
of  the  Creator  "is  seen  where  it  is  wanted.

II.  The  oil  with  which  birds  prune  their  fee-
then,  arid  the  organ  which  supphes  it,  is  a  specific ,
provnbn  for  the  winged  creation.  On  each  side
of  the  rump  of  biros  is  observed  a  small  -nipple,
yielding  upon  pressure  a  butter-like  substance,
which  the  bird  extracts  by  pinching  the  pap  with
Its  bill.  -With  this  oil,  or  ointment,  thus  procured,
the  bird  dresses  its  coat ;  and  repeats  the  action
as  often  a»iti  own  sensations  teach  it  that  it  bin
any  part  wanted,  or  as  the  excretion  may  be  suffi-
cient for  the  expense.  The  gland,  the  pap,  the
nature  and- quality  of  the  efccreted  substance,  the
manner  of  obtaining  it  from  its  lodgment  in  the
body,  the  application  of  it  when  obtained,  form,
collectively,  an  evidence  of  intention  which  it  is
not  easy  to  withstand.  NotbJiigaimilar  to  it  is
found  in  unfeathered  animals.  What  blind  cona-
tu»  of  nature  should  produce  it  in  birds ;  should
not  produce  it  In  beasts  1

III.  The  air-bladder  also  of  a  JUh  affords  a
plain  and  direct  instance,  not  only  of  contri-
vance, but  Btricjry  of  that  species  of  contrivance
which  we  denominate  mechanical.  It  is  a  philo-
sophical apparatus  in  the  body  of  an  animal.  The
principle  of  the  contrivance  is  clear:  the  applica-
tion of  the  principle  la  also  clear.  The  use  of  the
organ  to  sustain,  and,  at  will,  «leo  to  elevate,*  the
body  of  the  fish  in  the- water,  is  proved  by  observ-
ing, wfiat  has  been  tried,  that,  when  the  bladder
is  burst,  the  fish  grovels  at  the  bottom;  and  also,
that  flounders,  soles,  skates,  which  are  without  the
air-bladder,  seldom  rise  in  the  water,  and  that  with
effort.  The  manner  in  which  the  purpose  is  at-
tained, and  the  suitableness  of  the  means  to  the
end,  are  not  difficult  to  be  apprehended.  The
rising  and  sinking*  of  a  fish  in  water,,  so  for  as  it
is  waenendent  or  the  stroke  of  the  fins  and  tail,
can  only  be  4egulated  by  the  specific  gravity  of
the  .body:  When  the  bladder,  contained  in  the
body  of  the  fish,  is  contracted,  which  the  fish  pro-
bably possesses  a  muscular- power  of  doing,  the
bulk  of  the  fish  is  contracted  along  with  it;  where-
by, since  the  absolute  weight  remains  the  same,
toe  specific  gravity,  which  is  the  sinking  force,  is

.  increased,  and  the  fish  descends :  on  the  contrary,
when,  jn  consequence  of  the  relaxation  of  the
muscles,  the  elasticity  of  the  enclosed  and  now
compressed  air  restores  the  dimensions  of  the
bladder,  die  tendency  downwards  becomes  pro-
portionably  less  than  it  was  before,  or  is  turned
into  a  contrary  tendency.  'These  are  known  "pro-
perties of  bodies  immersed  in  a  fluid.  The  en-
amelled figures,  or  little  glass  bubbles,  in  a  jar  of
water,  are  made  to  rise  and  fall  by  the  same  arti-
fice. A  diving-nmcrnnetni^ht  be  made  to  ascend
and  descend,  upon  the  like  principle;  namely,  by
introducing  into  the  inside  of  it  an  air-vessel,
which,  by  its  contraction,  would  diminish,  and  by
its  distension  enlarge,  the  bulk  of  the  machine  it-
self, and  thus  render  it  specifically  heavier,  or
specifically  lighter,  than  the  water  which  sur-
rounds it  Suppose  this  to  be  done,  and  the  ar-
tist to  solicit  a  patent  for  his  invention.  The
inspectors  of  the  model,  whatever  they  might  think
of  the  use  or  value  of  the  contrivance,  could,  by


no  possibility,  entertain  a  question  in  thehnrinoV,
whether  it  were  a  contrivance  of  not  No  nana
has  evef  been  assigned — no  reason  can  be  tango-
ed, why  the  conclusion  is  not  as  certain  in  the
,fish,  as  it  is  in  the  rnachine^why  the  argument
'is  not  as  firm  in  one  case  as  the  other.

It  would  be  very  worthy  of  mquiry,  if  it  were
possible  to  discover  by  what  method  an  animtl
which  lives  constantly  in  water,  is  ante  to  supply
a  repository  of  air.  The  expedient,  whatever  it
be,  forms  part,  and  perhaps  the  most  curious  nut,
of  the  provision.  Nothing  similar  to  the  air-okd-
der  is  found  in  lahd-aoJuials;  and  a  life  in  the
water  has  no  natural  tendency  to  produce  a  bag
of  air.  Nothing-can  be  farther  from  an  acojrinil
organization  than  this  is.

These  examples  mark  the  attention  of  the  Cre-
ator to  the  three  great  kingdoms  of  his  animal
creation}  and  to  their  constitution  as  such.— The
example  which  stands  next  fat  point  of  geneiahry,
belonging  to  a  large  tribe  of  animals;  or  rather  to
varioua  species  of  that  tribe,  is  the  poisonous  tooth
of  serpents.

I.  The  fang"  qfa  viper  w  a  clear  and  curious
example  of  mechanical  contrivance.  It  is  a  per-
forated tooth,  loose  at  the  root:  in  irs^uiet  state,
lying  down  flat  upon  the  jaw,  .out  fornnhed  with
a  muscle,  which,  with  a  jerk,  and  by  the  pluck,  tf
it  were,  of  a  string,  suddenly  erects  it  Under
the  tooth,  dose  to  Us  root,  and  communicating
with  the  perforation,  lies  ajsmall  bag  containing
the  venom.  When  the  fong  is  raised,  the  daring
of  the  jaw  presses  its  root  against  the  bag  under-
neath; and  the  force'  of  this  compression  sends
out  the  fluid  with  a  considerable  impetus  through
the  tube  in  the  middle  of  the  tooth.  What  man
unequivocal  or  effectual  apparatus  could  be  de-
vised, for  the  double  purpose  of  at  once  inflicting
the  wound  and  mjecnng  the  poison  ?  Yet,  though
lodged  in  the  mouth,  it  is  so  constituted,  as,  in  its
monensive  and  quiescent  state,  not  to  interfere
with  the  animal's  ordinary  office  of  receiving  its
food.  It  has  been  observed  also,  tMBoneoftha
harmless  serpents,  the  black  snake,  the  blind
worm,  dec.  have  these  rings,  but  teeth  of  an  equal
size j  not  moveable,  as  this  is,  but  fixed  into  the
jaw.

II.  In.  being  the  property  of  several  dufeant
species,  the  preceding  example  is  resembled  by
that  which  I  shall  next  mention,  which  is  the  boc;
qf  the  opossum.  This  is  a  mechanical  contri-
vance, most  properly  so  called  The  siinpbaty
of  the  expedient  renders  the  contrivance  morew
vious  than  many  others,  and  by  no  means  he?
certain.  A  false  skin  under  the  belly  t>f  the  ani-
mal, forms  a  pouch,  into  which  the  young  litter
are  received  at  their  birth  j  where  they  &aw  *j|
easy  and  constant  access  to  the  teats;  in  wnien
they  are  transported  by  the  dam  from  place  to
place;  where  they .  are  at  liberty  to  run  in  and
out;  and  where  they  find  a  refuse  from  surpnsj
and  danger.  It  is  their  cradle,  their  asylum;  and
the -machine  for  their  conveyance.  Can  the  ose
of  this  structure  be  doubted  of  ?  Nor  is  it  a  mew
doubling  of  the  skin ;  but  it  is  a  neworganJ far-
nished  with  bones  and  musdee  of  its  6wn.  Two
bones  are  placed  before  the  os  pubis,  and  joined  to
that  bone  as  their  base.  These  support,  and  gi«
a  fixture  to,  the  muscles  which  serve  to  open  tne
bag.  To  these  muscles  there  are  antafonM
which  serve  in  the  same  manner  to  abut  it  \  ana
this  office  they  perform  so  exactly,  that,  is  UN


NATUttAL  THEOLOGY.


Bring  animal,  the  opening  can  scanjcly  be  dfccern-
etlj  except'  when  the  sides  are  forcibly  drawn
asunder.*  Is  there  any  action  in  this  part  of  the
animal,  any  process  arising  from  that  action,  by
which  these  members  could  be  formed  1  any  ac-
count to  be  given  of  (he  formation,  except  design.
III.  'As  a  particularity,  vet  appertaining  to
more  species  than  one;  and  also  as  strictly  me-
chanical; we  may  notice  a  circumstance  in  the
structure  of  the  claws-  of  certain  birds.  The  mid-
dle claw  of  the  heron  and  cormorant  is  toothed
and  notched  like  a  saw.  .These  birds  are  great
fishers,  and  these  notches  assist  them  in  holding
their  slippery  prey.  The  use  is  evident;  but  the
structure  such  as  cannot  at  all  be  accounted  for
by  the  effort  of  the  animal,  or  the  exercise  of  the
part.  Some  other  fishing  birds  have  these  notches
in  their  bills ;  and  for  the  same  purpose.  The
gannet;  or  soland  goose,  has  the  side  of  its  bill  ir-
regularly, jagged,  that  it  may  held  its  prey  the
faster.  Nor  can  the  structure  in  this,  more  tfian
in  the  former  case,  arise  from  the  manner  of  em-
ploying the  part.  The  smooth  surfaces  and  soft
nesh  of  fish,  were,  less  likely  to  notch  the  bills  of
birds,  than  the  hard  bodies  upon  which  many
other  species  feed.

'  We  now  come  to  particularities  strictly  so  call-
ed, as  being  limited  to  a  single  species  of  animal.
Of  these,  I  shall  take  one  from  a  quadruped,  and
one  from  a  bird.

I.  The  stomach  of  the  camel  is  well  known  to
retain  large  quantities  of  water,  and  to  retain  it
uncharxged  for  a  considerable  length  of  time.
This  property  qualifies  it  for  living  in  the  desert.
Let  us  see,  therefore,  what  is  the  internal  organi-
zation, upon  which  a  faculty  so  rare,  and  so  bene-
ficial, depends. '  A  number  of  distinct  sacks  or
bags  (in  -a  dromedary  thirty  of  these  have  .been
counted)  are  observe^  to  lie  between  the  mem-
branes of  the  second  stomach,. and ( to  open  into
the  stomach  near  the  top  by  small*  square  aper-
tures. .Through  these  orifices,  after  the  stomach
IS  full,  the  annexed  bags  are  filled  frern  it :  and
the  water  so  deposited  is,  in  the  first  place,  hot
liable  to  pass  into  the  intestines ;  in  tne  second
place,  is  kept  separate  from  the  solid  aliment ;  .and,
m  ihe  third  place,  is  out  of  the  reach  of  the  diges-
tive action  of  the  stomach,  or  of  mixture  with  the
gastric  juice.  It  appears  probable,  or  rather  cer-
tain, that  the  animal,  by  the  conformation  of  its
muscles,  possesses  the  power  of  squeezing  back
this  water  flora  the  adjacent  bagB  into  the  sto-
mach, whenever  thirst  excites  it  to  put  this  power
in  action.

>  II.  The  tongue  of  the.  woodpecker  is  one  of
those  singuiarites  which  nature  presents  us  with,
when  a  singular  purpose  is  to  be  answered.  It  is
a  Pflrtimilar  instrument  for  a  particular  uas:  and
wnat,  except  design,  ever  produces  such  1  The
woodpeckesr  lives,  chiefly- upon  insects,  lodged  in
the  bodies  of  decayed  or  decaying  trees,  for  the
purpose  of  boring  into  the  wood,  it  is  furnished
with  a  bill,  straight,  hard, .  angular,  and  sharp.
When,  by  means  of  this  piereer,  it  has  reached
the  cells  of  the  insects,  then  comes  the  office  of
its  tongue :  which  tongue  is,  first,  of  such  a  length
that  'the  bird  can  dart  it  out  three  or  four  inches
front  the  bill — in  this  respect  differing  greatly
from  every  other  species  at  bird ;  in  the  second
place,  it  is  tipped  with  a  stiff,  sharp*  bony  thorn;


and,  in  the  third  place,  (vjucft  \


i  to  me  the


most  remarkable  property  of  allTthis  tip  is  den-
tated  on  both  sides,  like  the  beard  of  an  arrow  or
the  barb  of  a  hook.  The  description  of  the  part
declares  its  uses.  The>  bird,  having  exposed  the
retreats  of  the  insects  by  the  assistance  of  its  bill,
with  a  motion  inconceivably  quick,  launches 'out
at  them  this  long  tongue ;  transfixes  them  upon
the  barbed  needle  at  the  end  of  it ;  and  thus  draws
its  prey  within  its  mouth.  If  this  be  not  mecha-
nism, what  is?  Should  it  fc»  said,  that,  by  con-
tinual endeavours  to  shoot  out  the  tongue  to  the
stretch,  the  woodpecker  species  may  by  degrees
have  lengthened  the  organ  itsel£  beyond  that  of
other  birds,  what  account  can  be  given  of  its  form,
of  its  tips?  how,  in  particular,  did  it  gBtitlj  barb,
its  dentation?  These  barbs,  in  my  opinion,
wherever  they  occur,  are  decisive. proofs  of  me-
chanical contrivance.

ill.  I  shall  add  one  more  example,  for  the  safca
of  its  novelty.  It  is  always  an  agreeable'disco*
very,  when,  having  remarked  in  an  animal  an  ex-
traordinary structure,  we  come  at  length  to  find
out  aa  unexpected  use  for  k.  The  following  nar-
rative furnishes  an  instance,  of  this  kind.  The
babyrouessa,  or  Indian  hog,  a  species  of  wild  boar,
found  in  the  East  Indies,  tup  two  bent  teeth,  more
than  half  a  yard  long,  growing  upwards,  and
(which  is  the  singularity)  from  the  upper  jaw.
These  instruments,  are  not  warned  for  offence;
that  service  being  provided  for  by  two  tusks  i


jtaoldsmith's  Nat.  His.  vol.  iv.  p.  944.
31


ing  from  the  upper  jaw,  and  resembling  those  of
the  common  Ijpar :  nor  does  xhe  animaluse  them
for  defence.  They  might  seem  therefore  to  bo
both  a  superfluity  and  an  encumbrance.  But  ob-
serve the  event : ,  jfrc  animal  sleeps  steading ;  and,  .
in  order  to  support  its  head,  hosts  its  upper  tusks
upon  the  branches  of  trees.


CHAPTER.XIV*  .
Prospective  Contrivances.

I  CA$r  hardly  imagine  to  myself  a  mow  distin-
guishing mark,  and,  consequently,  a,more  certain
proof  of  design,  than  preparation,  i  e.  the  pro?
viding  of  things  before-hand,  which*  are  not  to  be
used  until  a  considerable  time  afterward :  for  this
implies  a  contemplation  of  the  future,  which  be-
longs only  to  intelligence.

Of  these  prospec/tre  contrivances,  the  bodies  of
animals  furnish  various  examples.

U  The  human,  teeth,  afford  arf  instance,  tot
only  of  prospective  contrivance-,  but  of  the  com-
pletion of  the  contrivance  being  designedly  sus-
pended. They  are  formed  within  the  gums,  and
there  they  stop:  the  fact  bejag,  that  their  farther
advance  to  maturity  woukT  not  only  be-ueeless  to
the  new-born  animal,  but  extremely  ia  its  way  ;
as  it  is  evident  that  the  act  of  sucking,  by  which
it  is  for  some  time  to  be  nourished,  will  be  per-
formed with  more  ease  both  to  the  nurse  and.  to
the  infaqt,  whilst  the  inside  of  the  mouth^and
edges  of  the  gums,  are  smooth  arid  soft,  than  if
set  with  hard  pointed  bones.  By  the  time  they
are  wanted,  the  teeth  are  ready.  .  They  have  been
lodged  wfthin  the  gums  for  some  months  past,  but
detained,  as  jt  were,  in  their  sockets,  so  long  as
their  farther  protrusion  would  interfere  with  the
office  to  which,  the  mouth  is  destined.  Nature,
37


434


natural;  theology.


timely,  that  inttlfigenee  which  wee  eninloyed  in
creation,  looked  beyond  the  first  year  of  the  in-
sult's' fife ;  yet,  whilst  she  was  providing  for  func-
tions which  were  after  that  term  to  become  neces-
sary, was  careful  not  to  incommode  those  which
preceded  them.  What  renders  it  more  probable
that  this  is  the  effect  of  design,  is,  that  the  teeth
are  imperfect,  whilst  all  other  parts  of  the  mouth
axe*  perfect.  The  lips  an  perfect  the  tongue  is
perfect;  the  cheeks,  the  jaws,  trie  palate,  the
pharynx,  the  larynx,  a*a  all  perfect:  the  teeth
alone  are  not  so.  This  is  the  tact  with  respect  to
the  human  mouth :  the  feet  also  is,  that  the  parts
above  enumerated  are  called  into  use  frain  the  be-
ginning; whereas  the  teeth  wouhj  be  only  so
many  obstacles  and  annoyances',  if  they  wen
there.  When  a  contrary  order  is  necessary,  a
contrary  order  prevails,  fn  the  worm  of  the  beetle,
as  batched  from  the  egg,  the  teeth  are  the  first
things  which  arrive  at  perfection.  The  insect  be-
*  sans  to  gnaw  as  soon  as  it  escapes  from  the  shell,
though  its  other  parts  be  only  gradually  advancing
to  their  maturity.

What  has  been  observed  of  the  teeth,  is  true
of  the  horn*  of  animals ;  and  for  the  same  reason.
The  horn  of  a  calf  or  a  lamb  does  not  bud,  or  at
least  does  not  sprout  to  any  considerable  length,
until  the  animal  be  capable  of  browsing  upon  its
pasture ;  because  such  a  substance  upon  the  fore-
Mad  of  the  young  animal  would,  very  much  in-
cammode  the  teat  of  the  dam  in  the  office  of  giv-

j$ut  In  the  ease  of  the  fee**,— of  the  human
teeth  at  least,  the  prospective  contrivance  looks
•till  farther.  A  succession  of  crops  is  provided,
and  provided  from  the  baginnfrg ;  a  second  tier
being  originally  formed  beneath  the  first,  which
do  not  come  into  use  till  several  years  afterward.
And  this  double  or  suppfetory  provision  meets  a
difficulty**!  the  mechanism  of  the  memth,  which
Weald  hese  appeared  almost  insurmountable.
The  expansion  of  the  jaw,  (the  consequence  of
the  proportionable  growth  of  the  animal,  and  of
its  skuft,)  necessarily  separate*  the  teeth  of  the
first  set,  however  compactly  disposed,  to  a  dis-
tance *ftem  one  another,  which  would  be  very
inconvenient!  In  due  time,  therefore,  t.  e.  when
the  jaw  has  attained  a  great  part  of  Us  dimen-
sions, a  new  set  of  teeth  springs  op,  (loosen-
ing and  pushing  out  the  old  ones  before  them,)
more  exactly  fit^d  to  the  space  which  they  are  to
occupy,  ana  rising  also  in  suA  close  ranks,  as  to
allow  for  any  extension  of  line,  which  the  sub-
seonent  enlargement  of  the  head  may  occasion*

it.  It  is  not  very  easy  to  conceive  a  more  evi-
dently prospective  contrivance,  than  lhat  which,
in  all  viviparous  animals,  is  found  in  the  milk  of
the  female  parent  At  the  moment  the  young
animal  enters  the  woaid,  there  is  its  maintenance
ready  for  ft>  The  particulars  to  be  remarked  in
this  economy;  are  neither  few  nor  slight  We
have,  first,  the  nutritious  quality  of  the  fluid,  un-
like, in  this  respect,  every  other  excretion  of  the
body;  and  in  which  nature'  hitherto  remains  nn-
imitated.  neither  cookery  nor  chymlstry  having
been  able  to  make  milk  out  of  grass :  we  have,
secondly,  the  organ  for' its  reception  and  reten-
tion? we  have,  thirdly,  the  excretory  duct,  an-
nexed to  the  organ;  and  we  have,  lastly,  the  de-
termination of  the  milk  to  the  breast,  at  the  parti-
cular juncture  when  it  is  about  to  be  wanted.
We  have  alUbsse  properties  to  the  subject  before


us:  and  tbeyttre all  indioatfcrsi  of


Tbm


last  circumstance  is  the  strongest  of  any.  If  I
had  been' to  guess  beforehand,!  should  have  con-
jectured, that  at  the  time  when  there  was  en  ex-
traordinary demand  for  nourishment  |n  one  part
of  dke  system,  there  would  be  the  least  Iftcjsbeod
of  a  redundancy  to  supply  another  part  The
advanced  pregnancy  of  tne  female  has  no  intelli-
gible tendency  to  fiU  the  breast  with  sulk.  The
lacteal  system  is  a  constant  wonder ;  and  it  adds
to  other  causes  of  our  admiration,  that  the  i


ber  of  the  teats  or  papa  in  each  species  is  found
to  bear  a  proportion  to  tftte  number  of  the  young.
In  the  sow,  the  bitch,  the  rabbit,  the  cat,  tne  rat,


which  have  numerous  litters,  the  paps  are  i
oua,  ana  are  disposed  alone;  the  whole  length  of
the  belly;  In  the  cow-  and  mare,  they  are  few.
The  most  simple  account  of  this  is*  to  refer  it  to
a  designing  Creator.

But,  infte  ajfeument  before  us,  we  are  entitled
to  consider  not  only  animal  bodies  when  framed,
but  the  circumstances  under  which  they  era
framed :  and  in  this  view  of  the  subject,  the  con-
stitution of  many  of  their  pasta  is  most  strictly
prospective.

III.  The  eye  iao?  no  use,  at  the  time  when  it
is  formed,  it  is-  an  optical  instrument  made  in  a
dungeon;  constructed  for  the  refraction  of  light
to  a  focus,  and  perfect  for  its  purpose,  before  a  ray
of  light  has  had  access  to  it;  geometrically  adapt-
ed to  the  properties  and  action  of  an  element,
with  which  it  has  no  communication.  It  is  about
indeed  to  enter  into  that  commnnicatioit:  and  thin
is  precisely  the  thing  which  evidences  intention*
It  is  providing  tor  the  future,  in  the  closest  sense
which  can  be  given  to  these  terms :  for  it  fa  pro-
viding Ibr  a  future  change;  not  for  the  then  sub-
sisting condition  or  the  animal ;  not  for  any  gra-
dual progress  or  advance  in  that  same  condition  ;
but  for  a  new  state,  the  consequence  of  a  gseat
and  sudden  alteration*  which  the  animal  is  to  un-
dergaat  its  birth.  Is  it  to  be  believed  that  the
eye  was  fttmed,  or,  which  is  the  same  thing,  that
the  aeries  of  causes  was  fixed  by  which  <£e«ye)
is  formed,  without  a-view  to  this  change  -x  without
a  prospect  of  that  condition,  in  which  Us  mhnc,
of  no  use  at  present,  is  about  to  be  of  the  greatest;
without  a  consideration  of  the  qualities  of  that
element  hitherto  entirely  exclude^  but  with  which
it  was  hereafter  to  hold  so  intimate  a  relation  1
A  young  man  makes  a  pair  of  spectacles  for  him-
self against  he  grows  old;  for  which  sport  acica
he  has  no  want  or  use  whatever  at  the  time  he
mikes  them.  Could  this  be  done  without  know-
ing and  considering  the  defect  of  vision  to  which
advanced  age  is  subject  1  Would  not  the  precise
suitableness  of  the  instrument  to  its  purpose,  of
the  pemedy  to  the  defect,  of  the  convex  lens  to  thai
flattened  eye,  establish  the  certainty  of  the  concra>
sio^that  theease,  afterward  to  arise,  had  been  con-
sidered beforehand,  speculated  upon,  provided  lor  1
All  which  are  exclusively  the  acts  of  a  reasoning
mind.  The '•ye  formed  in  one  state,  for  use  only
in  another  state,  and  in  a  different  state,  afibrda  a
proof  no  Was  clear  of  destination  to  a  future?  pur-
pose ;  and  a  proof  prpportionabry  stranger,  as  the
machinery  is  more  complicated,  and  the  adapter-
tk>n  mora  exact

IV.  What  has  beeft  aaid  of  the  ere,  hold.
equally  true  of  the  tonga.  Composed  of  sir- vesw
where  there  is  no  air;  elaborately  oonstructed
the  alternate  admiaaion  and  oxpnsrinn  of  a "


ETATTOAL  THEOLOGY.


495


ving  ama~<  'along
:  whiemin- intent


Arid,  Where  no  inch  fluid  exist* ;  tins  great  organ,
with  the  whole  apparatus  belonging  to  it,  lies  cot-
kpsed  in  the  fcetaj  thorax;  yet  jn  order,  and  in
readiness  for  action,  the  first  moment  that  the  oc-
casion requires  its  service.  This  is  bavin
chine  locked  up  in  store  for  future  use;  wniemin-
contestably  profes,  that  the  case  was  expected  to
occur,  in  which  this  use  might  he  experienced :
hot  expectation  is  the  proper  act  of  intelligence.
Considering  the  state  in  which  an  animal  exists
before  its  bath,  I  should  look  for  nothing*]***  in
its  body;  then  e  system  of  lungs.  It  is  fitte  find-
ing a  pair  of  bellows  in  tltebotjUxn  of  the  sea;,  of
no  sort  of  n*e  in  the  situation  in  which -they  are
founds  formed  for  an  action  which  was  impossible
to  be  exerted ;  holding  no  relation  01  fitness  to  tffe
dement  which  surrounds  them,  bat  both  to
another  element  in  another  place*

As  part  and  parcel  of  the  same  plan  ought
to  be  mentioned,  in  speaking  orShe-  lungs,  the
proviswnsey  contrivances  of  the  foramen  ovale
and  ductus  arteriosus.  In  the  foetus,  pipes  are
laid,  for  the  passage  of  the  blood  through  the
fangs;  but  until  tte  lungs  be  inflated  by  the  in-
spiration of  air,  that  passage,  is  impervious,  or  in
a  great  degree  obstructed.  What  then  is  to  be
dope?  What  wpuld  an  artist,  what  would  a
matter,  do  upon  the  occasion? .  He  would  en-
deavour, most  probably,  to  provide  a  temporary
passage,  which  might  carry  on  the  *emmunication
required,  until  the  other  was  open.  Now  this  is
the  thing  which  is  actually  done  in  the  heart:—.
Instead  ofthe  circuitous  route  through  the  lungs,,
which  the  blood  afterward  take*,  before  it  get  from
one  auricle  of  the  heart  to  the  other:  a  portion  of
the  blood  passes  immediately  from  the  right  auricle
to  the  left,  through  a  hole  placed  in  the  partition,
which  separates  these  cavities.  This  hole,  anato-
mists call  ihtt  foramen  ovale.  There  is  likewise
smother  cross  cut,  answering  the  -same  purpose,
by  what  is  called-  the  ductus  arteriosus,  lying
between  the  pulmonary  artery  and  the  aorta.  But
both  expedients  are  so  strictly  temppfary,  that,
after  birth,  tip  one  passage  is  olosed,  and  the  tube
which  forms  the  other  shrivelled  up  into  a  liga-
ment If  tl^i*  be  not  contrivance,  what  is  1

But,  forasmuch  as  the  action  of  the  air  upon
the  blood  in  the  lungs,  appears  to  be  necessary  to
the  perfect  concoction*  of  that  fluid,  i.  e.  to  the  life
and  health  of  the  animal,  (otherwise  the  shortest
route  might  still  be  the  best,)  how  comes  it  to  pass
that  the  foetus  lives,  and  .grows,  and  thrives,
without  hi  The  answer  is,  that  the  blood  of  the
foetus  is  the  mother's;  that  it  has  undergone  that
action  in  her  habit;  that  one  fair  0/  Jungs  serves
for  both.  When  the  animajs  are  separated,  a
'new  necessity  arises;  and  to.  meeUhis  necessity  as
anon  as  it  occurs,  an  organization  is  prepared.  It
ft  ready  for  Ha  purpose;  it  only  waits  for  the  at-
reosphere^k  begin*  to  play,  the  moment  thenar


CHAPTER  XV.

Relation*.

Wkbn  several  different  part*  contribute  to  one
•Sect;  or,  which  is  the  same  thing,  when  an  ef-
fect is  produced  4>y  the  joint  action  of  different  in-
•JnuMntot  tirefitnejsoj  such  parts  or  instn&nento


to  one  another,  for  the  jpupoflerf  producing,  \m
their  united  action,  the  effect,  is  what  I  call  rela-
tion ;  and  wherever  this  is  observed  in  the  wore*
of  nature  or  of  mas',  ft  appears  to  me  to  carry
along  with  iMlecisive  •evidence  of  understanding^
intention,  art.  In  examining,  for  instance,  the
several  parts  of  a  v>atok,  the  spring,  the  barrel
the  chain,  the  fusee,  the  balance,  the  wheel*  or
various  sizes,  forms,  and  positions,  what  »  It
which  would  take  an  observer's  attention,  as  most

Slainly  evincing  a  construction,  directed  by
lought,  deliberation,  and  contrivance  1  It  h  the
suitableness  of  these- parte  to  one  another ;  first,  in
the  succession  And  order  in  Jwhieh  they  act ;  and
secondly  .with  a  view  to  the  effect  finally  pro-
duced. Thus  referring  the  spring  to  the  wqejla.
our  observer  sees  in  it,  that  which  originates  and
upholds  tfieir  motion;  fh  the  chain  that  which
transmits  the  motion  to  the  fusee;  in  the  fusee,
that  which  communicates  it  to  the  wheels;  in  the
conical  figure  of  the  fusee,  if  he  refer  to  the  spring,  .
he  sees  that  which  corrects  the  inequality  of  fl
force.  Referring  the  wheels  to  one  another,  he
notices,  first,  their  teeth,  which  would  have  been
without  use  or  meaning,  if  there  had  been  only
one  wheel,  or  if  the  wheels  had  had  no  connexion
between  themselves,  or  common  bearing  upon
some  joint  effect ;  secondly,  the  correspondency  of '
their  position,  so  that  the  teeth  of  one  wheel  catcfi
into  the  teeth  of  another}  thirdly,  the  proportion
observed  in  the  number  of  teeth  of -each  wheel,
which  determines  the  rate  of  going.  ^Referring
the  balance  to  the  rest  of  the  works,  he  saw,  when
he  came  to  understand  its  action,  that  which  sea*
dered  their  motions  equable.  Lastly,  in  looking
upon  the  index  and  face  of  the  watch,  he  sow  the
use  and  conclusion  of  the  mechanism,  wr.  mark-
ing the  succession  of  minutes  and  hours;  but  all
depending  upon  tlje  motions  within,  all  upon  the
system  of  intermediate  actions  between  the  spring
and  the  pointer.  What  thus  struck  his  attention
in' the  several  parts  of  the  watch,  he  might  proba-
bly designate  by  one  general  name  of  " relation;"
and  observing  with  respect  to  all  cases  whatever,
in  which  the  origin  and  formation  of  a  thigg
could  be  ascertained  4>y  evidence,  that  there  rela-
tions were  found  in  things  produced  by  art  and
design,  and  in  no  other  things,  he  would  rightly
deem  of  them  as  characteristic  of  such  productions.
— To  apply  the  reasoning  here  described  to  the
works  of  nature.

The  animal  economy  is  full,  is  made  up,  of
these  relations: —  -**

I.  There  are/  first,  what,  in  one  form  or  other
belong  to  all  animals,  the  parts  and  power*  which
successively  act  upon  then:  food.  Compare  this
action  witn  .the. process  of  a  manufactory.  In
men  and  quadrupeds,  the  aliment  is,  first,  broken
and  bruised  by  mechanical  instruments  of  masti-
cation, tiz.  sharp  spikes  or  hard  knobs,  pressing
against  or  rubbing  upon  one  another;  t^us  ground
and  comminuted;  it  is  carried  by  a  pipe,  into  the
stomachy  where  H  waits  to  undergo  a  great  chy-
mieal  action,  which  we  call  digestion :  when  diges*
ted.  it  is  delivered  through  an  orifice,  which  open*
and  flhuts  as  there  is  occasion,  into  the  first  intest-
ine: there,  after  being  mixed  with,  certain  other
ingredients,  poured  through  ahole  in  the  side  o£
the  vessel,  it  is  farther  dissolved :  an  this  state,  the
milky  chyle,  or  part  which  is  wanted,  and  which  is
suited  for  animal  nourishment,  is  strained  off  by
the  mouths  of  very  email  tubes,  opening  into  the


436


NATURAL  THEOLOGY".


Cawtty  of  too  intantftio?  thus)  need  from  its  grosser
pertSj  the  percolated  fluid  ia  carried  by  a  long,
Winding,  but  traceable  course,  into  the  main  stream
of  the  old  circulation ;  which  conveys  it  in  its
y regress,  to  every  part  of  the  body.  Now  I  -say4
again,  compare  this  with  the  process  of  a  manu-
factory;  with  the  making  of  cider,  for  example ;
with  the  bruising  of  the  applea  in  the  mill,  the
squeezing  of  them  when  so  bruised  in  the  press,
the  fermentation  in  the  Tat,  the  bestowing  of  the
liquor  thus  fermented  in4he  hogsheads,  the  draw-
ing off  into  bottles,  the  pouring  out  for  use  into
the  glass.  Let  any  one  show  me  any  difference
between  these  two  cases,*  as  to  the  point  of  contri-
vance. That  which  is  at  present  under  our  con-
sideration, the  "  relation"  of  the  parts  successively
employed,  is  not  more  clear  in  the  last  case  than
in  the  first.  The  aptness  of  the  jaws  and  teeth
to  prepare  the  food  for  the  stomach,  is,  at  least,  as
manifest  as  that  of  the  cider-mill  to  crush  the
apples  for  the  press..  The  concoction  of  the  food
in  the  stomach  is  as  necessary  for  its  future  use,
as  the  fermentation  of  the  stum  in  the  vat  is  to  the
perfection  of  the  liquor.  The  disposal  of  the  ali-
ment afterward ;  the  action  and  change  which  it
undergoes ;  the  route  wVich  it  is  made  to  take,  in
order  that,  and  until  th  •*,  it  arrive  at  its  destina-
tion, is  more  complex  taleed  and  intricate,  but  in
the  midst  of  complication  and  intricacy,  as  evident
«nd  certain,  as  is  the  apparatus  of  cocks,  pipes,
tunnels,  for  transferring  the  cider  from  one  veKsel
|ft  another;  of  barrels  and  bottles  for  preserving  it
till  fit  for  use ;  or  of  cups  and  glasses  for  bringing
it,  when  wanted,  to  the  lip  of  the  consumer.  The
character  of  the  machinery  is  in  both  cases  this ;
that  one  part  answer*  to  another  part,  and  eVery
part  to  the  final  result.

;  This  paxallel  between  the  tixieniary  operation
and  some  of  the  processes  of  artj  might  be  carried
farther  into  detail.  Spaiian9.n1  has  remarked*  a
circumstantial  resemblance  between  the  stomachs
of  gallinaceous  fowls  and  the  structure  of  com-
muU.  Whilst  the  two  sides  of  the  gizzard  per-
form the  office  of  the  mill-stones,  the  craw  or  cropN
supplies  the  place  of  the  hopper.

When  our  fowls  are  abundantly  supplied  with
meat,  they  soon  fill  their  craw:  but  it  does  not
immediately  pass  thence  into  the  gizzard;  it  al-
ways enters  in  very  small  quantities,  m  proportion
to  the  progress  of  trituration ;  in  like  manner  a?,
in  a  mill,  a  receiver  is  fixed  above  the  two  large
atones  which  serve  for  grinding  the  corn ;  which
receiver,  although  the  corn  be  put  into  it  by  bush-
els, allows  the  grain"  to  dribble  only  in  small  quan-
tities, into  the  central  hole  in  the  upper  mill-
stone. *  •

But  we  have  not  done  with  the  alimentary  his-
tory. There  subsists  a  genera)  relation  between
the  external  organs  of  an  animal  by  whieh  it  pro-
cures its  food,  and  the  internal  powers  by  which
it  digests  It  Birds  of -prey,  by  their  talons  and
beaks,  are  qualified  to  seize  and  devour  many  spe-
cies, both  of  other  birds,  and  of  quadrupeds.  The
constitution  of  the  stomach  agrees  exactly  with
the  form  of  the  members.  The  gastric  mice  of  a
bird  of  prey,  of  an  owl,  a  falcon,  or  a  kite,  acts
upon  the  animal  fibre  alone ;  it  will  not  act  upon
seeds  -or  grasses  at-  all.  On  the  other  hand,
the  conformation  of  the  mouth  of  the  sheep
or  the  ox  is  suited  for  browsing  upon  herbage.

♦IMs.Lseet.liv.


Nothing  about  these  anhnab  is  fitted  fcr  (fat
pursuit  of  living  prey.  Accordingly  it  hat  been
found  by  experiments,  tried  not  many  yean  ago,
with  perforated  balls,  that  the  gastric  juice  of
ruminating  animals,  such  as  the  sheep  and  the
ox,  speedily  dissolves  vegetables,  but  makes  no
impression  upon  animal  bodies.  This  acconjancy
is  still  more  particular.  The  gastric  juice,  even
of  granivorous  birds,  will  not  act  upon  the  grain,
whilst  whole  and  entire.  In  performing  the  ex-
periment of  digestion  with  the  gastric  juke  in
vesscls,lhe  grain  must  be  crushen  and  bruised,
before  it  be  submitted  to  the  menstruum,  that  is
to  say,  must  undergo  by  art  without  the  body,  the
preparatory  action  which  the  gizzard  exerts  upon
it  within  the  body ;  or  no  digestion  will  take  place.
So  strict,  in  this  case,  is  the  relation  between  the
offices  assigned  to  the  digestive  organ,  between
the  mechanical  operation  and  the  chymical  pro-
cess.

II.  The  relation  of  the  kidneys  to  the  bladder,
and  of  the  ureters  to  both,  t  e.  of  the  secreting
organ  to  the  vessel  receiving  the*  secreted  liquor,
and  the  pipe  laid  from  one  to  the  other  for  the
purpose  of  conveying  it  from  one  to  the  other,  is
as  manifest  as  it  is  amongst  the  different  vessels
employed  in  a  distillery,  or  in  the  communication!
between  them.  The  animal  structure,  in  this
case,  being  simple,  and  the  parts  easily  separated,
it  forms  an  instance  of  correlation  which  may  be
presented  by  dissection  to  every  eye,  or  which,  in-
deed, without  dissection,  is  capable  of  being  appre-
hended by  every  understanding.  Thfe  correlation
of  instruments  to  one  another  fixes  intention
somewhere.

Especially  when  every  other  solution  is  nega-
tived by  the  conformation.  If  the  bladder  bad
beerfnierely  an  expansion  of  the  ureter,  produced
by  retention  of  the  fluid,  there  ought  to  have  been
a  bladder  for  each  ureter.  One  receptacle,  fed  by
two  pipes,  issuing  from  different  sides  of  the  body,
yet  from  both  conveying  the  same  fluid,  is  not  to
be  accounted,  for  by  any  such  supposition  as.thfe.

HI.  Relation  of  parts  to  One  another  accompa-
nies us  throughout  the  whole  animal  economy.
Can  any  relation  be  more  simple,  yet  more  con-
vincing than  this,  that  the  eyes  are  so  placed  as
to  look  in  the  direction  in  which  the  legs  move
and  the  hands  work  ?  It  might  have  happened
very  differently  if  it  had  been  left  to  chance.
There  were,  at  least,  three  quarters  of  the  com-
pass out  of  four  to  have  erred  in.  Any  consider-
able alteration  in  the  position  of  the  eye,  or  the
figure  of  the  joints,  would  have  disturbed  the  line,
■and  destroyed  the  aHiance  between  the  sense  and
the  limbs.

IV.  But  relation  perhaps  is  never  so  striking
as  when  it  subsists,  not  between  different  parts  of
the  same  thing,  but  between  different  things.
The  relation  between  a  lock  and  a  key  is  more
obvious,  than  it  is  between  different  parts  of  the
lock.  A  bow  was  designed  for  ah  arrow,  and  an
arrow  for  a  bow :  and  the  design  is  more  evident
,  for  their  being  separate  implements.

Nor  do  the  works  of  the  Deity  want  this  clear-
est species  of  relation.  The  sexes  are  manifestly
made  for  each  other.  They  form  the  grand  rela-
tion of  animated  nature ;  universal,  organic,  me-
chanical :  subsisting  Hke  the  clearest  relations  of
art,  in  different  individuals;  unequivocal,  inexpli-
cable without  design.

So  much  so,  that,  were  euary  other  proof  of


NATURAL  THEOLOGY.


497


oontrivance  in  'nature  dubious  or  obscure,  this
alone  would  be  sufficient.  The  example  is  corn-
plate..  Nothing  is  wanting  to  the  argument.  I
aee  no  way  whatever  of  getting  over  It

V.  The  teats  of  animals  which  give  suck,  bear  a
relation  to  the  mouth  of  the  suckling  progeny ;
particularly  to  the  lips  and  tongue.  Here  also,  as
before,  is  a  correspondency  of  parts;  which  parts
subsist .in  different  individuals.


These  are  general  relations,  or  the  relations  of
parts  which  are  found,  either  in  all  animals,  or  in
large  classes  and  descriptions  of  animals.  Parti*
cuXar  relations^  or  the  relations  which  subsist  be-
tween theiparricular  configuration  of  one  or  more
parts  of  certain  species  01  animals,  and  the  parti-
cular configuration  of  one  or  more  other  parts  of
tiie  same  animal,  (winch  is  the  sort  of  relation
that  is,  perhaps,  most  striking,)  are  such  as  the
following : —

I.  In  the  *wanj  the  web-foot,  the  spoon-bill,
(he  long  neck,  the  thick  down,  the  graminivorous
stomach,  bear  all  a  relation  to  one  another,  irtas-
nauch  as  they  all  concur  in  one  design',  that  of
supplying  the  occasions  of  an  aquatic  fowl,  float-
ing upon  the  surface  of  shallow  pools  of  water,
ana  seeking  its  food  at  the  bottom.  Begin  with
any  one  of  tnese  particularities  of  structure,  and  ob-
serve how  the  rest  follow  it.  The  web-foot  quali-
fies the  bird  for  swimming;  the  spoon-bill  enables
it  to  graze.  But  how  is  an  animal,  floating  upon
the  surface  of  pools  of  water,  to  graze  at  the  bot-
tom, except  by  the  mediation  of  a  long  neck  ?  A
long  neck  accordingly  is  given  to  it  Again,  a
warm-blooded  animal,  which  was  to  pass  its  life
upon  water,  required  a  defence  against  the  cold-
ness of  that  element.  Such  a  defence  is  furnished
to  the  swan,  in  the  muff  in  which  its  body  is
wrapped.  But  all  this  outward^  apparatus  would
have  oeen  in  vain,  if  the  intestinal  system  had  not
been  suited  to  the  digestion  of  vegetable  sub-
stances; I  say,  suited  to  the  digestion  of  vegeta-
ble substances :  for  it  is  well  known,  that  there
are  two  intestinal  systems  found  in  birds:  one
with  a  membranous  stomach  and  a  gastric  juice,
capable  of  dissolving  animal  substances  alone:  the
other  with  a  crop  and  gizzard,  calculated  for  the
moistening,  bruising,  and  afterward  digesting,  of
vegetable  aliment.

Or  set  off  with  any  other  distinctive  part  in  the
body  of  the  swan ;  for  instance,  with  a  long  neck.
The  long  neck,  without  the  web-foot,  woura  have
been  an  incumbrance  to  the  bird;  yet  there  is  no
necessary  connexion  between  a  long  neck  and  a
web-foot.  In  fact,  they  do  not  usually  go  toge-
ther. How  happens  it,  therefore,  that  they  meet
only  when  a  particular  design  demands  the  aid
offioih.  r

II.  This  natural  relation,  arising  from  a  sub-
serviency to  a  common  purpose,  is  very  observable
also  in  the  parts  of  a  mole.  The  strong  short  legsr
of  that  animal  the  palmated  feet  armed  with  sharp
nails,  the  pig-like  nose,  the  teeth,  the  velvet  coat,
the  small  external  ear,  the  sagacious  smell,  the
sunk,  protected  eye,  all  conduce  to  the  utilities  or
to  the  safety  of  its  under-ground  life.  It  is  a  spe-
ciaj  purpose,  especially  consulted  throughout.  The
form  of  the  feet  fixes  the  character  of  the  animal.
They  ate  so  many  shovels ;  they  determine  its  ac-
tion to  the*  of  rooting  in  the  ground;  and  every


thing  rfbeut  its  body  agrees  wish  its  destinations
The  cylindrkal  figure  of  the  mole,  as  well  as  tae
compactness  of  its  form,  arising  from  the  terseness
of  its  limbs,  proportidnabry  lessens  its  labour.;  be-
cause, according  to  its  bulk,,  it.  thereby  require*
the  least  possible  quantity, of  earth  to  be  removed
for  its  progress.  It  has  nearjy  the  same  structure
of  the  race  and  jaws"  as  a  swine,  and  the  same  of-
fice for  them.  The  nose  is  sharp,  •slender,  tendi-
nous, strong ;  with  a  pair  of  nerves  going  down
to  the  end  of  H.  The  plush  covering,  winch,  by
the  smoothness,  closeness,  and  polish,  of  the  short
piles  that  compose  it,  rejects  the  adhesion  of  almost
every  species  of  earth,  defends  the  animal  from
cold  ahd  wet,  and  from  the  impediment  which  it
would  experience  by  the  mould  sticking  to  its
body.  From  soils  of  all  kinds  the  little  pioneer
comes  forth  bright  and  clean.  Inhabiting  dh*>  it
is,  of  all  animals,  the  neatest.

But  what  I  have  always  most  admired  in  the
mole  is  its  eyes.  This  animal  occasionally  visiting
the  surface,  and  wanting,  for  its  .safety  ated  direc-
tion, to  be  informed  when  it  does  so,-  or  When  it
approaches  it,  a  perception  of  light  was  necessary.
I  do  not  know  that  the  clearness  of  sight  depends
at  all  upon  the  size  of  the  organ.  What  is  gained
by  the  largeness  or  prominence  of  the  globe  of  the
eye,  is  width  in  the  field  of  vision.  Such  a  capa-
city would  be  of  no  use*  to  an  animal  which  wart
to  seek  its  food  in  the  dark.  The  mole  did  not
want  to  look  about  it;  nor  would  a  large  ad-
vanced eye  have  been  easily  defended  from  this
annoyance  to  which  the  life  of  the  animal  must
constantly  expose  it.  How  indeed  was  the  mole,
working  its  way  onder  ground,  to  guard  its  •eyes
at  al|  ?  In  order  to  meet  this  difficulty,  the  eyes
are  made  scarcely  larger  than  the  head  of  a  cork-
ing pin ;  and  these  minute  globules  are  sunk  so
deeply  in  the  skull,  and  lie  so  sheltered  within
the  velvet  of  its  covering,  as  that  any  contraction
of  what  may  be  canea4  the  eve-brows,  not  only
closes  up  the  apertures  which  lead  to  the  eyes,  but
presents  a  cushion,  as  it  were,  to  any  sharp  or
protruding  substance  which  might  push'  against
them.  This  aperture,  even  in  its  ordinary  siate,
is  (ike  a  pin-hole  in  a  piece  of  velvet,  scarcely  per-
vious to  loose  particles  of  earth.

Observe  then,  in  this  structure,  that  which  we
call  relation.  There  is  no  natural  connexion  be-
tween a  small  sunk  eye  and  a  shovel  palmated
foot  Palmated  feet  might  have  been  joined  with
goggle  eyes ;  or  small  eyes  might  have  been  joined
with  feet  of  any  other  form.  What  was  it  there-
fore which  brought  them  together  in  the  mole'?
That  which  brought  together  4he  barrel,  the
chain,  and  the  fusee;  in  a  watch;  design:  and
design,  in  both  cases,  inferred,  from  the  relation
which  the  parts  bear  to  one  another  in  the  prose-
cution of  a  common  purpose.  As  hath  already
been  observed,  there  are  different  ways  of  stating
the  relation,  according  as  we  set  out  from  a  di£
ferent  pail  In  the  instance  before  us,  we  may
either  consider  the  shape  of  the  feet,  as  qualifying
the  animal  for  that  mode  of  life  and  inhabitation
to  which  the  structure  of  its  eyes  confines  it ;  or
we  may  consider  the  structure  of  the  eye,  as  the
only  one  which  would  have  suited  witlfthe  action
to  which  the  -feet  are  adapted.  The  velation  is
manifest,  whichever  of  the  parts  related  we  place
first  in  theorder  of  our  consideration.  In  a  word  \
the  feet  of  the  mole  are  made  for  digging :  the  N
neck,  nose,  eyes,  ears,  and  tain,  are  peculiarly
37*


NATURAL  THEOLOGY.


to  an  underground  Ifis*  and  this  is  whet


CHAPTER  XVL

Compensation.

Compensation  »  m  species  of  relation,  ft  is
Delation  when  the  defect*  of  one  put,  or  of  one
organ  an  supplied  by  the  structure  of  another
fait  or  of  another  organ. Thus,

I.  The  short  unbending  neck  of  the  elephant,
is  compensated  by  the  length  and  flexibility  of  his
jHVDotri*.  He  could  not  have  reached  the  ground
without  It;  or,  if  it  be  sup|>osed  that  he  might
haw  fed  upon  the  fruit,  leaves,  or  branches  of
trees,  how  was  he  to  drink  1  Should  it  be  asked,
Why  is  the  elephant's  neck  so  abort  1  it  may  be
answered,  that  the  weight  of  a  head  so  heavy
could  not  haw  been  supported  at  the  end  of  a
longer  lever.  To  a  form,  therefore,  in  some  re-
spects necessary,  but  in  some  respects  also  inade-
quate to  the  occasion  of  the  animal,  a  supplement
is  added,  whish  exactly  makes  up  the  deficiency
under  which  he  laboured.

If  it  be  suggested  that  {his  proboscis  may  have
been  produced,  in  a  lomf  course. of  generations,
fry  the  constant  endeavour  of  the  elephant  to
throat  out  his  nose,  (which  is  the  general  hypo-
thesis by  which  it  has  lately  been  attempted  to
account  for  the  .forms  of  animated  nature,)  1
would  ask,  How  was  the*nimal  to  subsist  in  the
time;  during  the  process;  until  this  pro-
of snout  were  completed  1  What  was
of  the  individual,  whilst  the  species  was

Our  business  at  present  is  simgly  to  point  out
ihe  relation  which  this  organ  bears  to  the  peculiar
figure  of  the  animal  to  which  it  belongs. And


herein  all  things  correspond.


belongs.
The  necessity  of


the  elephant's  proboscis  arises  from  the  shortness*
of  his  neck ;  the  shortness  of  the  neck  is  rendered
necessary  by  the  weight  of  the  head.  Were  we
to  enter  into  an  examination-  of  the  structure  and
anatomy  of  the  proboscis  itself,  we  should  see
in  it  one  of  the  most  carious  of  all  examples  of
animal  mechanism.  The  disposition  of  the  ring-
lets and  fibres,  for  the  purpose,  first,  of  forming  a
long  cartilaginous  pipe :  secondly,  of  contracting
and  lengthening  that  pipe:  thirdly,  of  turning  it
In  every  direction  at  the  will  of  the  animal:  With
the  auDeraddition  at  the  end,  of  a  fleshy  produc-
tion, rf  about  the  length  and  thickness  of  a  finger,
and  performing  the  office  of  a  finger,  so  as  to  pick
up  a  straw  from  the  ground :  these  properties  of
the  same  organ,  taken  together,  exhibit  a  speci-
men, not  only  of  design  (which  is  attested  by  the
advantage)  but  of  consummate  art,  and,  as  I  may
say,  of' elaborate  preparation,  in  accomplishing
that  design.

II.  The  hook  in  the  wing  of  a  bat  is  strictly  a
mechanical,  and  also  a  compensating  contrivance..
At  the  angle  of  its  wing  there  is  a  bent  claw,
exactly  in  the  form  of  a  hook,  by  which  the  bat
attaches  itself  to  the  sides  of  rocks,  caves,  and
buildings,  laying  hold  of  crevices,  joinings,  chinks,
and  roughnesses.  It  hooks  itself  by  this  claw ;
remains  suspended  by  this  hold :  takes  its  flight
from  this  position :  which  operations  compensate
•wthedeetepiurfeofUslegsandfeet Without


her  hook.thebatwotildBnthemoithf^taof
all  animals.  She  can  neither  run  upon  her  feet,
nor  raise  herself  from  the  ground.  These  inabili-
ties are  made  up  to  her  by  the  contrivance  in  her
wing :  and  in  placing  a  claw  on  that  put,  the
Creator  has  deviated  from  the  analogy  observed
in  winged  animals. — A  singular  defecT requited  a
singular  substitute.

.  III.  The  crane  kind  are  to  live  and  seek  their
food  amongst  the  waters;  yet,  having  no  web-
feet,  are  incapable  of  swimming.  To  make  op
for  this  deficiency >  they  are  furnished  with  long
legs  for  wading,  of  long  bills  for  groping;  or
usually  with  bock  This  is  compensation.  But
I  think  the  true  reflection  upon  the  present  in-
stance is,  how  every  part  of  nature  is  tenanted
by  appropriate  inhabitants.  Not  only  is  the  sur-
face of  deep  waters  peopled  by  numerous  tribei
of  birds  that  swim,  but  marshes  and  shallow
pools  are  furnished  with  hardly  less  numerous
tribes  of  birds  that  wade. '

IV.  The  common  parrot  has,  in  the  structure
of  its  beak,  both  an  inconveniency,  and  a  eampenr
tation  for  it  When  I  apeak  of  an  inconveniency,
I  have  a  view  to  a  dilemma  which  frequently
occurs  in  the  works  of  nature,  vis.  that  the  pecu-
liarity of  structure  by  which  an  organ  is/maoe  to
answer  one  purposel  necessarily  unfits  it  for  some
other  purpose.  This  is  the  case  before  us.  The
upper  bill  of  the  parrot  is  so  much  hooked,  and  so
much  overlaps  the  lower,  that  if,  as  hi  other  birds,
the  lower  chan  alone  had  motion,  the  bird  conn
scarcely  gape  wide  enough  to  receive  its  food:
yet  this  hook  and  overlapping  of  the  4h11  coold
not  be  spared,  for  it  forms  one  very  fastrmmentby
which  the  bird  climbs ;  to  say  nothing  of  the  use
which  it  makes  of  it  in  breaking  nuts  and  the
hard  substances  upon  which  it  feeds.  How.
therefore,  has  nature  provided  for  the  opening  of
this  occluded  mouth  ?  by  making  the  upper  chap
moveable,  as  well  as  the  lower.  In  most  birds,
the  upper  chap  «  connected,  and  makes  but  one
piece,  with  the  skull ;  but  in  the  narrot,  the  upper
chap  is  joined  to  the  bone  of  the  head  by  a  strong
membrane  placed  on  each  side  of  it,  which  lite
and  depresses  it  at  pleasure.*

V.  The  spider's  web  is  a  compensating  con-
trivance. The  spider  lives  upon  flies,  without
wings  to  pursue  them;  a  case,  one  would  haw
thought  or  great  difficulty  >  yet  provided  for,  and
provided  for  by  a  resource  which  no  stratagem.
no  effort  of  the  animal  could  have  produced,  nad
not  both  its  external  and  internal  structure  bees
specifically  adapted  to"  the  operation,

VI.  In  many  species  of  insects,  the  eye  is  fixed ;
and  consequently  without  the  power  of  turning
the  pupil  to  the  object.  This  great  defect  a\
however,  perfectly  compensated;  and  by  a  me-
chanism which  we  should  not  suspect.  The  eve
is  a  multiplying-glass,  with  a  lens  looking  m
every  direction  and -catching  every  object.  By
which  means,  although  the  orb  of  the  eye  be  step
tionary,  the  field  of  vision  is  as  ample  as  that  of
other  animals,  and  is  commanded  on  every  side.
When  this  lattioe.work  was  first  observed,  the
multiplicity  and  minuteness  of  the  surfaces  most
have  added  to  the  surprise  of  the  discovery.
Adams  tells  us,  that  fourteen  hundred  of  these
reticulations  have  been  counted  in  the  two  eyes  of
a  drone-bee.


t*  OcIasmiQi's  Natural  History,  voL  v.  p.  «t


NATURAL  THEOLOGY.


In  other  cases  the  compensation  »  effected  b  y
the  number  and  position  of  the  eyes  themselves.
The  spider  has  eight  eyes,  mounted  upon  differ-
ent parts  of  the  head ;  two  in  front,  two  in  the
top  of  the  head ;  two  on  each  side.  These  eyes
are  without  motion;  hut  by  their  situation,  suited
to  comprehend  every  view  which  the  wants  or
safely  of  the  animal  rendered  it  necessary  for  it  to
take.

VII.  The  Memoirs  for  the  Natural  Histoij
of  Animals,  published  by  the  French  -Academy,
A.  D.  1687,  furnish  us  with  some  curious  par-
ticulars in  the  eye  cf  a  chameleon.  Instead  of  two
eyelids^  it  is  covered  by  an  eyelid  with  a  hole  in
it.  This  singular  structure  appears  to  be  eeirt-
jsjiuatory,  and  to  answer  to  some  other  singulari-
ties kr  the  shape  of  the  animal.  The  neck  of  the
chameleon  is  inflexible.  To  make  up  for  this,
the  eye  is  so  prominent,  as  that  more  than  half  of
the  ball  stands  oat  of  the  head ;  by  means  of  which
extraordinary  projection,  the  pupil  of  the  eye  can
be  carried  by  the  muscles  in-  every  direction,  and
is  capable  of  being  pointed  towards  every  object.
But  then,  so  unusual  an  exposure  of  the  globe
©f  Jhe  eye  requires,  for  its  lubricity  and  te-
fence,  a  more  than  ordinary  protection  of  eye-
lid, as  well  as  a  more  than  ordinary  supply  of
moisture;  yet  the  motion  of  an  eyelid,  formed  ac-
cording to  the  common  construction,  would  be  im-
peded, as  it  should  seem,  by  the  convexity  of  the
organ.  The  aperture  in  the  lid  meets  this  diffi-
culty. It  enables  the  animal  to  keep  the  principal

-  part  of  the  surface  of  the  eye  under  cover,  and  to
,  preserve  it  in  a  due  state  of  humidity  without
shutting  out  the  light  r  or  witheut  performing
•very  moment  a  nictitation,  which,  it  is  probable,
would  be  more  laborious  to  this  animal  than  to
others.

VIII.  In  another  animal;  and  in  another  part
of  the  animal  economy,  the  same  Memoirs  describe
•  most  remarkable  substitution.  The  reader  will
remember  what  we  have  already  observed  con-
cerning the  intestinal  canal:  that  its  length,  so
many  times  exceeding  that  of  the  body,  promotes
the  extraction  of  the  chyle  from  th6  aliment,  by
giving  joom  for  the  lacteal  vessels  to  act  upon  it
through  a  greater  space.  This  long  intestine,
wherever  it  occurs,  is,  in  other  animals,  disposed
in  the  abdomen  from  side  to  side  in  returning
folds.  But,  in  the  animal  now  under  our  notice,
the  matter  is  managed  otherwise.  The  same  in-
tention is  mechanically  effectuated;  but  by  a  me-
chanism of  a  different  Kind.  The  animal  of  which

.  I  apeak,  is  an  amphibious  quadruped,  which'  our
authors  call' the  alopecias,  or  sea4bx.  The  intes-
tine is  stiaight  from  one  end  to  the  other:  but  in
this  straight,  and  consequently  short  intestine,  is
a  winding,  corkscrew^  spiral  passage,  through
which  the  food,  not- without  several  circumvolu-
tioni,  and  in  feet  by*  Jong  route,  is  conducted  to
Its  exit.  Here  the  shortness  of  the  gut  is  commen-


ted -by  the  obliquity  of  the  perforation.

IX.  But  the  works  of  the  Deity  are  known  by
expedients.  Where  we  should  look  for  absolute
destitution  j  where  we  can  reckon  but  wants;.
sjomo  contrivance  always  come*  in,  to  supply  the
privation.  A  enoil,  without  wings,  foet,  er  thread,
climbs  up  the  stalks  of  plants,  by  the  sole  aid  of  a
visck}  humour  discharged  from  her  skin.  She
adfcem  to  the  stems,  leaves,  and  fruits,  of  plants,
by  meanerof  a  stickinc  plaster.  A  mutely  which
amigfatf«en^byitohel|)essneBs  to  lie  at  the  mar  •


cy  of  every  wave  that  went  oyer  Hfnas  the  singo*
lar  power  of  spinning  strong,  tendinous  threads,
by  which  she  moors  her  shell  to  rocks  and  timbers.
A  cockle,  on  the  contrary,  by  means  of  its  stiff
tongue,  works  for  itself  a  shelter  in  the  sand.
The  provisions  of  nature  extend*  to  cases  the.  moat
desperate.  -  .

A  lobster  has  in  iU  constitution  a  difficulty  so
great,  that  one  could  hardly  conjecture  beforehand
hovrnature  would  dispose  ofsjt.  In  most  snhnsle,
the  skin  grows  with  their  growth.  If;  instead  of
a  soft  skin,  there  be  a  shell,  still  it  admits  of  a
gradual  enlargement.  If  the  shell,  a*  in  tip  tor-
toise, consist  of  several  pieces,  the  accession  of
substance  is  made  at  the  sutures.  Bivalve  sheDs
£tow  bigger  by  receiving  ah  accretionat  their  edge;
it  is  the  same  with  spiral  shells  at  then*  mouth.
The  simplicity  of  their  form  admits  of  this.  But
the  lobster's  shell  being  applied  to  the  Mmbs  of  the
body,  as  well  as  to  the  body  itself,  allows  not  of
either  of  the  modes  of  growth  which  are  observed
to  take  place  in  other  shells.  Its  hardness  resists
expansion :  and  its  complexitV  renders  it  incapa-
ble oflncreasipg  its  size  by  addition  of  substance
to  its  edge.  How  then  was  the  growth  of  the
lobster  to  be  provided  fort  'Was  room  to  be  made
for  it  in  the  old  shell,  or  was  it  to  be  successively
fitted  with  hew  ones'?  If  a  change  of  shell  be*
came  necessary,  how  wtt'the  lobster  to  extricate
himself  from  his  present  confinement  1  how  was
he  to  uncase  his  buckler,  or  draw  hie  lege  out  of
his  boots  1  The  process  which  nshdrmen  hav*
observed  to  take  place  is  as  follows: — At  certain
seasons,  the  shell  of  the  lobster  grows  soft:  the
animal  swells  its  body ;  the  seams  open,  am\the
claws  burst  at  the  joints.  When  the  shell  has
thus  become  loose  upon  the  body,  the


makes  a  second  effort,  and  by  a  tremulous,  spas-
modic motion,  casts  k  off.  In  this  state,  the  liber-
ated but  defenceless  fish  retires  into  holes  in  the
rock.  The  released  body  now  suddenly  pushes
its  growth.  In  about  eight-and-forty 'hours,  a
fresh  concretion  of  humour,  upon  the  surface,  i.  a.
a  new  shell,  is  formed,  adapted  in  every  part  to
the  increased  dimensions  of  the  animal.  This
wipderfulinutarion  is  repeated  every  year.

If  there  be  imputed  defects  without  compensa-
tion, I  should  suspect  that  they  were  defects  only
in  appearance.  Thus,  the  body  of  the  *loth  has.
often  been  reproached  for  the  slowness  of  its  mo-
tions, which  has  been  attributed  to  an  imperfec-
tion in  the  formation  of  its  hmbi.  But  ^  it  ought
to  be  observed,  that  it  is  this  slowness  which  alone
suspends  (he  voracity  of  the  animal  He  foste
during  his  migration  from  one  tree  to  another:
and  this  fast  may  be  necessary  for  the  relief  of  his
overcharged  vessels  v  as  well  as  to  allow  time  for
the  concoction  of  the  mass  of  coarse  and  bard
food  which  he  has  taken  into  bis  stomach.  The
tardiness  of  his  pace  seems  to  have  reference  to
the  capacity  of  ms  Organs,  and  to  his  propensities
with  respect  to  food;  t. «.  w  calculated  to  counter-
act the  effecte  of  ropietion.

Or  there  may  be  cases,  in  which  a  defect  is  arti-
ficial, and  compensated  by  the  very  cause  which
produces  it  Thus  the  sheep,  in  the  domesticated
state  in  which  we  see  it,  is  destitute  of  the  ordinary
means  of  defence  or  escape :  is  incapable  either  of
resistance  or  flight.  But  this  is  hot  so  with  the
wild  animal.  The  natural  sheep  is  swift  and  ac-
tive; and,  if  it  lose  these  qualities  when  it  cornea
under  the  subjection  of  man,  H*  loss  is  company


440


NATURAL  THEOLOOY.


sated^ry  his  protection.  Perhaps  there  is  no  «pe-
«tce  of  quadruped  whatever,  which  suffers  go  little
m  this  does,  from  the  depredation  of  animals  of
prey.

For  the  sake  of  making  oar  meaning  better  un-
derstood, we  have  considered  this  business  of  com-
pensation under  certain  particularities  of  constitu-
tion, in  which  it  appears  to  be  most  conspicuous.
This  view  of  the  subject  necessarily  limits  the
instances  to  single  snecies  of  animals.  Bat  there
are  compensations,  perhaps  not  less  certainl  which
extend  over  large  classes,  and  to  large  portions  of
living  nature.

I.  in  quadrupeds,  the  deficiency  of  teeth  is  usu-
ally compensated  by  the  faculty  of  rumination.
The  sheep,  deer,  and  ox  tribe,  are  without  fore-
teeth in  the  upper  jaw.  These  ruminate*  The
horse  and  .ass  are  furnished  with  teeth  in  the
upper  jaw,  and  do  not  ruminate.  In  the  former
class,  the  grass  and  hay  descend  into  the  stomach,
nearly  in  the  state  in  which  they  axe  cropped
from  the  pasture,  or  gathered  from  the  bundle.  In
the  stornach. they  are  softened  by  the  gastric  juice,
which  in  these  animals  is  unusually  copious.
Thus  softened  and  rendered  tender,  they  are  re-
tamed  a  second  time  to  the  action  of  the  mouth,
where  the  grinding  teeth  complete  at  their  leisure
the  trituration  which  is  necessary,  but  which  was
before  left  imperfect  I  any.  the  trituration  which
b  necessary;  for  UappeanriDm  experiments,  that
the  gastric  fluid  of  sheep,  for  example,  has  no
•fleet  in  digesting  plants,  unless  they  have  been
previously  masticated;  that  it  only  produces  a
alight  maceration  j  nearly,  as  common  water  would
do  in  a  like  degree  tf  heat ;  but  that  when  once
vegetables  are  reduced  to  pieces  by  mastication,

-  the  fluid  then  exerts  upon  them  its  specific  opera-
tion. Its  first  effect  is  to  soften  them,  and  to  de-
stroy their  natural  consistency;  it  then  goes  on  to
dissolve  them;  not  sparing  even  the  toughest  parta,
•ueh  as  the  nerves  of  the  leaves:*

I  think  it  very  probable,  that  the  gratification
also  of  the  animal  is  renewed  and  prolonged  by
this  faculty.  Sheep,  deer,  and  oxen,  appear  to  be
in  a  state  of  enjojment  whilst  they  am  chewing
the  cud.  It  is  then,  perhaps,  that  they  best  relish
their  food.

II.  In  birds,  -the  compensation  is  still  more
striking.  They  have  no  teeth  at  alL  What  have
•they  then  to  make  up  for  this  severe  want  ?  I
apeak  of  granivoroua  and  herbivorous  birds ;  such
as  common  fowls,  turkeys,  ducks,  geese,  pigeons,
etc.;  for  it  is  concerning  these  alone  that  the
question  need  be  asked.  All  these  are  furnished
with  a  peculiar  and  most  powerful  muscle,  called
the  gizzard;  the  inner  coat  of  which  is  fitted  up
with  rough  plaits,  which,  by  a  strong  friction
against  one  another,  break  and  grind  the  hard
aliment  aa  effectually,  and  by  the  same  mechani-
cal action,  as  a  cofiee-mill  would  do.  It  has  been
proved  by  the  moat  correct  experiments,  that  the
gastric  juice  of  these  birds  will  not  operate  upon
the  entire  grain;  not  even  when  softened  by
water  or  macerated  m  the  crop.  Therefore
without  a  grinding  machine  within  its  body,
without  the  trituration  of  the  giziard,  a  chicken

her?

>  there

are  teeth.


wunooi  ine  iruurauon  or  ine  gizzara,  a  cnicxi
would  have  starved  upon  a  heap  of  com.  Y
why  ahould  a  bill  and  a  gizzard  so  togethe
Why  should  a  gizzard  never  be  found  where  the


t8eail.Dis.Ui.soct.cxl.


Nor  does  the  gizzard  belong  to  buds  as  soeh.
A  giaxard  is  not  found  in  birds  of  prey.  Their
food  requires  not  to  be  ground  down  in  a  mill.
The  compensatory  contrivance  «oes  no  farther
than  the  necessity.  In  both  classes  of  birds,
however,  the  digestive  organ  within  the  body
bears  a  strict  and  mechanical  relation  to  the  carter-
net  instruments  for  procuring  food.  The  soft
membranous  stomach  accompanies  a  hooked,
notched  beak;  short,  muscular  lege;  Strang,  sharp,
crooked  talons:  the  cartilaginous  stomach  attends
that  conformation  of  bill  and  toes,  which  restrains
the  bird  to  the  picking  of  seeds,  or  the  cropping  of


III.  But  to  proceed  with  our  compensation*.—-
A  very  numerous  and  comprehensive  tribe  of  ter-
restrial animals  are  entirely  without  feet;  yet  lo-
comotive ;  and  in  a  very  considerable  degree  swift
in  their  motion.  How  is  the  wont  qffett  com-
pensated 1  It  is  done  by  the  disposition  of  the
muscles  and  fibres  of  the  trunk.  In  consequence
of  the  just  collocation,  and  by  means  of  the  joint
action  of  longitudinal  and  annular  fibres,  that  is
to  sayy  of  strings  and  rings,  the  body  and  train  of
readies  are  capable  of  being  reciprocally  shortened
and  lengthened,  drawn  up  and  stretched  oat.
The  result  of  this  action  is  a  progressive,  and,  in
some  cases,  a  rapid  movement  of  the  whole  body,
in  any  direction  to  which  the  will  of  the  animal
determines  it.  The  meanest  creature  is  a  coflec*
tion  of  wonders.  The  play  of  the  rings  in  an
earthrtcorm,  a*  it  crawls ;  the  fwdoJasary  motion
propagated  along  the  body;  the  beards  or  prickles
with  which  the  annuli  are  armed,  and  which  the
animal  can  either  shut  op  close  to  its  body,  or  let
out  to  lay  hold  of  the  roughness  of  the  surface
upon  which  it  creeps;  and  the  power  arising  from
all  these,  of  changing  its  place  and  position,  afford,
when  compared  with  the  provisions  for  motion  in
other  animals,  proofs  of  new  and  appropriate
mechanism  Suppose  that  we  had  never  seen  an
animal  move  upon  the  ground  without  feet,  and
.that  the  problem  was, — muscular  action,  i.  e.  re-
ciprocal contraction  and  relaxation  being  given,
to  describe  how  such  an  animal  might  be  con-
structed, capable  of  voluntarily  changing  place,
Something,  perhaps,  like  the  organization  of  rep-
tiles might  have  been  hit  upon  oy  the  ingenuity
of  an  artist;  or  might  have  been  exhibited  in  an
automaton,  by  the  combination  of  springs,  spiral
wires,  and  ringlets:  but  to  the  solution  of  the
problem  woujd  not  be  denied,  surely,  the  praise  of
invention  and  of  successful  thought :  least  of  all
could  it  ever  be  questioned,  whether  intelligence
had  been  employed  about  it,  or  not.


CHAPTER  XVII. .

The  Relation  a/  animated  Bodies  to  inanimaU

Nature.

We  have  already  considered  relation,  and  un-
der different  views ;  but  it.  waa  the  relation  of
parts  to  parta,  of  the  parta  of  an  animal  to  other
parts  of  tne.same  animal,  or  of  another  individual
of  the  same  species.  %

But  the  bodies  of  animals  hold,  in  theb  const*,
tution  and  properties,  a  close  and  important  rela-
tion to  natures  altogether  external  to  their  own ;
to  inanimate  substances,  and  lo  the  specific  quauV


NATURAL  THEOLOGY.


441


ties  of  't&ewi*  e.  g.  they  tidd  a  tkrict  relation-  to
fa  Ki-KMENTsdy  which  theSf  pre  surrounded.

I.  Can  it  £e  doubted',  whether  the  wings  of
birds  bear  a  relation  to  air;  and  thejins  ofjlsh  to
Water  1  They  are  instf-UTdent*  of  rpotjon,  seve-
rally suited  to  the  properties  of  the  medium  in
which:  the  motion*  is*  to  oe  performed  :  which  pro-
perties are  different  Was  not  this  difference  cori-
.  templated,.  wheq^tae  instruments  were  differently
constituted  7  m'  * ^

.  II:  The  structure  of  {he  animal'  ear  depends
for  its  use,  not  simply  upon  being  durrouWed  by
a  fluid,'  but  upon  the  specific  nature  of  that  fluid.
Ever^  fluid  woukjnot  serve :  its -particles  must  re-
feel  one  another;  it  must  fofm  ah  elastic  medium :
for  it  is  by  the  successive  pulses  of  such  a  medium,
that  the  undulations  excited  by  the  surrounding
body  .are. carried  to  tne  organ ;  that  a  eominunir*-
tion  is  formed  between  the"  object  and  the  senJB;
which  must  bd  done,  before  the  internal  machi*
nejy  of  the  ear,  sdbulc  as  it  is,  ean  act  at  all.
.  III.  Tho-  organs  of  voice,  and 'respiration,  ate
no  fess  than  the  ear,  indebted,  for  the  success  of
•  their  operation,  to  th$  peculiar  qualities'  of  the
fluid  in  which  the  animal  is  immersed.  ?  They,
therefore,^  well  as  the  ear,  are  constituted  upon
the.  supposition  of  such  a  fluid,  t.  e.  of  a  fluid  with
SQcfi  particular  properties,'  beirig  always  present.
Change  the  properties  of  the  fluid  a,nd  the  orgnp
cannot  act;  change  the  organ- and  the  properties
of  the  fluid  wobldbe  lost.  The  structure  there-
lore  of  our  organ^  and  the  properties  of1  out  atmos-
phere, are  made  for  one  another.  Nor  does  it  alter
the  relation,  'whether,  you  allege  the  organ  to  be
made  for  the  element  (which  seems  the*  most
natural  Way  of  -considering  it,)  or  tfio  element  as
prepared  for  th&orgaft.

IV.  But  there  is  arwtner-fluld  withf  which  we"
ha^e  to  do;  wkh  properties  of  its  owrr ;  with  laws
of  acting,  and  of  being  acted  upon,  totally  different
from  those  of  air  arid  water:  .and  that  is  light.
'  To  this  new,  this  singular  element;  to  Equalities
perfectly  .peculiar,  perfectly  distinct  and  remote
from  the  qualities  of  anj  other  substance  with
which  we  are  acquainted,  an  organ  is  adapted]  an
instrument  is  correctly  adjusted,  not  less  peculiar
amonfrst  the  parts  o^  the  body,  not  less' -singular
in  its  form,  and  in  the  substance  of  whictt  it-  is
composed,  not  less  remote  from  the  materials,  the
model,  and  the  ahalogy/oT  anv  other  part  of  the
animaT  frame,  |han  the  element  to  which  it  're-
lates, is  specific  amidst  the  substances  with  which
wecon  verse.  .  If  this  does  not-prove  appropriation,.
I  desire  to  know  what  would  prove  it. *

Yet  the  element  of  light  ana  the  organ  of  vision,
however  related  in  their  office  and  use;  have  nri
connexion  whatever '  in  their  original.  The
action  of  riys  of  light  upon  the  surfaces  of  animals, '
has  no  tendency  to  breed  eyes  m  their  heads.  T  he
sun  might  shine  for  ever  upon  living  hodies,  with-
out the  smallest  approach-,  towards  producing  the
sense  of  sight.  On  thV  othet  hand  also,  the
animal  eye  does  not  generate  "or  emit  light.

V.  Throughout  the  universe  there;  is  a  wonder-
lb]  proportioning  of  one  thing  to  another. ,  The


size' of  animals,  of  the  human  animal  especially^
i  considered  with  respect  to  other  animals,  or


wheoc


to*  the  plants  which  grow  around  him; is  such  as
a  regard  to  hie  conveniency  would  have 'pointed
out  A  giant  or  a  pigmy  could  not  have  milked
goats,  reaped  corn,  or  mowed  grass ;  we  may  add,
could  not  nave  rede  a  hone,  trained  a  fine,  shorn
3K


a. sheep,  with  the  same  bodily  ease  as  wfe  do,  if  at
all.  A  pigmy  wou&'ha\o  been  lost  amongst
rushes;  or  earned  off  by  btrds.bf  pte*y.  *
'  It  teay  tie  mentioned  likewise,  that  the  model
and  the  materials  of  the  human  body  being  what
they  are,  a* much  greater  bark  would-  have  broken
dqwn  by  Its  own  weight.  The  persons  of  men
who -much  exceed  the.  ordinary  stature,  betray
tfiis  tendency.  *  •  '

VI.  Again,  (and  which  includes  a  vast  variety
ef  particulars,  and  those  of  the  greatest  import-
ance ;)  turw  close  is  tm;  suitableness  of  the'  earth
and  sea  to  their  several  inhabitants  ?  and  of  these  in-
habitants, to  the  places  of  their  appointed  residence!

Take  the  earth  as  it  is;  arid:  consider  the  cor-
respondency, of  the  powers  of  its^  inhabitants  wijh
the  properties  and  condition  -Of  the  soil  which  they
tread.  Take  the  intmbiflmts  as  they  are ;  and
consider  the  substances  which  the  earth  yields  for
their  use.  'They  ean  scratch,  it*  surface5;  and  He
surface,  supplies  all  which"  they  want.  ^  This  is
the  length  of  their  faculties :  arid  such  is  the  con-
stitution of  the  globe,  and  their  own,  that:t|fis  is
sufficient  for  all  their  occasions.  -.

When  we  pass  from  the  earth  tS  the"  sea,  frdrn
land  to  water,  we  pass  through  a  great  change;
tut,  an  adequate  change  accompanies  us2  of  ani-
mal forms  arid  functions,  of  animal  capacities  and
wants ; .  so  that  correspondent)/  remains.  .  yhc
earth  tn  its  nature  fe  very^ different  from  the.fcea,
and  the  sea  from  the  earth :  hut  one  accords  with
its  inhabitants  as  exactly  as  the  other.
„  Vfl.  'The  last  Relation  of  this  kind  which  I
shall  mention,  Is  that  of  steep  to-night;  and  it  ap*
pears  to  me"  to  bea  relation  which  was  eTpresfly
intended.  Two  points  are  manifest :  first,  that
trie  animaf  frame  requires  sleep-  secondly,  that
night  brings  with  it  a  silence,  ana  a  cessation  of
activity,  which  allows  of  sleep  being  tafctfhwitfai
out  interruption,  and  without  loss.  Animal  ex-
istence hi  made  up  of  action  and  slumber;- nature
has  provided  a  season  for  each.  An  animatwhlch .
stood  not  in  need  pf  rest,  Would  always*  live  in
day-light.  An  animal,  which;  though  majde  for,
.  action,,  and  delighting  in  action,  must  haYfe  its
strength  repaireiTby  sleep,  meets,  by  its  constitu-
tion,  thejeturns  of  day  and  night,  tyi  the  human
species,  for  instance,  were  the  bustle, -the  labour,
the  raocifcn  of  life,  upheld  by  the  constant  presence
of  light,  -sleep  .couH  not  be  enjoyed  without  being-
disturbed  by  tie, isc,  and  without •  expense  T>f.  that
time  which  the  eagerness  of  private  interest  would  '
not  contentedly  resign.  -  It  is  happy  therefore  for
this  part  'of  the  creation;  I  mean  that  it  is  con-
formable to  the  frame  antf  wants  of  their  eonstitu-  .
tion,  that  nature,  bythe  very  disposition  6f  her
'elements,  nas  commanded,  as  it  were,  and  im-
posed upon  them,  at  moderate  intervals,  a  general
intermission  of  their  toils,  their  occupations,  and
pursuits.  '

;  Put  it  is  not  for  marl,  either  eolelysor  principal-
ly, that  "nigHt  is  made.  Inferior  hot  less  perverted
natures,  taste 'its  solace,  and  expect  its  return,
with  greater  exactness  and  advantage  than  he
does.  I  have  often  observed,  apd  never  observed
but  to  admire,  the  satisfaction,  no  less  than  the
regularity,  with  which  the  greatest  part  of  t*e'h\
rational  world  yield  to  this  soft  necessity,  this
grateful  vicissitude;  how  comfortably  the  Birds
of  the  air  for  example  address  themselves  to  the
repose  of  the  evening ;  with  what  alertness  they
resume  the  activity  of  the  da)!


NATUKIL  TH£OgXX»Y.


Nor  3dm  k  msturb  our  ligament  to
thai  certain  enedes  of  snimak  are  in
daring  the  night  andat  nit  m  the  day.  With
respect  even  to  them,  it  is  atUl  true,  that  there  is  a
change  of  condition  in  the  animal,  and  an  exter-
nal chang?  conesponding  with  it.  There  is  still
the  relation,  though  inverted.  The.  feet  is,  that
the  repose  of  other  animals  sets  these  at  liberty,
and  invitos.them  to  their  food  or  their-sport  - ._

If  the  relation  ,of  sleep  to  night,  and  in  some
instances,  its  converse^  be  reel,  we  cannot  reject
without  itmawmenl  upon  the  extent  to  which  it
carries  us.  Day  and  night  are  thingsxlose  to  us ;
the  change  applies  immqfl lately  to  our,  sensations ;
of  all  the  phenomena  of  nature,  it  is  the  most  ob-
vious aj^  thenioatfimMliv  to  our  experiences  but,
in  its  causa,  it  belong*  to  the  great  motions  which
are  passing  in  1fre  heavens.  Whilst  the  earth
f  tides  round  her  axle,  she  ministers  to  the  alter-
nate neoassines  of  -the  animals  dwelling  iipon  her
mrmce.at  the  same  time  that  she  obey*  the  inAV
enee  ox  those  attractions  which  regulate  the  order
oT  many  thousand  worlds.  The  relation,  there-
fin,  jof  sleep  to  night,  is  the  reftatmn  of  the  inha-
bitants of  the  earth  to  the  rotation  of  their  glebe;
attfcataV  it  is  more.;  it  is-a  relation  to  the  system,
ofwhich  that  p^obejs  apart;  and, .still firmer, to
the  congregation  of  systems,  of  which  theirs  is
only  one.  If  this  account  fee  true,  it  connects  the
meant*  individual  with  the  universe  itself;  a
chicken  roosting  upon  its  perch,  with  the  spheres
revolving  in  the  firmament

VIIL  But  if  any  one  object  to  our  representa-
tion, thai  thef  succession  of  day  and  night,' or  the
notation  of  the.  earth  upon  which  it  depends,  is
not  resolvable  into  central  attraction,  we  will  refer
him  to  that  which  certainly  is{  to  the  change  of
the  seasons,  Now  the  consututipn  of  aiumals
MMOtpttble  of  torpor,  bears  a  relation  to  winter,
simibr  to  that  which  sleep  beaj*  to  pight.  Against
not  only  the  cold,,  bat  the  want  of  food,  which  the,
approach  of  winter  induces,  the  Preserver  of  the,
wood  has  provided  in  many  animals  by  migration,
In  many  others  by  torpor.  As  one  example,  out
of  a  thousand  j  the  hat,  if  it  did  not  sleep  through
the  winter,  must  have-  starved,  as  the  moths  end
flying  trisects  upon  which  it  feeds  disappear.  But
the  transition  from  summer-  to  winter  carries,  us,
into  the  very  midst  of  physical  astronomy ;  that  is
.to  say,  into  Jhe  midst  of  those  Jaws  which  govern
the  solar  system  at  least,  ami  probably  ail  the
heavenly  todies..


. CHAPTER  XVIII.

Instincts.  -

Ta?  ecfer  may  not  be  very  obvious,  by  which
I  place  instincts  next  to  relation.  BuV  I  consider
them  as  a  species  ofrelations.  They  contribute,
along  with  the  animal  organization,  -to  a  joint  ef-
fect, m  which  view  they  are  related  to  that  organ-
ization. In  many  cases,  they  refer  from  one  ani-
mal to  another  animal ;  ana,  when  this  is  the  case,
become  strictly  relations  in  a  second  point  or  view.

An  instinct  is  8c  propensity  prior  to  experi-
ence, and  independent  or  instruction. We  con-


tend, that  it  is.  by  instinct  that  the  sexes  of  ani-
mabseek  each  other ;  that  animals  cherish  their
waprjng;  thai  die  young  quadruped  2a  directed


totbeteatof^<km;«^htril«iUtBerfBeMsi
and  brood..wHhsomuwpatience~upontbekegn;
that  insects  which  do  not  sit  upon  their  eggfcTde^
posit  them  in  tfua*  particular  situatioaajn  whim
the  young,  when  hatched,  find  their  eppropmte
food;  thai  it  is  instinct  which  carries  the  •almon,
and  some  other  fish,  out  of  the  sea  into  riven  far
the  purpose  of  shedding  their  spawn  ia  fiesfc
voter.

We  may  safest  out  of  this  catalogue  the  incu-
bation of  eggs;  i  entertain  no  doubt,  bat  that  a
couple  of  sparrows  hatched  in  an  oven,  and  kept
separate,  from  the  rest  of  their  species,  would  wo-
ceed  as  other  sparrows  do, ,  in  every  office  which
related  to  the  productioivand  preservation  of  their
brood.  Assuming  this  fact,  the  .thing  is  inexpK-
cable  upon  any  other  hypothesis  man  that  of  an
instinct,  impressed  upon  the  constitution  of  the
attmaL  For,  first,  what  should  induce  the  female
bird  to  prepare  a  nest  before  she  lays  her  esgil
It  is  in  vain,  to  suppose  her  to  be  possessed  of  the
feculty  of  reasoning:  for,  no  reasoning  wflj  reach
the  case.  The  fatness'  or  distension  Which  she
might  feel  in  a  particular,  part  of  her  bodv,  from
the  growth  and  solidity  of  the  egg  witftn  her,
could  not  possibly  inform  her,  that  she  was  about
to  produce  something,  which,  when  produced,  wa
to  be  preserved  and  taken  care  of.  Friof  to  ei  pe-
rience,  there  was' nothing  to  Jead  to.thk  inftr-
ence,  or  to  rms  auBpirfbn,  The  analogy  was  stf
against  it:  for  in  every -other  instance,  wwtisjiisa
from  the  >ody  was  cast  out  and  rejected.

But.  secondly,  let  us  suppose  the  egg  to  be  pro-
duced mto  day ;  how,  should  birds  know  that  their
eggs  contain  their  young?  Them  is  nothing,
either  in  the  aspect  or  in  $e  internal  composition
of  an  egg,  which  could  lend  even  the  most  daring
imagination  to  conjecture,  jthat  it  was  heseafteftto
turn  out/from  under  ito  shell,  a  living,  perfect
bint  The  form  of  the  egg  bears  not  the  rudiments
of  a-  resemblance  to  that  of  the,  bird.  *  Inspecting
ito  contents,  we  find -still  less  reason,  if  possible,
to  look  for  the  result  which  'actually  takes  pfatf*.
[f  we  j&ould  go  so  far,  a*,  from  the  appearance  of
order  and  distioction-in  ihe  disposition  of  $e  faqon
substances  which  we  noticed  in 'the  egg;  to  guess
that  it  might  be,  designed  for  the  abode  and  nutaj
meat  of  an  animal,  (which  would  .fee  a  very  bofa
hypothesis^)  we  should  expect  a  tadpole  dabbtin*
in  the  slimer  much  rather  than  a  dry,  winged,
feathered  'creature;.-  a  compound  of  parU-and  pro-
perties impossible  to  be  used  jn  a  state  of  confine-
ment in  the  eggt  andl»earmg  no  conceivable  rela-
tion, either  in  quajily  or  material  to  any. thing
observed  in,  it  From  the  white  of  an  egg,  wouw
any  one  look  for  .the  feather  of  a  goldfinch  1  or
expect  from  a  eimple,  uniform  mucuago,  the  moat
complicated  of  all  machines  r  the  most  diversified
of  all  collections  of  substances  t  Nor,  would  the
process  of  incubation,  for  some  time  at  least,  lead
^us  to  suspect  the  event.  Who  thai  saw  red  streaks,
s&oogng  in  the^me"  membrane  which  divides  the
white- from  the  yolk,  would  suppose  that  thaw
were  about  to  "become  bones  and  limbs  1  Who,
thai  espted!  two  discoloured  points  first  making
their1  appearance  in  the  cicatrix,  would  have  had
the  courage  to  predict,  that  these  points  were  to
grow  into  the  heart  and  head  of  a  birdl  It  is  dif-
ficult to  strip  the  mind  of  its  experience.  It  *
difficult  to  resuscitate  surprise,  when  iamiEarfr
has  once  laidf  the  sentiment  asleep.  But  coaw
we  forget^  all  we  know,  and  which  aur^BperjjW


KATWtAL  TBEOLOGT.


44*


Asm  knew,  tkwt  ot^impim  gwiwation;  could
we  divest  ouraelver  of  every  infonhatien,  but  what
we  derived  4jom  reasoning  upon  the  appearances
«I  quality  discovered  in  -the  objects  presented  to
vs>;  '1  am  convinced  thatHarlequin  coming  out  of
an  egrapon4he  stage,  is  not  more  astonishing  fa
a  chad,  than  the  hatching  of  a  chicken  both  would'
be,  and  ought  to  be,  to  a  philosopher. •

But  admit  the  sparrow  by  eon*  maans  to  knew.
thaTwithin  that  egg  was  concealed  the  principle  or
a  future  birek  fromwbelchyniist  was  she  to  team,
that  wcjrmULwaa  neceaaarj  to  bring  it  to  maturity,
or  that  the  degree  of  Warmth,  imparted  by  the
temperature  o/her  own  body,  was  the  degree  re-
quired %

To  suppose,  therefore,  that  the.  female  bird  acta
in  this  pwcess.from  a  sagacity  and  reason  of  her
own,  is  to  suppose  her: to  arrive  at  conclusions
which  there  are  no  premises  to  justify.  If  our
sparrow,  sitting  upon  her  eggs,  expect -young
sparrows  to  come  out  of  them,  she  forms,  I  will
venture  to  say,  a-  wild  and  extravagant  expecta-
tion, in  opposition  to  present  appearances,  and*  to
psobahility.  She  must  have  penetrated  .into  the
erder.of  nature,  farther  than  any  faculties  of  ours
will  carrjrue ;  and  it  hath-been  well  observed,  thai
.  this  deep  sagacity,  if  it  be  sagacity,  subsists  in
conjunction  with  great  stupidity,  even  in  relation
to  the  same  subject  4<  A  chymical  operation,"
says  Addison,  "could  not  befouewed  with  greater
a/t  or  diligence,  than  is  seen  in  hatching  achicken  :•'■
yet  is  the  process  carriedon  without  the  least  glim-
tnering'ef  thought  or  common  sense.  The  -hen
will  mistake*  piece  of  chalk,  for  an  egg;  is  insen-
sible of  the-inereaae  or  diminution  of  their  number ;
does  not  distinguish  between  her  own  and  those
of  another  species;  is  frightened  when  her  sup-
posftfeiout breed  of  ducklings  take  the  water."

But  it  will  be  said,  that  what  reason  could  not
do  for  the 'bird,  observation,  or  instruction,  or  tra-
dition, might  New  if  it  be  true,  that  a  couple  of
sparrows,  brought  ypfrcjm  the  first  in  a  state  Of-
separation  from  all  other  birds,  would-  build  their
nest,  and  brood  upon  their  eggs,  then  there  is  an
end  tl>  this  solution.  What  can  be  the  tradition-
ary knowledge,,  of  a  chicken  hatched  pi,  an
.even?  /

Of  young  birds  taken  to  their  nests,  a  few.spe-
cSes  breed,  when  kept  in  cages ;  and  they  which
do  so,  build  their  nests  nearly  in  the  same  manner
sjs>m  the  wild  state,  and  sit  upon  their  eggs.  This
is  sufficient  to  £iwe  an  instinct,  without  having
recourse  to  experiments  upon  birds  hatched  by
artificial  heat,  and  deprived;  from  their  birth,  of
sjl  commnnration  with  their  species :  for  we  can
herdry  bring  ourselves  to  believe,  that  the  parent
.  Mrd  informed  her  unfledged  pupd  of  the  history
of  her  gestation,  her  tunely  preparation  of  a  neat
her  exclusion,  of  the  eggs,  nor  long  incubation,  and
of  the  joyful  eruptionat  last  of  her  expected  off-
spring; all  which  the  bird  in  Jfae  cage  must  have
learnt  in  her  infency,  if  we  resolve  her  conduct
into  institution.

Unless  we  will  rather  suppose,  that  she  remem-
ber* her  own  escape  from  the  egg;  had  attentively
.  observed  the  conformation  of  the  nest  in  which
she  was  nurtured;  and  had  treasured  up  her  re-
narks  for  future  imitation:  which  is  net  only  ex-
probable,  (for  who,  that  sees  a  Jwoed  of
i  in  their  nest,  can  believe  that  they  are
taking  a  plan  of  their  habitation  1)  t*$  leaves  un-
avcountedfor,  one  principal  part  of  the^hffibujty,


*  the  prtJperatkm  of  the.  nest  before  the  lay
theegg^  This  she  could  not  gain "from c
tion  m  her  mfancY.
_  It  is  remarkable  also,  that  the  hen  .ails  .upon
eggs  which  she  has  laid  without  any  communica-'
tmn  with  the  male  i  and  which  -are  therefore<ne-
ceasarily  unrnritftd.  That  secret  she  is  not  let
into.  Vet  if  incubation  had  been-  a  subject  of
instruction  or  of  .tradition,  it  should  seenrihat  this
distinction  would  have  formed  part  of  the  lesson :
whereas- the  instinct  of  nature  is  .calculated  for  ft
state  of  nature: -the  exception  here  alluded  to,
taxing  place  chienV,  if  not  solely'  amongst  domes-
ticated fowls,  in  winch  iiature  is  forced  out  of  her
course.  ■  -

There  is  another  case  of  oviparous  economy,
which  is  still  less  Hkely  to  be  the  eflect  of  educa-
tion than  it  is  even  mirirds,  namely  that  of  moths
and  butterjtiet,  wMclj  deposit  then;  eggs-  in  the
precise 'substance'  that  of  a  cabbage  for  example^
from  which,  not  the  butterfly  herself,  bntthecatee-
pilkr  which  is  to  issue  from  her  egg,  draws  its
^appropriate  food.  The  butterfly  cannot  taste  the '
cabbage.  Cabbage- is  no  food  for  her:  yet  in  the
cabbage,  not  by  chance,  but  studiously  and  elec-
tively,  she  lays  her-  eggs.  There  are,  amongst
many  other  kinds,1  the  willow-caterpiHar  and  ua
cabbage-caterpillar :  but  we  never  find  upon  a  vdl-
low  the  caterpillar  winch  eats  the  cabbage;  nor
the  converse.  This  choice,  as  appears  to  me,
cannot  in  -the  butterfly  proceed  from  instruction.
She  had  no  teacher  in  her  caterpillar  state.-  She
never  knew  her  parent .  I  do  not  see,  therefore, '
how  knowledge  acquired  hy  experience,  if  it  ever
were  such,  could  be  transmitted  from  one  genera-
tion to  another.  There  is  no  opportunity  either
for  instruction  or  imitation.  The  parent  race  is
gone,  before  the  new  brood  is  hatched.  And  if  if
be  original  reasoning  in  the  butterfly,  it  is  pro-
found reasoning  indeed.  She  must  remember  her
caterpijlar  jrtate,  its  tastes  and  habits:  of  which
memory  she  shows  no  signs  Whatever.  She  must
conclude  from  analogy  (far  Eere  her  recollection
cannot  serveher,)  thai  the  little  round  body  which
drops  foam  her  abdomen,  wjll  at  a  future  pence?
produce  a  living  creature,  not  like,  herself,  but  like
the  caterpillar  which  she  remembers  hefself  once
to  have  been.  Unjjer  the  influence  of  then*  re-,
flections,  she  goes  about  to  make  provision  for  an
order  of  things,  which  she  concludes  will,  some
time,  or  other,  take  plaoey  And  it  js  to  be  observed,
that  not  a  few  out  of  many,  but  that  all  butter-
flies argue  thus;  ail  draw  this  conclusion;  all  act
upon  it  ~  •, .  •'

But  suppose  the  address,  and  the  selection,  and
the  plan,  vf  Inch  we  perceive  in  the  preparations
which-  many-  irrational-  animals  make  for  their
young, .  to  be  traced  to. some  probable  origin:  still
there  » left  to  be  accounted  for,-  that  which  is  the
source  and  foundation  of  these  phenomena,  that
which  sets  the  whole  at  work,  the  rrofv^,  the  pa-
rents! affection,  which  I  contend  to.be  ineiplica-  *
bje  upon  any  other  hypothesis  than  that  of  in-
stinct -. .  ,N '  •

For  we  shaB  hardly,  I  imagine,  m  brutes,  refer
their  conduct  towards  their  offspring  to  a  sense  of
duty,  or  of  decency,  a  care  of  reputation,  a  comv
pliance  with  pubtic  manners,  with  public  Jews,  o*
with  rules  oflife  built  upon  a  long  experience  of*-
their  utifity.  And  all  attempts  to  account  for  the
-parental  affection  from  association,.  1  think,  fail,  '
Wi£  what  is  it  associated  I  Most  inmjediately


444


NATU&At  TBSOLOQY,


with  the  throes  of  f»utiiritwn>  that  js,  with  pain
and  terror  and  disease.  The  more  remote,  bat
not  leas  strong  association,  that  which  depends
upon,  analogy,,  is  all  against  it.  Every  thing  $lse
which  proceeds  from  the  body,  is  cast  away,  and
rejected.  Ja  birds,' is  it  the  egg  which  the  hen
loves  1  •  or  is  ft  the  expectation  which  she  cherishe*
of  n/uture  progeny  ft,hat  keeps,  her  upon  her  nest  ?
What  came  hps  she  to  expect  delight  from  her
progeny  t  Can  any  rational  answer  be  given  to
the  aueation,  whv,  prior  to  experience,  the  jxrood-
tag  hen  should  look  for  pleasure  from  her  chick*
ensl  It  does  not,  I  think,  appear,  that  the  cuckoo
ever  knows  her  voting:  yet,  in  her  way,  she  is
as  careful  hi  making  provision  for  them,  as  any
other  bird. She  does  not  leave  her  egg  in  every

The  salmon  suffers  no  surmountable  obstacle  to
oppose  her.nrogtvss  up  the  stream  of  fresh  rivers-.
And  what  -does  she  do  there  1  She  sheds  a  spawn,
which  she  immediately  quits,  in  order  to  return
to, the  sea:  and  this  issu«  Of  her  body,  she  never
afterward  recognise*  in  -any  shape  whatever.
Where  shall  we  find  a  motive  fop  her  efforts- and
her  perseverance  ?  Shan  we  seek  itinaTgumentr
jition,  or  in  instinct  7  The  violet  crab  of  Jamaica
.performs  a  fatiguing- march  of  some -months'  con-
tinuance; from  the  mountains  to  the  sea  side.
When  she  reaches  the-coast,-  she*  casts  her  spawn
into  the  open  sea;  and  sets  out  upon  her  return
home;  *■

"  Moths,  and  butterflies,  as  hath  already  been  ob-
served, seek  out  for  their  eggs  those  precise  situa-
tions and  substances  in  which,  the  offspring  cater-
pillar will  find  its  appropriate  food.  That  dear
caterpillar,  jthe  parent  butterfly  must  never  see.
There  are  no  experiments  to  prove  that  she  would
retain  any  knowledge  of  it,  if  she  did.  -  How  shall
We  account  for  her  conduct?  I  do  not  mean-  for
her  art  and  judgment  n?  selecting  and  securing  a
maintenance  for.  her  young,  but  for  the  impulse
upon  which  she  acts.  What  should  induce  ber
to  exert  any  text,  or* judgment,  er- .choice,  about
the  metier  f  The  undisclosed  'grub,  the  animal
Which  she  is  destined  not  to  know,  can  hardly  be
the  .object  of  a  (testicular  affection,  if  we  deny  the
influence  of  instinct.  There  is  nothing,  therefore,
left  to  her,  but  that  of  which  her  nature  seems  in.
ctfpahlo.  anabstraet  anxiety  for  (he  general  preserv-
ation of  the  species ;  a  Jund  of  •patriotism ;  a  solici-
tude'lest  the  butterfly  race  should  cease  from  the
creation.  :  *

lastly;  the^principle  of  association  will  not  ex-
plain the  discontinuance  of  the  affection  when  the
young  Animal  is  grown -op.  Association,  ope-
rating. b>  its  usual  way,  would  rather  produce  a
contrary  effect  'The  object  would  become  more
necessary,  by.  habits,  of  ssciety:  whereas  Jrird*'
and  beasts,  after  a-  certain  time,' banish  their  off-
spring ;  disown  their  acquaintance ;  seem  to  have
oven  no  knowledge  of  the  objects  which  so  lately
engrossed  the  attention  of  their  minds,  and  occu-
pied the  industry  and  labour  of  their  bodies. T  his

*  change,  in  different  animals,  takes  place  at  differ-
ent distances  of  time  from  the  birth:  but  the  time
always  corresponds  with  the  ability  of  the  young
animal  to  maintain  itself  r  never  anticipates  it.  in
toe  sparrow  tribe,  when  it  is  perceived  that  the
young  brood  can  fly,  arid  shift  for  themselves,  then
the  parents  forsake  them  for  ever ;  and,  though
they,  continue  to  live  together,  pay  them  no  mora

.  attention  than  they  do  to.  other  bunk  in  the  amino


flock.* lbehew5thesajrjethh^is.troa«ftllfW.
garioua  quadrupeds-  '»■>

In  this  part'of  the  casev  the  variety  of  wawras,
expedients,  and  materials,  winch  anhoab  of  the
same  species  are  said  to  have  recourse  to,  wafer
different  circumstanees,  ami  when  differently  sup-
plied, makes  nothing  against  the  doctrine  of  h*
stinrts.  The  thing  which  we  want  to  account
for.  is  the  propensity.  The  propensity  being  there,
it  is  probable  enough  that  it  may  pot  rheajwnsl
upon  different  actions,  according  to  different  eii?
genoies.  And  this  adaptation  of  josourojs  aa\y
look  tike  the  effect  of  art  and  consideration,  nthw
than  of  instinct:  but  stilt  the  propensity  as  in-
stinctive. Fur  instance,  suppose  what  is  related
of -the  woodpecker  to  be  true,  that  in  Europe  she
'deposits  her  eggs  m  cavities,  whiq}i  she  scoops  oat  ,

in  the  trunks  of  soft  or  decayed  Oees;  and  in  which \
cavities  the  eggs  lie  concealed  from  the  eye,  and
in  some,  sort  safe  from  the  hand  of  man:  but  that  i

in  Che  forests  of  Guinea  and  the  Brazils,  Which  j

man  seldom  frequents,  the  same  tgrd  bang*  her
nest  to  the  twigs  of  taO  trees;  thereby  placing
them  out  of  the  reach  of  monkeys  and  snato;
i:  «.  that  in  each  situation  she  prepares  against
the  danger  which  she  has  moat  occasion  to  ap-
prehend :  suppose,  I  say,  this  to  be  true,  and  to
he  alleged,  on  the  part  of  the.  bird  that  buUdsthese
nests,  a*  evidence  pf  a  reasoning  and  distinguish-
ing precantion;  atill  the  question  returns,  whence
the  propensity  tt>  build  ol^alH

Nor  does  parental  affection  accompany  genenv
tion  by  any  universal  Jaw  of' animal  orgsnha-
tion,  irsuch  a  thing  were  intelligible,  tametn>
maJs  cherish  their  progeny  with  the  most  ardent
fondness,  an4  the  most  assiduous  attention ;  otben
entirely  neglect  them :  arid  this  distinction  nl«aw
meets  the  constitution  of  the  young  animal,  with
respect  to  its  wants  and  capncitiea  In  many,  the
parental  care  extends  to  the  young  animal  in
others,  us  in.  all  oviparous  fish,  it  is  confined  s>
the  egg,  and  even,  as  to  thai,  to  the  disposal  of  it
in  its  proper  >element  x  Also,,  an  there  w  genenv
tion  without  parental  affection,  so  is  there  parental
iiistinotj  or  what  -exactly  reaetnnfes  it,  withoot
generation;  In  the  bee  tribe,  the  grub  is  nurtured
neither  by  the  father  nor  the  mother  ^but  by  the
neutral  bee.  .  Probably  t^cawe  is  the  same  with
ants.

J  am  not  ignorant  of  the  theory  which  resolve*
instinct  into  sensation ;  which  asserts,  that  what
appears  to  h*ve£  view  and  relation  to  the-future,
is  the  result  only  of  the  preaaanfrdis^onition  efrthe
animal's  body,  and  of  pleasure  or  pun  experienced
at  the  time.  Thus  the  incubation  of  egos  is  ac-
counted for  by  the  pleasure  which  thehird  U  sup-
posed to  receive  from  the  presume  of  the  smooth
convex-  surface  of  the  shells  against  the  abdomen,
or  by  the  relief  which  the  mild  temperature  of
the  egg  may  afford' to  the  heat  of  the  lowerpaft
of  the  body,  which  is  observed  at  this  time  to  be
increased  beyond  its  usual  state.  This  present
gratification  is  the  only,  motive  with  the  nen  for
sitting  upbn  her  nest;  the  hatching  of  the  chick-
ens is,  with  'respect  to  her,  an  accidental  oonse-
quence.  '  The  affection  of  viviparous  animals  for
their  young  is,  in,  like  manner,  solved  by  the  re-
lief, and  perhaps  the  jdeaaure,  which  they  receive
from  giving  suck.  The- young  animal's  seeking!
in  so  many  instances,  the  teat  of  ita  dam,  is  ex-


•  Goldsmith*  Nat.  His.  voL  is*,  p,  *M»


JSTAT^^ALrTBWOLOOy.


4*


try  the.  odour  of  milk.  The-  salmon's  urging  iU
way  up  the  stream  of  fresh  water  riven,  i**ttri-
bated  to  eomeg ratification  or  refreshment,  which,
hi  thja  jpaftieufer  state,  of  the  fiahfe  body;  she  re-
ceives -front  the  change  of  element.  '  N«w  of  this
theory,  it  may  be  said,  -•
First>  that  ef  the  case*  which  require  solution,
.  there  are  iew  to_,  wtych  it  can  be  applied  'with  to-
krable  probability  p4het  there  are  none  to  which
it  can  be  snptted  without  strong  objections,  fur-
nished by  the  etrenmstahces  of  the  case.  The
attention  of  the  cow  to  it*  calf,  and^of  the  ewe  46
its  lamb,  appear  to  be  prior  to  theft  sucking;  '<  The
attraction  of  the  calf  or  lamb  to  the  teat  of*  the,
daih,  is  not  explained  byl.sim.pl y  referring  it  to  the
sense  of  smelL  What  matle  the  .scent  of  millcao
agreeable  to  the  larab,*hat  it  should  ibOow  it  up
with  ite  nose,  or  seek  with  its'  mouth  tjie  place*
Horn  which  it  proceeded  %  No.  observation,  no.exr
^erianee,  ne  argument,  could  leaeh  the  new  dro^

-  ped  animal,  4hat  the  substance  from  which  the
scent  issued  -was  the  material'  of  its  food1.  It  .bad
never,  lasted  milk  before  its  ,birtb^  None  -of  the
animal*  which  -are  not  designed  fo»  thai  nourish-

'  ment,  ever  offer  to  tuck,  at  to  seek  out  an*  such
food  What  is  (he  oonclnsion,  but  that  tie  keu-
geseent  pacts  of,  animals  are  fitted  tor  their  use,
and  the  knowferigeef  that  use  pot  into  them  1 .

Weiseeri,  secondly,  that,  even  as  to  the-  cases
In  which  the  hypothesis  has  the  fairest  claim  to
enjuidtaUJon,  it  doee-npt  at  all  lessen  the  force  of
the  .eminent  for  intention  antLdesign. ;  The  '
tone  offittinct  iaythatof appetencies;  #Jp<
to  the  constitution  of  an  animal,  for  the
ntang  of  ajpurpoee  beneficial  U?  the  species.  The
above  stated  solution  would  derive  these  appeten-
cies from  <jrganfaation ;  but  then  this  organization
ja  not ^  less  specifically,  not  less  precisely,  and,
therefore,  not  leas  evidently,  adapted  to  the  same
ends,  than  the-  appetencies  themselves  would  be
upon  the*  old  hypothesis*  In  this  way  of  consi-
dering the  subject,  sensation  supplies  the  place- of
foresight:  hut  this  is  the  effect  of  contrivance  en
the  part  of  the  CreatpR  Let  it  be  allowed,  for
example,  that  the  hen  is  induced  to  brood  upon,
hef  eggaby  tie  enjoyment  or  relief',  which,  in  the
heatedetate  of  her  ahdomen,-she  experiences  from
the  pressure  of  round  smooth  sui
the .  application  of  a^temperate  wafmtn :  .  How
cornea  this  eatraoKfinary  heat  or  itching,  or  call  it
what  you  will,  wipch  you  suppose  to  be  the
of  the;  bird's  inclination,  to  b*JeltJU8t  at  *■».  nme
when  the-  inclination  .itself  is  wanted';  when  it
tallies  so  exactly  with  the  internal  constitution  of -
the  egg,  am  with  the  help  wnictu  that  constitution

-  requires  in  order1  to  bring  it  to  maturity  ?  In.  my
©pinion,  this  solution,  ir  it  be  accepted  as  to  the
fact,  ought  to  increase,  jrat her  than  otherwise,  our*
admiration  of  the  contrivance.  4  A  gardener  light-
ing up  bis  stoves,  just  when  he  wants  to  force  hb
firui^  andwjhen  his  trees  require  the  heat,  gives
Dot  a  more  certain  evidence  of  design.  r5qagain ;
when  a  male  and  female  sparrow  come  together,
they  do  not  meet  to  confer  upon  the  expediency
of  perpetuating  their  species.  As  an  abstract
proposition,  they  care  not  the  value  of  a  barley-
corn, whether  the  species  be  perpetuated,  or  not  :
they  follow  their  sensations;  and  all  those  conse-

Seucea  ensue,  wruch  the  wisest  counsels  could
ve  dictated  v  which  the  most  solicitous  care  of
futurity,  which  ^he  moat  anxious  concern  for  the


sparrow  world,  aonld  heye  modoced.  IJuthoW
dojhese  consequences  ensue  f  The  sensations,  and
the.  constitution  upon  which  they  depem},  are  ai
manifestly  directed  to  the  purpose^  which  we  see
fulfilled  by  them ;  and  the  train  of  intermediate
effects,  as  manifestly  laid  and  planned  with  a  view
to  that  purpose:  that  is  to  say,  design  is  as  com-
plete^ evinced  by  the  phenomena^  as  H  would,  be,
,  efen  if  we  suppose  the  operations  to  begin,  or  to  .
be  carried  on,  from  what  some  wi[l  allow  to  be
alone  properly  called  instincts,  that  is,  from  de-
sires directed  to  a  future  .end,  and  having  no  ac-
complishment or -gratification  distinct  from  the  at-/
tainmentof  that  endT.  .^

In  a  word ;  I  should  say  ip  the  patrons  of  this
opinion.  Be  it  so:  bait,  thai  those  actions;  of  aui-
jnals, which  we  refer J to  instinct,  -are.  not, gone
about  with  any  view  to  their  consequences,  but
that  they  are  attended  in  the  animal  with  a-  pre-.,
sent  gratification*  and  are  pursued  for  the  sake  of
that  gratification  alone;  what  does  alhthis  prove,
but'  that  the  ptbsptciwn,  iwbicp  must  oev  some-
where, is  not  Vthe  anijnal,  but  in  the  Creator  1"  .
» Jin  treating  of  the  parental  aflection'in  brutes,
our  business  lies  rather  with  the  origin  of  the
principle,  than  with  t^e  enacts  and  expressions  of*
it  Writers  recount  these  with  pleasure*  and  ad-
miration. The,  conduct  of  many  Jdnds  of  animals,
towards'  their  young,  h**  escaped  no  observer,  no
historian. '  of  nature.  ~  . "  How  wnU  \hgy  t  caress


says  Derhenv  "  with  their  affectionate
notes';  lull  and  quiet  them  with  their  tender  pa-
rental voice ;,  put  food  into  their  mouths  -T  cherish
and  keep  them  warm ;  teach  them  tapick,  and  eat,
and  gather  food  for  themselves ;  ani},  in  a  woru^
perform  the  part  of  so  many  nurses,  Reputed  by
the  Sovereign, Loni  and  Preserver  of. the  world,
to  help  -such  young '  and  shjftless  creatures  r
Neither  ought  it,  under  this  head,  to  be  forgotten,
how  much  the  instinct  costs  the  animal  which  N
feels  it ;  how  much  a  bird,  for  example,  gives  up,
by  sitting  upon  her  best :  hoWrepugnant  it  is  to
her  organization^  her.  habits,  and  her*  pleasures.
An  animal,  formed  for-  liberty ,  sabrmts  to  confine^
ment  in  .the  very  season  wheh  every  thimrinvitee
her anroad :  what  is  morej^ an  arnmalden^hfing
in  motion,  made  for  motion,  all  whose  motions  axe
so  easy  and  so  tree,  hardly  a  "moment,  at  other
^-^  at  rest,  is,  for  marly  houni  ef  many  davs
fixfea'to  her  nest,  as  close  aa  if  her  limbs
^  down  by  pms:  arid  wires,  F^prmypert,
I  never  see  a  bird  in.that  situation,  buC  I.  recog-
nise, an  invisible  hand,  detaining  the  ^contented
prisoner  from  her  fields  and  gr&vesj  for  the  purV
pose,  as  th&eveht  proves,  the  most  worthy  of  the
sacrifice,  the  most  important,, Che  most  beneficial

'B-ut-the  loss  of  liberty  is  not  the  whole  of  what
the  procreant  bird  sunpra: ,  Hajvey  tells  us,  that
he  has  often  found  the,  female  wasted  to  skin  and
bone  by  fitting  upon  her- eggs.

.'One  observation  more,  and  Pwill  dismiss  the
subject  The  pairing  of  birds,  and.the'7t4»-
pairing  of*  beasts,  forms  a  distinction  between  the
two  classes,  which  shows,  that  the  conjugal  h>
stiiict  is  modified  with  a  reference  to  utility
founded  on  the  condition  of  the  offspring.  In
quadrupeds,  the  younj£  animal  draws  its  jiutrL*
ment  from  the  body  of  the  dam.  'the.  male
parent  neither  does  nor  can  contribute  any  part
to.  its  sustentation.  In  the  winged  race,  the  young
bird  is  .supplied  by  an  importation  of  mod,  to  pro-
cure and  bring  home  which  in  a  sufficient  quan-


«s


NATtmAL  THEOLOQFY.


tfyfbrtfedeira^ef  anun^  require*!  Oiein;ortajttp^t|{iiaflMlrWa^>it«


the  industry  of  both  parents.  In  this  difinvnce,  we
see  t  reason  for  the  vsmmt  instinct  of  the
psd>  *j>d  far  the  ftuWuT  love  of


^  _ CHAPTER  XIX.

' qfbuertM.'

"We  am  not  writing  a  system  of  natural  histo-
ry; therefore  we  heye  not  attended  to  the  classes,
into  which  (he  subjects  of  that  science  are  distrHJ  selves  up  under  its  pwttjctkm.


buted.  What  we  pad  to  observe  concerning  dif-
ferent apectes  of  ■  animals,  fell  easily,  for  the  most
part,  within  the  divisions'  which  the  course  of  our
argument  led  as  to  adopt.  There  remain;  how-
ever, some  remarks  upon  the  insect  tribe,  which
could  not -properly  be  introduced  under  any  of
these  heads ;  and  which  therefore  we  have  col-
lected into  a  .chapter  by  themselves.

VThe  structure,  and  the  tise  *£  the  parts,  of
insects,  are  leas  understood  than  thai  of  quadru-
peds and  birds,  not  only  by  reason  of  their  mi-
nuteness, or  the  minuteness  of  their  parte  (for
that  minuteness  we  can.  in  some  measure,  follow
with  glasses,)  but  also  by  reason*  of  the  remote^
ness  of  their  manners  and  modes-  of  life  from
these  of  larger  animals.  Tor  Instance:  insects,
under  a&  their  varieties  bf  form,  are  endowed  with
antenna,  whidi  is  the  name  given- to  those  long
feelers  that  rise  from,  eackv  side  of  the  head ;  but
to  what  ^cornroon  use  or  want  of  the  insect
lindl  a  provision  ,io  Bfuversal  is  sjibservient.  has.
not  yet  been  %  ascertained,  and  it  has  not  been
ascertained,  becabae  it  admits  not  of  a  cleajy
or*  yery  .probable,  comparison,'  with  any  organs
which  we  possess  ourselves,  or  with  thp  organs
of  animals  which  resemble  ourselves  in  their
functions;. and  iacuWes,  or  with  which,  we  are
better  acquainted^  than  we  are  withJnsects.  We
want  a  ground  of  analogy*  This  dimculty  stands
in  our  way  as  to  some  particulars  in  the  insect
constatujtton^whioh  we  might  wish  to  be  acquaint-
ed with.  Nevertheless,  there1  are 'many  contri-
vance^ in  the  bodies  of  insects,  neither  dubious  in
their  use,  nor  obscute  in  their  structure,  and  .most
properly  mechanical. These  form  parte  of  our


The  elytra,  or  scaly  wings  of  (he- genus  of
scarabssus  or  beetle,  furnish  an  example  of  this
kind.  The  true  wing  of  the  animal  it  a  light,
transparent  membrane,  finer  than  the  finest
game,  and  not  unlike  it  It  is  also,  when  ex-
panded, in  proportion  ty  the  she  of  the  animal,
yety  large,  likotder  to  protect  this  delicate  struc-
ture, and,  perhaps,  also  to  preserve  it  in  a-  due
state  of  suppleness  and  humidity,  a  strong,  hard
case  is  given  to  it,  in  the  shape  or  the  horny  wing
which  we  call  the  elytron.  When' the  animal  is
at  rest,  the  gauze  wings  lie  folded  up  under  this
impenetrable  shield.  When  the  beetle  prepares
for  flying,  he  raises  the  integument,  and  spreads,
out  his  thin  membrane  to  the  air.  And  it  cannot
be  observed  without  admiration  what  a  tissue  of
cordage,  i.  e.  of  muscular  tendons,  must  run  in
various  and  complicated,  but  determinate  direc-
tion*, along  this  fine  surface,  in  order  to  enable


for/ action.

In  some  bisects,  the  caytra  cover  ft»wbx)erboa>;
in  others,  half;  in  others,  only  a  small  nut  of*;
but  in  all,  tbey  completely  bide  and  cover  thefts*
wings. Also,.  >

Many  or  most  of  the  beefle  species  lodge  in
holes  in- the  earth,  environed  by  hard,  rough  sub-
sfaness,  and  have  frequently  to  squeeze  their  way
through  narrow  passages;  in  which  situation,
wings  se  tender,  and*o  large,  could  scarcely  have
escaped  injury,  without  both  a  firm  covering  to
them,  anej  the  capacity  of  •collecting  then>


n.AnotW  contrivance,  equally  mechanical,
and  equally  clear,  is  the  aiel,  or  borer. -fixed  at  the
utile  of  various  species  of  flies ;  and  with  which
they  pierce,  in  seme  cases,  pjbmts ;  in  others,
wood ;  in  others,' the  skin  snd  ne%h  of  animals  j
mothers,  the  cos*  of  the  duysahs  of  msestsof  a
different  species  from  their  own:  and  in  other*)
even  Hme,  mortal, -and  stone,  \, need  not  addj
that  having  pierced  the  substance,  they  deposit
their  eggs  In  the  vole.  The  description  which
nsturahsts^ive  of  this/organ,  -are  such  as  the  fol-
lowing: Jt  is  a  shai^pdinted  instrument,  which,
in  hs  inactive  state,  lies  concealed  in  the  extremi-
ty of  the  abdomen,  and-wfaieh  the  animal  draws
out  at  pleasure;  for  the  purpose  of  makm£  a  pane-
tare  in  the  leaves,  stem,  or  bars:,  of  the  particular
plant  which  is  suited  to  the  ftourishmeht  of  its
young,  in  a  sheath,  which  divides  and  opens
whenever  the  organ  is  used,  there  is  enclosed  a
compact,  solid,  dendateslstem.  along  which  runs
a  'gtittQr  at  groove,  fay  which  groove,  'after  the
penetration  is  effected,  the  egg,  assisted,  in  some
cases  by  a  peristaltic  motion,  passes  to  its  destined
lodgement  hrthe  oestrum  or  gad-fly,  the  wimble
(draw*  out  like  the  bieces  of  a  spy-glass  ;  tlge  last
piece  is  armed  with  ihjeVhooks,  and  is  abfelo
bore  through  the  hide  of  an  ox."  Can  any  thing

Me.be  necessary  to  display  the  mechanism,  than
to  relate  the  feet  1 .  - - •

IIL  Theafwis*  of  insects^  though  for  a  dhs>-
rem  purpose,  am,,  in  their  structure,  not  unlike  .
the  piercer.  The  sharpness  to  which  the  notnt  nx
all  of  them  is  wrought;  the  temper  and  firmness
of  the  snbstanCfe  of  which  it  is -composed-  the
strength  of  the  muscles  by  which  it  is  darted  out,
amipared  with -the'  smajmess  and  weakness  of
the  insect,  and  with  the  soft  and  friable  texture  of
the  rest  of  the  body;  are  prpperties  of  the  sting*  to
be  noticed,  and  not  a  little  to  be.  admired.  Thai
sting  of  a  bee  will  rierce  through  a  goatskin  glove!
It  penetrates  the  humstf  flesh  more'  reachTy  than
the  finest  point  of  a  needle.  The  action  of  the
sting  affords  an  example  of  the  union  qfihjiiiisUj
and  mechanism,  such  as,  if  it  be  hot  a  proof  of
contrivance',  nothing  is.  First,  as  to  the  car-
mistry;  howjjnghly  concentrated  must  be  toe
tenom,  which,  in  so  small  a  ouentity,  can  produce
such  powerful  effects  1  'And  in  the  bee  we  may
observe,  thetthis  venom  is  made  from  honey.  Q&
only  food  of  the  insect,  but  the  last  material  from
which  I  ehould  have  expected  that  an  exalted
poison  could,  by  Any  process  or  digestion  wnatso-
ever,  h^ve  been  pijepared.^  In<  the  next  peace,
with  respect  to  the  mechanism,  the  sting  is  not  m
simple,  but  a  compound  instrument  The  yiaihee
sting,  though  drawn  to  *  point  exquisitely  sharp,


the  animal,  either  to  gather  it  up  into  a  certain

l^ecisftfoTra,  whenever  it  desires  to  place  its  wings  I  i*  in7  strictness  only  a  sheath;  for,  near  to  the

nude?  dm  shelter  which  nature  hath  given  toiextitmity,  may  he  peroeived  by  thr


VAyXSRAL  .T8E6L0«r.


44?


J  orifioo,  ftwn  which  orifices,  irUhe

act  of  stingingrand,  as  it  should  seem,  after  the
point  of  the  naam  sting  hap' buried  itaelf  in  the
flesh,  joe  bunched  out  two  subtile '  rays,  -which
may  be  caned  the  tree  or  proper  stings,  as  being
those  through:  which  the  poison  is  infused .  into
the  puncture  already  made  by  the  exterior  sting.
I  have  said  that  chvuristry  and  mechanism  are'
here  united;,  by  which  observation  I  pliant,  that
all  this  lnaxjiioery  would  have  been -osekss,  ielum,
tmbelle,  if  a  supply  of  poison,  intense  in  Quality.
In  proportion  to. the  smallnees  of  the  4rop>  naa
not  been  furnished  toitby  the  chynikaj  elaboration
which  was  carried  on  in  the*  insect's  body ;  and
that,  on  the  other  fond,  the  poison,  the  result  of
tiiis  process,  could  not  haw  attained  Ha  effect,  or
reached  it*enemy,  $  when  it  was  collected  at  the
extremity  of  the  abdamen,.R\  had  not  found  there
a  machinery,  fitted  to  conduct  it  to  the*  external
situations  in  which  it  was  to  operate,  vi?.  an  awl
to.  bore  a*  hole,  and  a  syringe  to  inject  Che  fluid.
Yet  these  attributes*  though  combined  in  their
action,  are  independent  in  their  origin.  ~.  The
tmotn  ones  not  breed  the  sting;  nor  does  the
ejing  concoct  the  venom.

IV.  Tbefn-okwcw,  with  which  many  maa&rare
endowed,  comes  next  in  order  to  be  considered.  It
is  a  tube  attached  to  the  head  of  Che  animal.  In
the  hen,  it  is  composed  of  two  pieces,  connected
t»y  a  jfatnt;  fotfif  it  were  constantly  extended,  it
wjjukl  be  too  much  exposed  to  accidental  injuries ;
thecenbre,  in  its  mdofent  state,  it  is  doubled  up  by
means,  of  the  joint,  and  in  that  position  Iteaae-
cure  under  a  scary  penthouse.  In  "many  species
of  the  butterfly,  the  proboscis,  when  not  in  nee,  is
coiled  np  like  a  watch-spring.  In  the  same. tee,
the  proboscis,  serves  the-  office  of  the  month,  the
.  insect  having  no  other:  and  -how  much  better
adapted  it  is,  than  tumouth  would  be,  for  the  col-
lecting of  the  prober  nourishment  of  the  animal,
is  sufficiently  evident.  The  food  of  the, bee  is  the
nectar  of  flowers;  a  drop  of  syrup,  lodged  deep  in
tiie-bajtam  of  the  corona^  in  the  receseea-of  the
Petals,  or  down  the  neck 'of  a  monopetalous  gipjre.
Into  these  cettr  the  bee  thrusts  its  long*  narrow
pump,  through  the  cavity  of  which.it  sucks  up
.  this  precious  fluid,  inaccessible  to  every  other  ap-
proach. It  is'obiervable  also,  that  the  plant  is  not
the  worse  fat  what  the  bee  does  to  it  The  harm-
lam  plunderer  rifles  the  sweets,  but  leaves  the
flower  uninjured  The  ringlets  of,  which*  the
protoscwofthejwei*  composed,  the  muscles  by
whip!}  it  is  extended  apd  contracted,  form  so  many
ntaoscopcal  wonders.  The  agility  also  with
whfch4ft  9  moved,  can  hardly  nuTto  «xcite  admi- ,
ration.  Butitiseno^^fof  oqjpurikwetaobserye,
m  general,  the  enitablenessof  dp  structure  to' the
one,  of  the  means  to  the  end,  and  especially  the'
wisdom  by  which  nature  *n08<feparted  from  its
moat  general  analogy  (for,  animals  being  furnish-
ed with  mouths  are.  such,)  when  the  purpose
could  he  better  answered  by  the  deviation.

In  opine  Insects,  the  proboscis,  of  tongue,  or
trunk,  |s  shut  up  in  a  sharp-pointed  shjeath :  which
eheeth,  being  of  a  much  firmer  texture  than  the
piobosciaitaelfiasweflasehar^pedatthepomt,
piefqes  the  substance  which  contains  the.  food,
and  than  open*  within  Ike  wound;  to  allow  the
encmssd  tnbe,  through  which  tfie  jukejs  extract-
ed, to  perform  its  office. .  Can  any  m^rJ^njam  he
plainer  than  this  is ;  or  surpass  this  1
Y.  The  metamorphoeis  of  insects  from  grubs


into  moths  and  flfa,  ja  an  aetonistog  process.  A
'hairy  caterpillar  is^  transformed  into  a  butterfly;
Observe  the  change.  We  have  four  beautiful
wings,  where  there  were  none  before  j  a  tubular
proboscis,  in~thc  place  of  a  mouth  with  jaws  and
teeth ;  six'  long  legs,  instead  of  fourteen  feet.  In
another  case,  we  see  a  white,  smooth,  soft  worm,
turned  into  a  black,  hard,  crustaceous  beetle,  with
gauze  wings.  ■  These,  as  I  aaid}  are  astonishing
processes,  and  muBt:  require,  as  it  should  seem,  a
proportionaHy  artificial  apparatus.-  The  hypo-
thesis which  appears  to  me  most  probable  is,  that,
in  the  grab,  there  exist  at  the  same  time  three
animals,  one  within  another,  all  nourished  by  the
same  digestion,  arid  by  a  communicating  cireula-
tion;  but  in  different  stages  of  maturity.*  .  The
latest  discoveries  made. .  by  naturalists,  seem  to  fa-
vour this  supposition.  The  insect  already  equip-  •
ped  with  wings,  •  is  described  under  the  mem-
branes both  of  the  worm  .and  nymph.  -  }n  aome
species,  (he  proboscis,  the  antenna*,  the  /ljmbs1
and  wings,  ot  the  fly,  have  been  observed  to  be
folded  up  within  the  body  of  the  caterpillar ;  and
wipi  such  nicety  as  to -occupy  a  -amaH  space  only
under  the  two  first  Springs.  This  being  $of  the
outermost  animal,  which, ^besides,  it|  own  proper)
character,  .serves  as  an  integument  lb  the  otter
two,  being  the  farthest  advanced*  dies,  as  we  sup-
pose, arid  drops  off  first.  The  second,  Che  pupa,
or  chrysalis,  then  offers  ijself  to  jobservation.  This
aIso,'in.its  turn,  dies;  its  dead  and.  brittle  busk
fidls  to  piecea}'  and  makes  way  for  the  appearance
of  the  fly  or  tooth.  "  Now,  if  this  be  the  case,  or
indeed  whatever  explication  be  adopted,  we  Jiave
%r  prospective  contrivance  of  the  most  curioQsJtfnd :
'we  have  organizations  three  deep;  yet  a. vascular  '
system^  which  supplies  .nutrition,  growth,  and  life,
to  all  of  them  together. \ ■

VI.  Almost,  afi  insects  arc  oviparous.  Nature
keeps  her  butterflies,  jnoths,  and  caterpillars,  lock-
etkup  during  the  Winter  in  their  egg  state^  and
We  have  to  admire  the  various  devices  to  which,  u
we  may's*  speak,  the  same  nature  hath  resorted,
for  the  security  of  the  egg.  Many  insects  enclose
kheir  eggs  in  s>  silken  web ;  otfjerf  cover  them
with  a  coat  of  hair,  torn  from' their  awn  bodies;
aome  glue  .theni  together;  and  others,  Jike'  the
moth  of  the  silkworm,, glue  them  to  the  leaves
irjion  which  they  are'  deposited,  that  they-raay  riot
be  sbaksn  off  by  the  wind,  or  washed  away  by
tain  :'spmer  again  make  incisions  Into  leaves,  and
hide  an  egg  in  each  incision}  whilst  sojne envelop
their  eggs  wjth  a  soft  substance,  which  forms  the
first,ahment  of  the  young  annual :  and  some  again
make  a  hole  in  the  earth,  and,  .having  stored  ft
with  a  quantity  of  proper  food,  deposit  their  egg*
in  it.  In  all  which  we  arelo  observe,  that  the  ex-
pedient depends,  not  so  much  upon  the  ajldress  oi
the  animal,  as  upon  the  physical  resoureeavof  his
constitution.

. ,  The  art  also  with  which  the  young  insect  is
coded  Up  in  the  egg,  presents,  where  it  can  be
examined,  a  subject  uf  great  curiosity.  The  in-
sect burnished  with  afl  the  members  which  it
ought  to  have,  is  rolled  up  into  a  form  v>hich
seems  to  contract  it  into  the  least  possible  spaces
by  which  contraction,  notwithstanding  the  smalt
ness  of  the  egg,  it  has  room  enough  in  its  apart-
ment, and  to  spare.  This  folding  of  the  nmbs
appears  to  me  to  indicate  a  special  direction;  for,
i/  it  were  merely  the  effect  of  compression,  the
collocation  of  the  parte  would  be  more  various


448


NATtTRAL  1B&GL0G*.


than  it  b.  tn  the  aims,  toades,  MwlieW,  H  is
always  the  same.

These  observations  belong  to  the  whote  bisect
tribe,  or  to  a  great  part  of  theni  Other'  observ-
ation* are  limited  to  a  fewer  species ;  bu(  not,  per-
naps*  less  important  or  satisfactory,

I.  The  organization  in  the  abdomen  of  the  afflc-'
worm;  or  spider,  whereby  these  insects  form
their  thread,  is  as  incontestably  mechanical  as  a
wire-drawers  mill.  In  the  body  of  the  silkworm
are  two  ban.  remarkable  for  their  form,  posjlbn,
and  ose.  They  wind  round  the  Intestine;  When
drawn  out,  t^ey  aire  tea  inches  in  length, 'though
the  animal  itself  be  only  two,  '  Within  these  bags,
is  collected  a  glue;  'and  communicating  With  the
bags,  are  two  .paps  or  outlets,  perforated,  like  a
gratef,  tyr  a  number  of- small  boles. The  glue  or

Sim,  being  passeg  through^  these  minute  apertures,
mat  halts  of  almost  imperceptible  fineness ;  aira
these  bain,  when  joined,  compose  the  silk'whieh
we  wind  off  from  the  cone,  in  which  the  silkworm
Has  Wrapped  itself  Dp :  in  the  spider,,  {he  web  hf
formed  mm  this-  thread.  In  Both  cases,  the  ex-
tremity of  the  thread,  6y  means  of  its  adhesive'
quality,  is  fifost  attached  by  the  animal  to  some
external  hold;  and  the  end  being  now  fastened  to
,  ji  paint,  the  insect,  bjrturning  'round'  jts '  body,,  or
fcy  receding  from  that  (Mint,  draws  out  thjp  thread ,
through  the  holes  above  described,  by  an  opera-
tion, as  hath  been  observed,  exactly  similar,  to  the
drawing  of  a  wire. .  The  thread,  like  the  wire,  is
formed  by  the  hole  throughrwhich  it  passes.  .  In
one  respect  there  is  a  difference.  'The  wire  is  ttye
metal  unaltered,  except  in  figure.  In  the  animal
process,  the  nature- 'of  (he  substance  is  somewhat
changed,  as  well  jm  the  form;  for,  si  It  exists
within  the  insect,  it  is  a  eoftj  clammy  gum,  or
glue.  The  thread  acquires,  it  js  probable,  ifs
firmness  and  tenacity  worn 'the  action  of  tl*e  air
upon  it* 'surface,  jnjthejnoment  of  exposure;  and
a  thread  so  fine  is. almost  all  surface.  ^Tbis^
property,  however,  ot  the  paste,  is  part  of  the  con-
trivance.^ ■*  ,  .  )  'K  (
The  mechanism  itself  consists  of  the  bags  or
reservoirs,  into  which  .the  -glue  is  collected,  ana  of
the  extern*]  holes-communicating  with  these  bags  :
and  the  action  oT'the  machine  is  seen,  in  the  form-
ln£ttf  a  thread,  as  wire  is  fqrmecl,  by  forcing  the
,  material  already  prepared  through -holes' of  proper
dimensions.  The  secretion  is  an  act  foo  sn^tde
for  our  discernment,  except  as  we  perceive  it  by
'the  produce,  T5ut  one  thing  answers  to  another ;
thp  sectetory^Iands  to  the  quality  and  consistence
requited  in  the  secreted,  substance;  the  bag' to  its
reception :  the  outlets  and  orifices  are  constructed,
not  merely  for  relieving  the  reservoirs' of  their
.burden,,  but -for  manufacturing  tfre  contents  into
„a  form  and  texture,  of  great  external  use,  ot  jrather
Indeed  of  future  necessity,  to  the  life  and  func-
tions of  the"  insect.

\  H.  feoes,  under  one  character  or  other,  hove,
furnished  every  naturalist  with  a'set  of  observa-
tions. I  shall,  in  thi»  place,  confine!  myself  to  one,-
and  that  is  the.  relation,  which  obtains  between
Che  wax  and  the  honey.'  No  person,  who  has  in-
spected a  bee-hive,  can  forbear  remarking  how
commodiously  the  honey  is  bestowed  in  the  comb ;
andr  amongst  other  advantages,  hoW  effectually
the  fermentation  of  the  honey  is  prevented  by  dis-
tributing it  into  small  cells:  The  tact  is,  that  when
the.  honey  js.  separated  from  the  comb*  and  £ut
into  jars,  it  runs  into  fermentation,  with  a  much


Ie*<degree  of  heat  than  what  takes  plsre  in  a
hive.  This  may  be  reckoned  K  nicety :  bof  inde-
pendently of  any  nioety  in  the  matter,  I  would..
ask,  what  could  me  beVdo  with- the  honey,  if  it '
had  not  the  wax  T~  how,  at  least,  could  it  store  H
up  for  winter?  The  wax,  therefore,  answers  a
purpose  with  respect  to  the  honey  j  and  the  honey
constitutes  that  purpose  with  respect  to  the  wax.
This  is  the  relation  between  them. .  But  the  two
substances,  though,  together,  of  the  greatest  use,
and,  without  each  other,  of  little,  come  from  a  dif-
ferent origin.  Thfrbee  finds  the  honey,  but  makes
the  wax.  ThclioneJ  is  lodged  in  the  nedfcrfa  ef
flowers;  and  probably  undergoes -tittle  alteration;
is  merely  collected :  whereas  tjie  wax  fe  a  dttctHe,
tenacious  paste,  made  out  of  a'  dry  powder,  not
simply  by  Kneading  it  with  a'Hqtfjo,  ouVbr  a  di-
gestive process"  rav  the  body  of  the'bee.  -  What  ac-
count can  be-  rendered  of  facts  so  ciix^nmstanced,
but  that  the  animal,  Being  intended  to  feed  upon
honey,  was,  By  a  peculiar  externa}  configuration,
enabled  to  procure  it  t  That,  moreover,  wanting
the  honey  when  it  could  not  lie  procured  at  all,  ft
whs  farther  endued  with  the*  no  less  necessary  fa-
culty of  •constructing  repositories  for  its  nresenrsV
tion  V  Whjeh  faculty,  it  is  evident,  most  depend,
primarily,  ujpoh  Uje  capacity  of  providing  soitahia
materials.  Two  distinct  fimcrieos  go  to  make  up
the  ability!  First,  the  power  in  the  bee,  with  re-
spect to  wax,  of  loadira^the  farina  of  flowers  upon
its  thighs.-  Microscopic  observers  speak  of  the
spoon-shaped  appendages  with  which  the  thsfrtie
of  bees  are  beset  for  this  very  purpose;  but;  m  as
much  as  the  ait  and  will  of"the  bee  may  be  sup-
posed to  he'concernetl  in  tips  operation,  there  -ja,
secondly,  that  which'  doth  not  jest  in  art  or  win,
—a  digestive  fatuity  which  converts  the  loose
ppwderinto  a  stiff  substance. '  This  hi  a  inst  ac-
count of  the  honey/ and  the  hone^-comb;  and
^tras  account,  through  every  (ert^  carries  a  creative
'intelligence  along  with  it.

.  The  Hing  also  of  the  bee"  has  this  relation  to
-the  honey,  that  it  is  'necessary  for  the  protection
of  a  treasure  which  Invites' so  many  robbers.

III.  Our  business  is  with  mechanism.  ^Tn  the
panarpa  trjbe  of  insects]  there  is  a  forceps  in  the
tail  or  the  mate  insect,  with  which  he  catches  and
holds  the  female.  Are  a  pair  of  pincers  more  rne-
chanical  than  this  provision  in  its  structure?  or  is
any  structure  more  clear  and  certain  in  its'dAign  1

IV.  St.  Pierre  tells  us,*  that  in  a  fly  with  six
feet*  (I  do  not  remember  that  he  describes  the  spe-
cies,) the  pair  next  the  head  «nd  the  pair  next  the
:  tail,  nave  brushes  at  their  extremities,  with  which
the  fly  dresses,"  as  there  may  be  occasion,  the  an-
terior or  the  posterior  part  of  its  body ;  hut  that
the  middle  pair  have/ no  such  brushes,  the>  situa-
tion of -these"  legs  not  admitting  ef  the  brasjir*,
if  theywere  there,  "beirig  converted,  to  the  same
use.  'This  is  a  very  exadt  mechanical  distinction.

.  V.  if  the  reader^  looking  to  ous  distributions;  of
science,  wish  to  contemplate  the  chymiatry,  as
well  as- the  mechanism,  of  nature,  the*  insect  cre-
ation wilt  afforv?  fjim  an  example,  1  refer  to  the
light  in  the-  taH  of  a  ghw-teorrm  '  Two  points
seem  to  befagfced  upon  by  naturalists  concerning
it-  first,  that  it  is  phosphoric ;  secondly,  that  its
Use  is  to  attract  the  male  insect.  The  only  thfmj
to  be  inquired  after,  is  the  singularity',  i£any  such
there  be',  in  {he  natural  history  of  this  animal,


•  ▼©U.p.*4s.


NATURAL  THEOLOGY.


4*9


which  should  teate  a  provision  of  this  kind  man
necesseryfor  it,  than  lor  other  insects.  That  sin-
gularity seems  to  be  the  dinerence  which  subsists
between  the  male  and  the  female;  which  difler-
1  than  what  we  find  in  any  other
si  whatever.  The  glow-worm  is  a
cmterpillari  the  male  of  which  is  %Jlyi
lively,  comparatively  smalL  dtssiinilsT  to  the  fe-
male in  appearance,  probably  also  as  distinguish-
ed from  her  in  habits,  pursuits,  and  manners,  as
he  is  unlike  in  form  and  external  constitution.
Here  then  is  the  adversity  of  the  case.  The  cater-
pillar csjinot  nvet  her  companion  in  the  air.  The
winged  rover  disdains  the  ground.  They  might
never,  therefore,  be  brought  together,  did  not  Skis
radiant  torch  direct  the  volatile  mate  to  bis  seden-
tarrfesnais.

In  this  example,  we  also  see  the  resources  of
art  anticipated.  One  grand  operation  of  chynns-
try  is  the  making  of  phosphorus:  and  it. was
thought,  an  ingenious  device,  to  make  phosphoric
msschas  supply  the  place  of  lighted  tapers.  Now
Hub  very  thing  is  done  in  the  body  of  the  glow-
worm. The  phosphorus  is  not  only  made,  but
kindled;  and  caused  to  emit  a  steady  and  genial

^§09  the  purpose  which  is  here  stated,  and
I  beheve  to  be  the  true  one.
VI.  Nor  is  (he  last  the  only  instance  that  en-
toniosagy  aftovds,  in  which  our  discoveries,  or  ra-
ther ear  projects,  turn  out  to  be  imitations  of  na-
tsmv  Some  years  ano,  a  plan  was  suggested,  of
producing  propulsionby  reaction  in  this  way :  by
the  aasce  of  a  stisaa  i  ngine,  a  stream  of  water  was
to  be  shot  out  of  the  stern  of  a  boat;  the  impulse
of  which  stream  upon  the  water  in  the  river,  was
to  push  the  baas  itself  forward;  It  is, in  truth,  the


to  push

prmcipfe  by  which  sky-rockets  ascend  in  the  air.
Of  the  use  or  practicability  of  the  plan,  I  am  not
speaking;  nor  is  it  my  concern  to  praise  its  inge-
nuity :  "but  it  is  certainly  a  contrivance.  Now,  if
naturahsts  am  to  be  believed,  it  is  exactly  the  de-
▼ice  which  nature  has  made  use  of  for  the  motion
of  soine  species  of  aquatic  insects.  The  larva  of
the  dragvnrjhj,  according  to  Adams,  swims  by
-*— **— \  water  from  its  tail ;  is  driven  forward  by


the  moction  of  water  in  the  pool  upon  the  current
issuing  in  a  dbection  backward  from  its  body.

VII.  Again:  Europe  has  lately  been  surprised
by  the  elevation  of  bodies  in  the  air  by  means  of
a  balloon.  The  discovery  consisted  in  finding  out
a  manageable  substance,  which  was,  bulk  for  bulk,
fighter  than  air;  and  the  application  of  the  disco-
was,  to  make  a  body  composed  of  this  sub-
*  bear  up.  along- with  its  own  weight,  some
ier  body  which  was  attached  to  it.  This  ci-
st, so  new  to  us,  proves  to  be  no  other  than
the  Author  of  nature  has  employed  in  the
gpomamtrsfider.  We  frequently  see  this  spider's
thread  rating  in  the  sir,  and  extended  from


hedge  to  hedge  across  a  road  or  brook  of  four  or
live  yards  width.  The  animal  which  forms  the
thread,  has  no  wings  wherewith  to  fly  from  one
extremity  to  the  other  of  this  line;  nor  muscles  to
enable  It  to  spring  or  dart  to  so  great  a  distance :
yet  its  Creator  hath  laid  for  it  a  path  in  the  atmo-
sphere; and  after  this  manner.  Though  the  ani-
mal itself  be  heavier  than  air,  the  thread  which
it  spins  from  its  bowels  is  specifically  lighter.
Tint  hi  Us  balloon.  The  spider,  left  to  itself,
would  drop  to  the  ground;  but  being  tied  to  its
thread,  beta  ass  supported.  We  have  nem  a  very
pecqfiar  provision;  and  toaceatemplative  eye  it
3  L


is  a  gratifying  spectacle,  to  see  this  insect  waned

on  her  thread,  sustained  by  a  levity  not  her  c


and  traversing  regions,  which,  if  we  ex

only  the  body  of  the  animal,  might  seem  to  have

been  forbidden  to  its  nature.


I  must  now  erave  the  reader's  permission  to
introduce  into  this  place,  for  want  of  a  better,  an
observation  or  two  upon-the  tribe  of  animals,  whe-
ther belonging  to  land  or  water,  which  are  covered
by  shells.

I.  The  shells  of  mail*  are  a  wonderful,  a  me-
chanical, and,  if  one  might  so  speak  concerning
the  works  of  nature,  an  original  contrivance.
Other  animals  have  their  proper  retreats,  their
hybemacnla  also,  or  winter-quarters,  but  the  snail
carries  these  about  with  him.  He  travels  with
his  tent ;  and  this  tent,  though,  as  was  necessary,
both  light  and  thin,  is  completely  impervious
either  to  moisture  or  air.  The  young  snail  comes
out  of  its  egg  with  the  shell  upon  its  back ;  and
the  gradual  enlargement  which  the  shell  receives,
is  derived  from  the  slime  excreted  by  the  animal's
skin.  Now  the  aptness  of  this  excretion  to  the
purpose,  its  property  of  hardening  into  a  shell,
and  the  action,  whatever  it  be,  of  the  animal,
whereby  it  avails  itself  of  its  gifts,  and  of  the  con-
stitution of  its  glands,  (to  say  nothing  of  the  work
being  commenced  before  the  animafis  born,)  are
things  which  can,  with  no  probability,  be  referred
to  any  other  cause  than  to  express  design ;  end
that  not  on  the  Dart  of  the  animal  alone,  in  which
design,  though  it  might  build  the  house,  could
not  have  supphed  the  material.-  The  will  of  the
animal  could  not  determine  the  quality  of  the  ex-
cretion. Add  to  which,  that  the  shell  of  a  snaiL
with  its  pillar  and  convolution,  is  a  very  artificial
fabric;  whilst  a  snail,  as  it  should  seem,  is  the
most  numb  and  unprovided  of  all  artificers.  In  the
midst  of  variety,  there  is  likewise  a  regularity,
which  would  hardly  be  expected.  In  the  same
species  of  snail,  the  number  of  turns  is  usually,  if
net  always,  the  same.  The  sealing  up  of  the
mouth  or  the  shell  by  the  snail,  is  also  well  calcu-
lated for  its  warmth  and  security ;  but  the  cerate
is  not  of  the  same  substance  with  the  shell.

II.  Much  of  what  has  been  observed  of  snails,
belongs  to  shell-fish,  and  their  shells,  particularly
to  those  of  the  univalve  kind;  with  the  addition
of  two  remarks:  one  of  which  is  upon  the  great
strength  and  hardness  of  most  of  these  shells.  I  do
not  know  whether,  the  weight  being  given,  art  can
produce  so  strong  a  case  as  are  some  of  these
shells.  Which  defensive  strength  suits  well  with
the  life  of  an  animal,  that  has  often  to  sustain  the
dangers  of  a  stormy  element,  and  a  rocky  bottom,
as  well  as  the  attacks  of  voracious  fish.  The
other  remark  is,  upon  the  property,  in  the  animal
excretion,  not  only  of  congealing,  but  of  congeal-
ing, or,  as  a  builder  would  call  it,  setting  in  water,
and  into  a  cretaceous  substance,  firm  and  hard.
This  property  is  much  more  extraordinary,  and,
chynncally  speaking,  more  specific,  than  that  of
hardening  in  the  air ,  which  may  be  reckoned  a
kind  of  exsiccation,  like  the  drying  of  clay  into
bricks.

III.  In  the  bivalve  order  of  shell-fish,  cockles
muscles,  oysters,  dec.  what  contrivance  can  be  so
simple  or  so  clear,  as  the  insertion,  at  the  back,  of
a  tough  tendinous  substance,  that  becomes  at
once  the  lig**M> *  which  binds  the  two  shells

38*


460


NATURAL  THEOLOGY.


together,  and  the  hinge  upon  which  they  open
tod  ahutl

IV.  The  shell  of  a  lobster's  tail,  in  its  articula-
tions end  overlapping*,  represent*  the  jointed
part  of  a  coat  of  mail ;  or  rather,  which  I  believe
to  be  the  truth,  a  coat  of  mail  is  an  imitation  of  a
lobster3!  shell.  The  same  end  is  to  be  answered
by  both ;  the  same  properties,  therefore,  are  re-
quired in  both,  namely,  hardness  and  flexibility,
a  covering  which  may  guard  the  part  without
obstructing  its  motion.  For  this  double  purpose,
the  art  of  man,  expressly  exercised  upon  the  sub-
ject, has  not  been  able  to  devise  any  thing  better
than  what  nature  presents  to  his  observation.  Is
not  this  therefore  mechanism,  which  the  mechanic,
having  a  similar  purpose  in  view,  adopts.  Is
the  structure  of  a  coat  of  mail  to  be  referred  to
art  1  la  the  same  structure  of  the  lobster,  con-
ducing to  the  same  use,  to  be  referred  to  any  thing

Some,  who  may  acknowledge  the  imitation,
and  assent  to  the  inference  which  we  draw  from
it,  in  the  instance  before  us,  maybe  disposed,
possibly,  to  ask.  why  such  imitations  are  not  more
frequent  than  they  are,  if  it  be  true,  as  we  allege,
that  the  same  principle  of  intelligence,  design,
and  mechanical  contrivance  was  exerted  in  toe
formation  of  natural  bodies,  as  we  employ  in  the
—iking  of  the  various  instruments  by  which  our
purposes  an  served  ?  The  answers  to  this  ques-
tion are,  first,  that  it  seldom  happens,  that  pre-
cisely the  same  purpose,  and  no  other,  is  pursued
in  any  work  which  we  compare,  of  nature  and  of
art;  secondly t  that  it  still  more,  seldom  happens,
that  we  can  imitate  nature,  if  we  would.  Our
materials  and  our  workmanship  are  equally  defi-
cient Springs  and  wires,  and  cork  and  leather,
produce  a  poor  substitute  for  an  arm  or  a  hand.
In  the  example  which


i  we  have  selected,

a  lobster's  shell  compared  with  a  coat  of  mail,
these  difficulties  stand  less  in  the  way,  than  in
almost  any  other  that  can  be  assigned :  andthe
consequence  is,  as  we  have  seen,  that  art  gladly
borrows  from  nature  her  contrivance,  and  imitates
it  closely.


But  to  return  to  insects.  I  think  it  is  in  this
class  of  animals  above  all  others,  especially  when
we  take  in  the  multitude  of  species  which  the
microscope  discovers,  that  we  are  struck  with
what  Cicero  baa  called  "  the  insatiable  variety  of
nature."  There  are  said  to  be  six  thousand
i  of  flies ;  seven  hundred  and  sixty  butter-

• ;  each  different  from  all  the  rest.  (St.  Pierre.)
The  same  writer  tells  us,  from  bis  own  observa-
tion, that  thirty-seven  species  of  winged  insects,
with  distinctions  well  expressed,  visited  a  single
strawberry-plant  in  the  course  of  three  weeks.*
Ray  observed,  within  the  compass  of  a  mile  or
two  of  his  own  house,  two  hundred  kinds  of  but-
terflies, nocturnal  and  diurnal.  He  likewise,
asserts,  but,  I  think,  without  any  grounds  of
exact  computation,  that  the  number  of  species  of
insects,  reckoning  all  sorts  of  them,  may  not  be
short  of  ten  thousand.*  And  in  this  vast  variety
of  animal  forms  (for  the  observation  is  not  con-
fined to  insects,  though  more  applicable  perhaps
to  them  than  to  any  other  class,)  we  are  some-
times led  to  take  notice  of  the  different  methods,


•Veil,  p.*


tv7isd.ofGod,p.S3.


or  rather  of  the  studiously  diversified  methods,  by
which  one  and  the  same  purpose  is  attained  In
the  article  of  breathing,  tor  example,  which  was
to  be  provided  for  in  some  way  tir  other,  besides
the  ordinary  varieties  of  lungs,  gills,  and  breath-
ing holes  (for  insects  in  general  respire,  not  by
the  mouth,  but  through  holes  in  the  sides,)  the
nymphs  of  gnats  have  an  apparatus  to  raise  their
back*  to  the  top  of  the  water,  and  so  take  breath.
The  hydrocanthari  do  the  like  by  thrusting  their
tails  out  of  the  water.*  The  maggot  of  the  eraca
labia  has  a  long  tail,  one  port  sheathed  whhin
another  (but  which  it  can  draw  out  at  pleasure,)
with  a  starry-tuft  at  the  end,  by  which  tuft,
when  expanded  upon  the  surface,  the  insect  both
supports  itself  in  the  water  and  draws  in  the  air
which  is  necessary.  In  the  article  of  natural
clothing,  we  have  the  skins  of  animals  invested
with  scales,  hair,  feathers,  mucus,  froth ;  or  it*
self  turned  into  a  shell  or  crust:  in  the  no  lean
necessary  article  of  offence  and  defence,  we  have
teeth,  talons,  beaks,  horns,  stings,  prickles,  with,
(the  most  singular  expedient  for  the  same  purpose)
the  power  of  giving  the  electric  shock,  and,  aa  is
credibly  related  of  some  animals,  of  driving  away
their  pursuers  by  an  intolerable  foator,  or  of  black-
ening the  water  through  which  they  are  pursued.
The  consideration  of  these  appearances  might
induce  us  to  believe,  that  variety  itself,  distinct
from  every  other  reason,  was  a  motive  in  the
mind  of  the  Creator,  or  with  the  agents  of  bis
will.

To  this  great  variety  in  organized  life,  the
Deity  has  given,  or  perhaps  there  arises  out  of  it,
a  corresponding  variety  or  animal  appetites.  For
the  final  cause  of  this,  we  have  not  far  to  seek.
Did  ail  animals  covet  the  same  element,  retreat,
or  food,  it  is  evident  how  much  fewer  could  be
supplied  and  accommodated,  than  what  at  pre-
sent live  conveniently  together,  and  find  a  plenti-
ful subsistence.  What  one  nature  rejects,  another
delights  in.  Food  which  is  nauseous  to  one  tribe
of  animals,  becomes,  by  that  very  property  which
makes  it  nauseous,  an  alluring  dainty  to  another
tribe.  Carrion  is  a  treat  to  dogs,  ravens,  vul-
tures, fish.  The  exhalations  of  corrupted  sub-
stances, attract  flies  by  crowds.  Maggots  level
in  putrefaction.


CHAPTER  XX.
QfPlants.

I  think  a  designed  and  studied  mechanism  to
be,  in  general,  more  evident  in  animals  than  in
plants:  and  it  is  unnecessary  to  dwell  upon  a
weaker  argument,  where  a  -  stronger  is  at  hand.
There  are,  however,  a  few  observations  upon
the  vegetable  kingdom,  which  he  so  directly  in
our  way,  that  it  would  be  improper  to  pass  by
them  without  notice.

The  one  great  intention  of  nature  in  the  struc-
ture of  plants  seems  to  be  the  perfecting  of  the
seed ;  and,  what  is  part  of  the  same  intention,
the  preserving  of  it  until  it  be  jjerfeetecL  This
intention  'shows  itself,  in  the  nrst  place,  by  the
care  which  appears  to  be  taken,  to  protect  and
ripen,  by  every  advantage  which  can  be  given  to


P- 7.


NATURAL  THEOLOGY.


451


them  c€  situation  in  the  plant,  those  parts  which
moat  immediately  contribute  to  fructification,  viz.
the  anthers,  the  stamina,  and  the  stigmata.
These  parts  are  usually  lodged  in  the  centre,  the
recesses,  or  the  labyrinths  of  the  flower ;  during
their  tender  and  immature  state,  are  shut  up
in  the  stalk,  or  sheltered  in  the  bud:  as  soon  as
they  have  acquired  firmness  of  texture  sufficient
to  bear  exposure,  and  are  ready  to  perform  the
important  office  which  is  assigned  to  them,  they
are  disclosed  to  the  light  and  air,  .by  the  bursting
of  the  stem,  or  the  expansion  of  the  petals ;  after
which  they  have,  in  many  cases,  by  the  very  form
of  the  flower  during  its  blow,  the  light  and  warmth
reflected  upon  them  from  the  concave  side  of  the
cup.  What  is  called  also  the  sleep  of  plants,  is
the  leaves  or  petals  disposing  themselves  in  such
a  manner  as  to  shelter  the  young  stems,  buds,  or
fruit  They  turn  up,  or  they  fail  down,  accord-
ing as  this  purpose  renders  either  change  of  posi-
tion requisite.  In  the  growth  of  corn,  whenever
the  plant  begins  to  shoot,  the  two  upper  leaves  of
the  stalk  join  together,  embrace  the  ear,  and  pro-
tect it  till  the  pulp  has  acquired  a  certain  degree
of  consistency.  In  some  water-plants,  the  flower-
ing and  fecundation  are  carried  on  within  the
stem,  which  afterward  opens  to  let  loose  the  im-
pregnated seed.*  The  pea  or  papilionaceous
tribe,  enclose  the  parts  of  fructification  within  a
beautiful  folding  of  the  internal  blossom,  some-
times called,  from  its  shape,  the  boat  or  keel ;
itself  also  protected  under  a  penthouse  formed  by
the  external  petals.  This  structure  is  very  arti-
ficial ;  and,  what  adds  to  the  value  of  it,  though
k  may  diminish  the  curiosity,  very  general.  It
has  abo  this  farther  advantage  (and  it  Js  an  ad-
vantage strictly  mechanical,)  that  all  the  blossoms
turn  their  backs  to  the  wind,  whenever  the  gale
blows  strong  enough  to  endanger  the  delicate
parts  upon  which  the  seed  depends.  I  have
observed  this  a  hundred  times  in  a  field  of  peas
in  blossom.  It  is  an  aptitude  which  results  from
the  figure  of  the  flower,  and,  as  we  have  said,  is
strictly  mechanical ;  as  much  so,  as  the  turning
of  a  weather-board  or  tin  cap  upon  the  top  of  a
chimney.  Of  the  vopvy,  and  of  many  similar
species  of  flowers,  the  head,  while  it  hi  growing,
hangs  down,  a  rigid  curvature  in  the  upper  part
of  the  stem  giving  to  it  that  position ;  and  in  that
^-u  it  is  impenetrable  by  rain  or  moisture.
i  the  head  has  acquired  its  size,  and  is  ready
to  open,  the  stalk  erects  itself,  for  the  purpose,  as
it  should  seem,  of  presenting  the  flower,  and  with
the  flower,  the  instruments  of  fructification,  to
the  genial  influence  of  the  sun's  rays;  This
always  struck  me  as  a  curious  property;  and
specifically,  as  well  as  originally,  provided  for  in
the  constitution  of  the  plant :  for,  if  the  stem  be
only  bent  by  the  weight  of  the  head,  how  comes
it  to  straighten  itself  when  the  head  is  the  heavi-
est 1  These  instances  show  the  attention  of
nature  to  this  principal  object,  the  safety  and
maturation  of  the  parts  upon  which  the  seed
depends.

In  trees,  especially  in  those  which  are  natives
of  colder  climates,  this  point  is  taken  up  earlier.
Many  of  these  trees  (observe  in  particular  the  ash
and  the  horse-chesnut)  produce  the  embryos  of  the
leaves  and  flowers  in  one  year,  and  bring  them  to
perfection  the  following. There is a winter

tpfcUos.  Transact,  part  ii.  TOO,  p.  508. >


therefore  to  be  gotten  over.  Now  what  we  are  to
remark  is,  how  nature  has  prepared  for  the  trials
-and  severities  of  that  season.  These  tender  em-
bryos are,  in  the  first  place,  wrapped  up  with  a
compactness,  which  no  art  can  imitate :  m  which
state,  they  compose  what  we  call  the  bud.  This
is  riot  all.  The  bud  itself  is  enclosed  in  scales ;
which  scales  are  formed  from  the  remains  of  past
leaves,  and  the  rudiments  of  future  ones.  Nei-
ther is  this  the  whole.  In  the  coldest  climates,  a
third  preservative  is  added,  by  the  bud  having  a
coat  of  gum  or  resin,  which,  being  congealed,  re-
sists the  strongest  frosts.  On  the  approach  of
warm  weather,  this  gum  is  softened,  and  ceases
to  be  a  hindrance  to  the  expansion  of  the  leaves
and  flowers.  All  this  care  is  part  of  that  system
of  provisions  which  has  for  its  object  and  consum-
mation, the  production  and  perfecting  of  the  seeds.

The  seeds  themselves  are  packed  up  in  a  cap-
sule, a  vessel  composed  of  coats,  which,  compared
with  the  rest  of  the  flower,  are  strong  and  tough.
From  this  vessel  projects  a  tube,  through  which
tube  the  farina,  or  some  subtile  fecundating  efflu-
vium that  issues  from  it,  is  admitted  to  the  seed.
And  here  also  occurs  a  mechanical  variety,  ac-
commodated to  the  different  circumstances  under
which  the  same  purpose  is  to  be  accomplished.
In  flowers  which  are  -erect,  the  pistil  is  shorter
than  the  stamina;  and  the  pollen,  shed  from  the
anthers  into  the  cup  of  the  flower,  is  caught,  in
its  descent,  by  the  head  of  the  pistil,  cahed  the
stigma.  But  how  is  this  managed  when  the
flowers  hang  down  (as  does  the  crown-imperial,
for  instance  j  and  in  which  position^  the  farina  in
its  fall,  would  be  carried  from  the  stigma,  and  not
towards  it?  The  relative  length  of  the  parts  m
now  inverted.  The  pistil  in  these  flowers  is  usu-
ally longer,  instead  or  shorter,  than  the  stamina,
that  its  protruding  summit  may  receive  the  pollen
as  it  drops  to  the  ground.  In  some  cases,,  (as  in
the  nigella,)  where  the  shafts  of  the  pistils  or
stiles  are  disproportionahly  long,  they  bend  down
their  extremities  upon  the  anthers,  that  the  ne-
cessary approximation  may  be  effected.

But  (to  pursue  this  great  work  in  its  progress,)
the  impregnation,  to  which  all  this  machinery  re-
lates, being  completed,  the  other  parts  of  the  flower
fade  and  drop  off  whilst  the  gravid  seed-vessel,  on
the  contrary,  proceeds  to  increase  its  bulk,  always
to  a  great,  ana  in  some  species  (in  the  gourd,  for
example,  and  melon,)  to  a  surprising  comparative
"-*• - • - - • denial


size ;  assuming  in  different  plants  an  incalculable
variety  of  forms,  but  all  evidently  conducing  to
the  security  of  the  seed.  By  virtue  of  this  process,
so  necessary,  but  so  diversified,  we  have  toe  seed,
at  length,  in  stone-fruits  and  nuts,  incased  in  a
strong  shell,  the  shell  itself  enclosed  in  a  pulp  or
husk,  by  which  the  seed  within  is,  or  hath  been,
fed ;  or,  more  generally,  (as  in  grapes,  oranges,  '
and  the  numerous  kinds  of  berries,])  plunged  over-
head in  a  glutinous  syrup,  contained  within  a
skin  or  bladder:  at  other  tunes  (as  in  apples  and
pears)  imbedded  in  the  heart  of  a  firm  fleshy  sub-
stance ;  or  (as  in  strawberries)  pricked  into  the
surface  of  a  soft  pulp.

These  and  many  more  varieties  exist  in  what
we  call  fruits* In  pulse,  and  grain,  and  grasses;


*  From  the  conformation  of  fruits  alone,  one  might
be  led,  even  without  experience,  to  suppose,  that  part
of  thii  provision  was  destined  for  the  utilities  of  ani-
mail.  As  limited  to  the  plant,  the  provision  itself
seams  to  fo  beyond  its  object The  flesh  of  aa  apple.


452


NATURAL  THEOLOGY.


m  trees,  and  shrubs,  and  flowers;  the  variety  of
the  seed-vessels  is  incomputable.  We  have  the
seeds  (ss  in  the  pea  tribe)  regularly  disposed  in
parchment  poda,  which,  though  soft  and  mem-
branous, completely  exclude  the  wet  even  in  the
heaviest  rains ;  the  pod  also,  not  seldom  (as  in  the
bean,)  lined  with  a  fine  down;  at  other  times  (as
in  the  senna)  distended  tike  a  blown  bladder :  or
we  have  the  seed  enveloped  in  wool,  (as  in  the
cotton-plant,)  lodged  (as  in  pines)  between  the
hard  and  compact  scales  of  a  cone,  or  barricadoed
(as  in  the  artichoke  and  thistle)  with  spikes  and
pickles ;  in  mushrooms,  placed  under  a  penthouse ;
m  fearns,  within  slits  in  the  back  part  of  the  leaf;
er  (which  is  the  most  general  organization  of  all)
we  find  them  covered  by  strong,  close  tunicles,
and  attached  to  the  stem  according  to  an  order
appropriated  to  each  plant,  as  is  seen  in  the  several
kinds  of  grains  and  of  grasses.

In  which  enumeration,  what  we  have  first  to
notice  is,  unity  of  purpose  under  variety  of  expe-
dients. Nothing  can  be  more  tingle  than  the
design ;  more  divenifled  than  the  means.  Pel-
licles, shells,  pulps,  poda,  husks,  akin,  scales
armed  with  thorns,  are  all  employed  in  prosecut-
ing the  same  intention.  Secondly;  we  may  ob-
serve, that,  in  all  these  cases,  the  purpose  is  fulfilled
within  a  just  and  limited  degree.  We  can  per-
ceive, that  if  the  seeds  of  plants  were  more  strongly
guarded  than  they  are,  their  greater  security
would  interfere  with  other  uses.  Many  species
of  animals  would  suffer,  and  many  perish,  if  they
could  not  obtain  access  to  them.  The  plant  would
overrun  the  soil;  or  the  seed  be  wasted  for  want
of  room  to  sow  itself.  It  is,  sometimes,  as  neces-
sary to  destroy  particular  species  of  plants,  as  it  is,
at  other  times,  to  encourage  their  growth.  Here,
as  in  many  cases,  a  balance  is  to  be  maintained
between  opposite  uses.  The  provisions  for  the
preservation  of  seeds  appear  to  be  directed,  chiefly
against  the  inconstancy  of  the'  elements,  or  Jhe
sweeping  destruction  of  inclement  seasons.  The
depredation  of  animals,  and  the  injuries  of  acci-
dental violence,  are  allowed  for  in  the  abundance

the  pulp  of  an  orange,  tbe  meat  of  a  plum,  the  fatness
of  the  olive,  appear  to  be  more  than  sufficient  for  tbe
nourishing  of  tbe  seed  or  kernel.  The  event  show*,
that  this  redundancy,  if  it  he  one,  ministers  to  the  sup-
port and  gratification  of  animal  natures ;  and  when  we
observe  a  provision  to  be  more  than  sufficient  for  one
purpose,  yet  wanted  for  another  purpose,  it  is  not  unfair
to  conclude  that  both  purposes  were  contemplated  to-
gether. It  favours  this  view  of  the  subject  to  remark,
that  fruits  are  not  (which  they  might  have  been)  ready
all  together,  but  that  they  ripen  in  succession  throughout
a  great  part  of  the  year;  some  in  summer;  some  in
antoma ;  that  some  require  tbe  slow  maturation  of  the
winter,  and  supply  the  spring  r  also  that  tbe  coldest
fruits  grow  in  tbe  hottest  places.  Cucumbers,  pine  ap-
ples, melons,  are  the  natural  produce  of  warm  climates,
and  contribute  greatly,  by  their  coolness,  to  the  refresh-
ment of  the  inhabitants  of  those  countries.

I  will  add  to  this  note  the  following  observation
communicated  to  me  by  Mr.  Brinkley :

•*  The  eatable  part  of  the  cherry  or  peach  first  serves
the  purposes  of  perfecting  the  seed  or  kernel,  by  means
of  vessels  passing  through  the  stone,  and  which  are
very  visible  in  a  peach-stone.  After  the  kernel  is  per-
fected, the  stone  becomes  hard,  and  the  vessels  cease
their  functions.  But  the  substance  surrounding  the
atone  is  not  then  thrown  away  as  useless.  That  which
was  before  only  an  instrument  for  perfecting  the  ker-
nel, aow  receives  aad  retains  to  itself  the  whole  of  the
ana's  Influence,  and  thereby  becomes  a  grateful  food  to
man.  Also  what  an  evident  mark  of  design  is  the  stone
peotectiag  the  kernel !  The  intervention  of  the  stone
Prevents  the  sssoad  ase  from  interfering  with  the  Am."


of  the  Increase.  Tin  result  k,  that  oat  of  tn#
many  thousand  Afferent  plant*  which  cover  that
earth,  not  a  single  species,  perhaps,  he*  been  lest
since  the  creation.

When  nature  has  perfected  her  seeds,  her  next
care  is  to  disperse  them/  The  seed  cannot  an-
swer its  purpose,  whilst  it  remains  confined  in  the)
capsule.  After  the  seeds  therefore  are  ripened,
the  pericarpium  opens  to  let  them  oat ;  and  the
opening  is  not  like  an  accidental  bursting,  bat,  for
the  most  partis  according  to  a  certain  role  in
each  plant.  What  I  have  always  thought  very
extraordinary;  nuts  and  ehetts.  which  we  can
hardly  crack  with  o«r  teeth,  divide  and  make  way
for  the  little  tender  sprout  which  proceeds  from
the  kernel.  Handling  the  not,  I  eould  hardly
conceive'  how  therphwtule  was  ever  to  get  oat  of
it  There  are  cases,  it  is  said,  in  which  the  seed-
vessel  by  an  elastic  jerk,  si  the  moment  of  its  ex-
ists the  seeds  to  a  distance.  We  ofl
know,  that  many  seeds  (those  of  moot
composite  flowers,  as  of  the  thistle,  dandeUen,  fee.)
are  endowed  with  what  are  not  improperly  called
wing*  ;  that  is,  downy  appendages,  by  which  they
are  enabled  to  float  m  the  air,  and  are  carried  often-
times by  the  wind  to  great  distances  from  tbo
plant  which  produces  them.  It  is  the  swelling
also  of  this  downy  tuft  within  the  seed-vessel,  that
seems  to  overcome  the  resistance  of  its  coals,  and
to  open  a  passage  for  the  seed  to  escape.

But  the  constitution  of  seeds  ir  vtill  mimr  attmi
rable  than  either  their  preservation  or  their  shapea>
In  the  body  of  the  seed  of  every


plosion,  o
however


sion. In  the  body  <

plant,  or  nearly  or  every  one,  provision  is  "made  for
two  graiid  purposes :  first,  fortne  sairty  of  the/perm;
secondly,  for  the  temporary  rapport  of  the  future
plant  The  sprout,  aa  folded  np  in  the  seed,  is
delicate  and  brittle  beyond  any  other  sohstasce.
It  cannot  be  touched  without  being  broken.  Yet
in  beans,  peas,  grana  seeds,  grain,  fruits,  it  is  so
fenced  on  all  sides,  so  shut  op  and  protected,  that,
whilst  tbe  seed  itself  is  rudely  handled,  tossed  into
sacks,  shovelled  into  heaps,  the  sacred  partsda,
the  miniature  plant,  remains  unhurt.  It  k  wonder-
ful also,  how  long  many  kinds  of  seeds,  by  the  help
of  their  integuments,  and  perhaps  of  their  on*,
stand  out  against  decay.  A  grain  of  mostaid-seed
has  been  known  to  lie  in  the  earth  for  a  hundred
years ;  and,  as  soon  as  it  had  aooaired  a  ft
hie  situation,  to  shoot  as  vigorously  as  if  ji
thered  from  the  plant.  Then,  as  to  the  i
point,  the  temporary  support  of  the  future  paant.
the  matter  stands  thus.  In  grain,  and  poise,  and
kernels,  and  pippins,  the  germ  composes  a  very
email  part  of  the  seed.  The  rest  consists  of  a  nu-
tritious substance,  from  which  the  sprout  draws
its  aliment  for  some  considerable  time  after  it  is
put  forth ;  viz.  until  the  fibres,  shot  out  from  the
t*her  end  of  the  seed,  are  able  to  imbibe  rakes
from  the  earth,  in  a  sufficient  quantity  for  ns  de-
mand. It  is  owing  to  this-  constitution,  that  we
see  seeds  sprout,  and  the  sprouts  make  a  consider-
able progress,  without  any  earth  at  ell.  It  is  an
economy  also,  in  which  we  remark  a  close  analo-
gy between  the  seeds  of  planta,  and  the  eggs  of
animals.  The  same  point  is  provided  for,  in  the
same  manner  in  both.  In  the  erg,  the  residence
of  the  living  principle,  the  cicatrix  forms  a  xtry
minute  part  of  the  contents.  The  white  and  the
white  only  is  expended  in  the  formation  of  the
chicken.  The  yolk,  very  little  altered  or  diminish-
ed, is  wrapped  up  in  the  abdomen  of  the  young


NATURAL  THEOLOGY.


in


Mrd.wheufc  <roks  the  shell;  and  eervsa  for  its

nourishment,  till  it  have  learnt  to  nek  its  own
food.  This  perfectly  resembles  the  first  nutrition
of  a  plant  In  the  plant,  as  well  as  in  the  animal,
the  structure  has  every  character  of  contrivance
belonging  to  it:  in  both  it  breaks  the  transition
from  prepared  to  unprepared  aliment:  in  both,  it
is  prospective  and  compensatory.  In  animals
which  suek.  this  intermediate  nourishment  is  sop-
pKed  by  a  dbterent  source.
-  In  au  subjects,  the  most  common  observations
are  the  best,  when  it  is  their  truth  and  strength
which  have  made  them  common.  There  are.  of
this  sort,  two  concerning  plants,  which  it  nils
within  our  plan  to  notice.  The  jfraf  relates  to,
what  has  already  been  touched  upon,  their  germi-
nation. When  a  grain  of  corn  is  cast  into  the
ground,  this  is  the  change  which  takes  place.
Prom  one  end  of  the  grain  issues  a  green  sprout;
from  the  other  a  number  of  white  fibrous  threads.
How  can  this  be  explained  1  Why  not  sprouts
from  both  ends  1  why  not  fibrous  threads  from
faothendsl  To  what  is  the  difference  to  be  refer-
led,  but  to  design;  to  the  different  uses  which  the
parts  are  thereafter  to  serve;  uses  which  discover
thernssrves  in  the  sequel  of  the  process  1  The
sprout,  or  plumule,  struggles  into  the  air ;  and  be-
comes the  plant,  of  which,  from  the  first,  it  con-
tained the  rudiments:  the  fibres  shoot  into  the
earth;  and,  thereby,  both  fa.  the  plant  to  the
ground,  and  collect  nourishment  from  the  soil  for
its  support  Now,  what  is  net  a  tittle  remarkable,
the  parts  issuing  from  the  seed  take  their  respect-
ive ejections,  into  whatever  position  the  seed
itself  happens  to  be  cast  If  the  seed  be  thrown
into  the  wrongest  posnbto  position ;  that  is,  if  the
ends  point  in  the  ground,  the  reverse  of  what  they
ought  to  do,  every  thing,  nevertheless,  goes  on
right  The  sprout,  after  being  pushed  down  a
little  way,  makes  a  bend,  and  turns  upwards;  the
fibres,  on  the  contrary,  after  shooting  at  first  up-
wards, turn  down.  Of  this  extraordinary  vegeta-
ble tact,  an  account  has  lately  been  attempted  to
be  given.  "  The  plumule  (it  Is  said)  is  stimulated
by  the  air  into  action,  ana  elongates  itself  when
it  is  thus  most  excited;  the  radicle  is  stimulated
by  moisture,  and  elongates  itself  when  U  is  thus
most  excited  Whence  one  of  those  grows  up-
ward in  quest  of  its  adapted  object,  and  the  other
downward.11*  Were  this  account  better  verified
by  experiment  than  H  fc,  it  only  shifts  the  con-
trivance. It  does  not  disprove  the  contrivance;
It  only  removes  it  a  tittle  father  back.  Who,  to
wee  eur  author's  own  language.  "  adapted  the  ob-
jects T'  Who  gave  such  a  quality  to  these-oonnate


lownele-
i<of
i  vegetation  requires  1  I  say,  "  which  the  suc-
■  of  the  vegetation  requires ;"  for  the  toil  of  the
husbandman  wou|4  have  been  in  vain;  his  labo-
rious and  expensive  preparation  of  the  ground  in
vein  |  if  the  event  must,  after  all,  depend  upon  the
position  in  which  the  scattered  eeed  was  sown.
Net  one  seed  out  of  a  hundred  would  fall  in  a
fight  direction.

Our  second  observation  is  upon  a  general  pro-
perty of  climbing  plants,  which  is  strictly  -me-
cbanical.  In  these  plants,  from  each  knot  or
joint,  or,  ae  botanists  call  it,  axilla,  of  the  plant,

•  Derwtaf  Fsytokfia,  a.  144*


issue,  dose  to  each  other,  two  shoots:  one  bearing
the  flower  and  fruit;  the  other,  drawn  out  Into  a
wire,  a  long,  tapering,  spiral  tendril,  that  twists
itself  round  any  thing  winch  lies  within  itareacb.
Considering,  that  in  this  class  two  purposes  are  to
be  provided  for,  (and  together,)  fructification  and
support,  the  fruitage  of  the  plant,  and  the  suaten-
tattoo  of  the  stalk,  what  means  could  be  used  more
effectual,  or,  as  I  have  said,  more  mechanical,  than
what  the  structure  presents  to  our  eyes'?  Why,
or  how,  without  a  view  to  this  double  purpose,  do
two  shoots,  of  such  different  and  appropriate
forms,  spring  from  the  same  joint,  from  contigu*
ous  points  of  the  same  stalk  f  It  never  happens
thus  in  robust  plants,  or  in'  trees.  "  We  see  not
(says  Ray)  so  much  as  one  tree,  or  shrub,  or  herb,
that  bath  a  firm  and  strong  stem,  and  that  is  able
to  mount  up  and  stand  alone  without  assistance,
Jurnished  with  these  tendrils."  Make  only  so
simple  a  comparison  as  that  between  a  pea  and  a
bean.  Why  does  the  pea  put  forth  tendrils,  the
bean  not;  but  because  the  stalk  of  the  pea  cannot
support  itself;  the  stalk  of  the  bean  can?  We
may  add.  also,  as  a  circumstance  not  to  be  over-
looked, that  in  the  pea  tribe,  these  clasps  do  not
make  their  appearance  till  they  are  wanted;  till
the  plant  has  grown  to  a  height  to  stand  in  need
of  support.

This  word  "support"  suggests  to  use  reflection
upon  a  property  of  grasses,  of  corn,  and  canes.
The  hoQow  stems  of  these  classes  of  plants  ase
est,  at  certain  intervals,  with  joints.  These  joints
are  not  found  in  the  trunks  of  trees,  or  in  the
solid  stalks  of  plants.  There  may  be  other  uses
of  these  joints;  but  the  fact  is,  and  it  appears  to
be,  at  least,  one  purpose  designed  by  them,  that
they  corroborate  the  stem;  which,  by  its  length
and  hoUowness,  would  otherwise  be  too  liable  to
break  or  bend.

Grasses  axe  Nature's  care.  With  these  she
clothes  the  earth;  with  these  she  sustains  its  in*
habitants.  Cattle  feed  upon  their  leaves :  birds
upon  their  smaller  seeds;  men  upon  the  larger;
for,  few  leaders  need  be  told  that  the  plants,  which
produce  our  bread-corn,  belong  to  this  dees.  In
those  tribes,  which  are  more  generally  considered
as  grasses,  their  extraordinary  means  and  powers
of  preservation  and  increase,  their  hardiness,  their
almost  unconquerable  disposition  to  spread,  their
faculties  of  revivisoence,  coincide  with  the  inten-
tion of  nature  concerning  them.  They  thrive
under  a  treatment  by  which  other  plants  are  de-
stroyed. The  more  their  leaves  are  consumed,
the  more  their  roots  increase.  The  more  they  are
trampled  upon,  the  thicker  they  grow.  Many  of
the  seemingly  dry  and  dead  leaves  of  grasses  re*
vive,  and  renew  their  verdure  in  the  spring.  In
lofty  inountains,  where  the  summer  heats  are  not
sufficient  to  ripen  the  eeeds,  grasses  abound,  which
are  viviparous,  and  consequently  able  to  propagate
themselves  without  seed.  It  is  an  observation,
likewise,  which  has  often  been  made,  that  herbi-
vorous animals  attach  themselves  to  the  leaves  of
grasses;  and.  if  at  liberty  in  their  pastures  to
range  and  choose,  leave  untouched  the  straws
which  support  the  flowers.*

The  general  properties  of  vegetable  nature,  or
properties  common  to  large  portions  of  that  king-
dom, are  almost  all  which  the  compass  of  our  ar-
gument allows  to  bring  forward. It  is  impossible

•  Wittering,  Bet.  Aw.  wjL  1  p.  n%  #4  tt.


454


NATURAL  THEOLOGY.


to  follow  plants  into  their  several  species.  We
Biay  he  allowed,  however,  to  single  out  three  or
far  of  these  species  as  worthy  of  a  particular  no-
tics,  either  by  some  singular  mechanism,  or  by
some  peculiar  provision,  or  by  both.

I.  In  Dr.  Darwin's  Botanic  Garden  (1.  395,
note,)  is  the  following  account  of  the  vallisneria,
as  it  has  been  observed  in  the  river  Rhone. —
"  They  have  roots  at  the  bottom  of  the  Rhone.
The  flowers  of  the  female  plant  float  on  the  sur-
fcce  of  the  water,  and  are  furnished  with  an  elas-
tic, spiral  stalk,  which  extends  or  contracts  as  the
water  rises  or  (alls ;  this  rise  or  fall,  from  the  tor-
rents which  flow  into  the  river,  often  amounting
to  many  feet  in  a  few  hours.  The  flowers  of  the
male  plant  are  produced  under  water;  and,  as
soon  as  the  fecundating  farina  is  mature,  they  se-
parate themselves  from  the  plant ;  rise  to  the  sur-
face; and  are  wafted  by  the  air,  or  borne  by  the
currents,  to  the  female  flowers."  Our  attention
in  this  narrative  will  be  directed  to  two  particu-
lars: first,  to  the  mechanism,  the  "elastic,  spiral
stalk,"  which  lengthens  or  contracts  itself  accord-
ing as  the  water  rises  or  fells;  secondly  to  the
provision  which  is  made  for  bringing  the  male
flower,  which  is  produced  under  water,  to  the  fe-
male flower  which  floats  upon  the  surface.

II.  My  second  example  I  take  from  Wither-
ing's  Arrangement,  vol.  ii.  p.  209.  ed.  3.  "  The
aucuta  europcea  is  a  parasitical  plant  The  seed
opens,  and  puts  forth  a  little  spiral  body,  which
does  not  seek  the  earth,  to  take  root;  but  climbs
in  a  spiral  direction,  from  right  to  left,  up  other
plants,  from  which,  by  means  of  vessels,  it  draws
its  nourishment."  The  "  little  spiral  body  "  pro-
ceeding from  the  seed,  is  to  be  compared  with  the
fibres  which  seeds  send  out  in  ordinary  cases :
and  the  comparison  ought  to  regard  both  the  form
of  the  threads  and  the  direction.  They  are
straight ;  this  is  spiral.  They  shoot  downwards ;
this  points  upwards.  In  the  rule,  and  in  the  ex-
ception, we  equally  perceive  design.

III.  A  better  known  parasiticaTplant  is  the  ever-
green shrub,  called  the  mistletoe.  What  we  have
to  remark  in  it,  is  a  singular  instance  of  compen-
saHon.  No  art  hath  yet  made  these  plants  take
root  in  the  earth.  Here  therefore  might  seem  to  be
a  mortal  defect  in  their  constitution.  Let  us  ex-
amine how  this  defect  is  made  up  to  them.  The
seeds  are  endued  with  an  adhesive  quality,  so
tenacious,  that  if'  they  be  rubbed  upon  the  smooth
bark  of  almost  any  tree,  they  will  stick  to  it  And
then  what  follows  1  Roots,  springing  from  these
seeds,  insinuate  their  fibres  into  the  woody  sub-
stance of  the  tree ;  and  the  event  is,  that  a  mis-
tletoe plant  is  produced  next  winter.*  Of  no  other
plant  do  the  roots  refuse  to  shoot  in  the  ground;
of  no  other  plant  do  the  seeds  possess  this  adhe-
sive,.generative  quality,  when  applied  to  the  bark
•/trees.

IV.  Another  instance  of  the  compensatory  sys-
tem is  in  the  autumnal  crocus,  or  meadow  saffron
(oolchieum  autumnale.)  I  have  pitied  this  poor
plant  a  thousand  times.  Its  blossom  rises  out  of
the  ground  in  the  most  forlorn  condition  possi-
ble ;  without  a  sheath,  a  fence,  a  calyx,  or  even
a  leaf  to  protect  it:  and  that,  not  in  the  spring,
not  to  be  visited  by  summer  suns,  but  under  all
the  disadvantages  of  the  declining  year.  When
^  ,  however,  to  look  more  closely  into  the


>  Wisteria*,  Bat  Air.  voL  L,  p.  903.  ed.  9d.


structure  of- this  plant,  we  find  that  instead  of  it*
being  neglected,  Nature  has  gone  out  of  her  course
to  provide  for  its  security,  and  to  make  up  to  it  for
all  its  defects.  The  seed-vessel,  which  in  other
plants  is  situated  within  the  cup  of  the  flower,  or
just  beneath  it,  in  this  plant  lies  buried  ten  or
twelve  inches  under  ground  within  the  bulbous
root  The  tube  of  the  flower,  which  is  seldom
more  than  a  few  tenths  of  an  inch  long,  in  this
plant  extends  down  to  the  root.  The  soles  in  all
cases  reach~the  seed-vessel ;  but  it  is  in  this,  by  an
elongation  unknown  to  any  other  plant  All  these
contribute  to  one  end.  r<  As  this  plant  blossoms
late  in  the  year,  and  probably,  would  not  haw
time  to  ripen  its  seeds  before  the  access  of  winter,
which  would  destroy  them ;  Providence  has  con-
trived its  structure  such,  that  this  important  office
may  be  performed  at  a  depth  in  the  earth  out  of
reach  of  the  usual  effects  of  frost"  *  That  is  to
say,  in  the  autumn  nothing  is  done  above  ground
but  the  business  of  impregnation;  which-is  an  af-
fair between  the  anthers  and  stigmata,  and  is  pro-
bably soon  over.  The  maturation  of  the  impreg-
nated seed,  which  in  other  plants  proceeds  within
a  capsule,  exposed  together  with  the  rest  of  the
flower  to  the  open  air,  is  here  carried  on,  and  dup-
ing the  whole  winter,  within  the  heart,  as  we  may
say,  of  the  earth,  that  is,  "out  of  the  reach  of  the
usual  effects  of  frost."  But  then  a  new  difficulty
presents  itself:  seeds,  though  perfected,  are  known
not  to  vegetate  at  this  depth  in  the  earth.  Oar
seeds,  therefore,  though  so  safely  lodged,  would,
after  all,  be  lost  to  the  purpose  for  which  ail  seeds
are  intended.  Lest  this  should  be  the  case,  ua
second  admirable  provision  is  made  to  raise  them
above  the  surface  when  they  are  perfected,  and  to
sow  them  at  a  proper  distance;  viz.  the  germ
grows  up  in  the  spring,  upon  a  fruit  stalk,  ac-
companied with  leaves.  The  seeds  now,  in  com-
mon with  those  of  other  plants,  have  the  benefit
of  the.  summer,  and  are  sown  upon  the  surface.
The  order  of  vegetation  externally  is  this : — The
plant  produces  its  flowers  in  September ;  its  leaves
and  fruits  in  the  spring  following.

V.  I  give  the  account  of  the  dwnma  muscipula,
an  extraordinary  American  plant  as  some  late
authors  have  related  it:  but  whether  we  be  yet
enough  acquainted  with  the  plant,  to  bring  every
part  of  this  account  to  the  test  of  repeated  and
familiar  observation,  I  am*  unable  to  say.  "  Its
leaves  are  jointed  and  furnished  with  two  rows  of
strong  prickles;  their  surfaces  covered  with  a
number  of  minute  glands,  which  secrete  a  sweet
liquor  that  allures  the  approach  of  flies.  When
these  parts  are  touched  by  the  legs  of  flies,  the
two  lobes  of  the  leaf  instantly  spring  up,  the  rows
of  prickles  lock  themselves  fast  together,  and
squeeze  the  unwary  animal  to  death."  t  Here,
under  a  new  model,  we  recognise  the  ancient  plan
of  nature,  viz.  the  relation  of  parts  and  provissans
to  one  another,  to  a  common  office,  and  to  the
utility  of  the  organized  body  to  which  they  belong.
The  attracting  syrup,  the  rows  of  strong  prickles,
their  position  so  as  to  interlock  the  joints  of  the
leaves ;  and,  what  is  more  than  the  rest,  that  sin-
gular irritability  of  their  surfaces,  by  which  they
dose  at  a  touch ;  all  bear  a  contributory  part  in
producing  an  effect,  connected  either  with  the
defence  or  with  the  nutrition  of  the  plant


•-Withering,  ubi  supra,  p.  380.

t  SmeUiel  PHIL  of  Nat.  Hist  voL  t  p,  &


NATURAL  THEOLOGY.


,465


CHAPTER  XXI.

The  Element*.

When  we  come  to  the  elements,  we  take  leave
of  .our  mechanics ;  because  we  come  to  those
things,  of  the  organization  of  which,  if  they  be
organised,  we  are  confessedly  ignorant.  This  ig-
norance is  implied  by  their  name.  To  say  the
truth,  our  investigations  are  stopped  long  before
we  arrive  at  this  point  But  men  it  is  for  our
comfort  to  find,  that  a  knowledge  of  the  constitu-
tion of  the  elements  is  not  necessary  for  us.  For
instance,  as  Addison  has  well  observed,  "  we  know
voter  sufficiently,  when  we  know  how  to  boil,
how  to  freeze,  how  to  evaporate,  how  to  make  it
fresh,  how  to  make  it  run  or  spout  out,  in  what
quantity  and  direction  we  please,  without  know-
ing what  water  is."  The  observation  of  this  ex-
cellent writer  has  more  propriety  in  it  now,  than  it
had  at  the  time  it  was  made :  for  the  constitution,
and  the  constituent  parts,  of  water,  appear  in
some  measure  to  have  been  lately  discovered ;  yet
it  does  not,  I  think,  appear,  that  we  can  make  any
better  or  greater  use  of  water  since  the  discovery,
than  we  aid  before,  it

,  We  can  never  think  of  the  elements,  without
lanWring  upon  the  number  of  distinct  uses  which
ne.contoUaated  in.  the  same  substance.  The  air
supplies  the  lungs,  supports  fire,  conveys  sound,
reflects  light,  diffuse*  smells,  gives  rain,  wafts  ships,
bears  up  birds.  'Eg***™*  t«*-«,t«:  water,  be-
sides maintaining  its  own  inhabitants,  is  the  uni-
versal nourisher  of  plants,  and  through  them  of
terrestrial  animals ;  is  the  basis  of  their  juices  and
fluids;  dilutes  their  food;  quenches  their  thirst,
floats  their  burdens.  Fire  warms,  dissolves,  en-
is  the  great  promoter  of  vegetation  and

,  if  not  necessary  to  the  support  of  both.

rVe  might  enlarge,  to  almost  any  length  we
pleased,  upon  each  of  these  uses;  but  it  appears
to  me  almost  sufficient  to  state  them.  The  few
remarks  which  I  judge  it  necessary  to  add,  are  as
follow:

L  Air  is  essentially  different  from  earth.
There  appears  to  be  no  necessity  for  an  atmos-
phere's investing  our  globe ;  yet  it  does  invest  it :
and  we  see  how  many,  how  various,  and  how  im-
portant, are  the  purposes  which  it  answers  to
every  order  of  animated,  not  to  say  of  organized
beings,  which  are  placed  upon  the  terrestrial  sur-
face. I  think  that  every  one  of  these  uses  will  be
understood  upon  the  first  mention  of  them,  except
it  be  that  of  reflecting  light,  which  may  be  ex-
plained thus:— If  I  had  the  power  of  seeing  only
by  means  of  rays  coming  directly  from  the  sun,
whenever  I  turned  my  back  upon  the  luminary,  I
should  find  myself  in  darkness.  If  I  had  the
power  of  seeing  by  reflected  light,  yet  by  means
only  of  fight  reflected  from  solid  masses,  these
masses  would  shine  indeed,  and  glisten,  but  it
would  be  in  the  dark.  The  hemisphere,  the  sky,
the  world,  could  only  be  illuminated,  as  it  is  illu-
minated, by  the  light  of  the  sun  being  from  all
aides,  and  in  every  direction,  reflected  to  the  eye,
by  particles,  as  numerous,  as  thickly  scattered,
and  as  widely  diffused,  as  are  those  of  the  air.

Another  general  quality  of  the  atmosphere  is
the  power  of  evaporating  fluids.  The  adjust-
ment of  this  quality  to  our  use  is  seen  in  its  action
upon  the  sea.  In  the  sea,  water  and  salt  are
mixed  together  moat  intimately:  yet  the  atmos-


phere raises  the  water  and  leaves  the  sak.  Pore
and  fresh  as  drops  of  rain  descend,  they  are  col-
lected from  brine.  If  evaporation  be  solution
(which  seems  to  be  probable,)  then  the  air  dis-
solves the  water,  and  not  the  salt  Upon  what-
ever it  be  founded,  the  distinction  is  critical ;  so
much  so,  that  when  we  attempt  to  imitate  the
process  by  art,  we  must  regulate  our  distillation
with  great  care  and  nicety,  or,  together  with  the
water,  we  get  the  bitterness,  or  at  least,  the  distaste-
fulness,  ofthe  marine  substance:  and  after  all  it
is  owing  to  this  original  elective  power  in  the  air,
that  we  can  effect  the  separation  which  we  wish,
by  any  art  or  means  whatever.
a  By  evaporation,  water  is  carried  up  into  the
air;  by  the  converse  of  evaporation,  it  falls  down
upon  the  earth.  And  how  does  it  fall  1  Not  by
the  clouds  being  all  at  once  reconverted  into
water,  and  descending  like  a  sheet;  not  in  rushing
down  in  columns  from  a  spout ;  but  in  moderate
drops,  as  from  a  colander.  Our  watering-pots  are
made  to  imitate  showers  of  rain.  Yet,  a  priori,  I
should  have  thought  either  of  the  two  former
methods  more  likely  to  have  taken  place  than  the
last.

By  respiration,  flame,  putrefaction,  air  is  render-
ed unfit  for  the  support  of  animal  life.  By  the
constant  operation  of  these  corrupting  principles,
the  whole  atmosphere,  if  there  were  no  restoring
causes,  would  come  at  length  to  be  deprived  of  its
necessary  degree  of  purity.  Some  of  these  causes
seem  to  have  been  discovered ;  and  their  efficacy
ascertained  by  experiment.  And  so  for  as  the
discovery  has  proceeded,  it  opens  to  us  a  beautiful
and  a  wonderful  economy.  Vegetation  move*  to
be  one  of  them.  A  sprig  of  mint,  corked  up  with
a  small  portion  of  foul  air,  placed  in  the  light,
renders  it  again  capable  of  supporting  life  or  flame.
Here,  therefore,  is  a  constant  circulation  of  bene-
fits maintained  between  the  two  great  provinces
of  organized  nature.  The  plant  purines,  what
the  animal  has  poisoned ;  in  return,  the  contami-
nated air  is  more  than  ordinarily  nutritious  to  the
plant:  Agitation  with  water  turns  out  to  he
another  of  these  restoratives.  The  foulest  air,
shaken  in  a  bottle  with  water  for  a  sufficient
length  of  time,  recovers  a  great  degree  of  its  purity.
Here  then  again,  allowing  for  the  scale  upon
which  nature  works,  we  see  the  salutary  effects  of
storms  and  tempest*.  The  yesty  waves,  which
confound  tlie  heaven  and  the  sea,  are  doing  the
very  thing  which  was  done  in  the  bottle.  ^  No-
thing can  De  of  greater  importance  to  the  living
creation,  than  the  salubrity  of  their  atmosphere.
It  ought  to  reconcile  us  therefore  to  these  agita-
tions of  the  elements,  of  which  we  sometimes
deplore  the  consequences,  to  know  that  they  tend,
powerfully  to  restore  to  the  air  that  purity,  which
so  many  causes  are  constantly  impairing.

II.  In  water,  what  ought  not  a  little  to  be  ad-
mired, are  tbose  negative  qualities  which  constoV
tute  its  purity.  Had  it  been  vinous,  or  oleaginous,
or  acid;  had  the  sea  been  filled,  or  the  rivers
flowed,  with  wine  or  milk;  fish,  constituted  as
they  are,  must  have  died ;  plants,  constituted  as
they  are,  would  have  withered ;  the  fives  of  animals
which  feed  upon  plants,  must  have  perished.  Its
very  insipidity,  which  is  one  of  those  negative  qua-
lities, renders  it  the  best  of  all  menstrua.  Having
no  taste  of  its  own.  it  becomes  the  sincere  vehicle
of  every  other.  Had  there  been  a  taste  in  water,
be  it  what  it  might,  it  would  have  infected  every


466


NATURAL  THEOLOGY.


we  sje  or  dfink,  within
oftbe


Another  thing  in  this  dement,  not  1
Imired,  is  the  constant  round  which  it


fepe>


leas  to  be


and  by  whicb^  without  sttfTering  either  adulters
tion  or  waste,  it  is  continually  offering  itself  to  the
wants  of  the  habitable  globe.  From  the  sea  are
exhaled  those  vapours  which  form  the  doode:
these  cloud*  descend  in  showers,  which,  pene-
trating into  the  devices  of  the  hills,  supply
springs:  which  springs  flow  in  little  streams  into
toe  valleys;  and  there  uniting,  become  rivers;
which  rivers,  in  return,  feed  the  ocean.  So  there
is  an  incessant  circulation  of  the  same  fluid;  and
not  one  drop,  probably,  more  or  less  now  than
there  was  at  the  creation.  A  particle  of  water
takes  its  departure  from  the  surface  of  the  sea,  in
order  to  fulfil  certain  important  offices  to  the  earth;
and,  having  executed  the  service  which  was  as-
signed to  it,  returns  to  the  bosom  which  it  left.

Some  have  thought,  that  we  have  too  much
water  upon  the  globe,  the  sea  occupying  above
three  quarters  or  its  whole  surface.  But  the
expanse  of  ocean,  immense  as  it  is,  may  be  no
more  than  sufficient  to  fertilize  the  earth.  Or,
independently  of  this  reason,  I  know  not  why  the
sea  may  not  have  as  good  a  right  to  its  place  as  the
land.  It  may  proportionably  support  as  many  in-
habitants ;  minister  to  as  large  an  aggregate  of  en-
joyment. The  land  only  affords  a  habitable  sur-
face: the  sea  is  habitable  to  s  mat  depth.

III.  Of  fire,  we  have  said  that  it  dissolve*.  The
only  idea  probably  which  this  term  raised  in  the
reader's  mind,  was  that  of  fire  melting  metab,
resins,  and  some  other  substances,  fluxing  ores,
running  glass,  and  assisting  us  in  many  of  our
operations,  chymlcal  or  culinary.  Now  these
are  only  uses  of  an  occasional  kind,  and  give
us  a  very  imperfect  notion  of  what  fire  does  for  us.
The  grand  importance  of  this  dissolving  power.
the  great  office  indeed  of  fire  in  the  economy  or


,  is  keeping  things  in  a  state  of  solution,
that  is  to  say,  m  a  state  of  fluidity.  Were  it  not
for  the  presence  of  heat  or  of  a  certain  degree  of  it,
all  fluids  would  be  frown.  The  ocean  itself
would  be  u  quarry  of  ice:  universal  nature  stiff
and  dead.

We  see,  therefore,  that  the  elements  bear  not
only  a  strict  relation  to  the  constitution-  of  orga-
nised bodies,  but  a  relation  to  each  other.  Water
could  not  perform  its  office  to  the  earth  without
air:  nor  exist,  as  water,  without  fire.

IV.  Of  light  (whether  we  regard  it  as  of  the
same  substance  with  fire,  or  as  a  different  sub-
stance,) it  is  altogether  superfluous  to  expatiate
upon  the  use.  No  man  disputes  it.  The  observa-
tions, therefore,  which  I  shall  offer,  respect  that
little  which  we  seem  to  know  of  its  constitution.

Light  travels  from  the  sun  at  the  rate  of  twelve
trillions  of  miles  in  a  minute.  Urged  by  such  a
velocity,  with  what  Jbrce  must  its  particles  drive
against  (I  will  not  say  the  eye,  the  tenderest  of
animal  substances,  but)  every  substance,  animate
or  inanimate,  which  stands  in  its  way!  It  might
seem  to  be  a  force  sufficient  to  shatter  to  atoms
the  hardest  bodies.

How  then  is  this  effect,  the  consequence  of  such
prodigious  velocity,  guarded  against  1  By  a  pro-
portionable mtnuUneta  of  the  particles  of  which
light  is  composed.  It  is  impossible  for  the  human
mind  to  imagine  to  itself  any  thing  so  small  as  a  par-
ticisoffight. ButthisextremeexiUty,  though <tif^


heult  to  conceive,  It  is  easy  to  prove.  A  drop  of
tallow,  expended  in  the  wick  of  a  farthing  candle,
shall  send  forth  rays  sufficient  to  fill  a  hemsjunen
of  a  mile  diameter:  and  to  fill  it  so  full  of  f


rays,  that  an  aperture  not  larger  than  the  pupi  of
an  eye,  wherever  it  be  placed  within  the  hemi-
sphere, shall  be  sure  to  receive  some  of  them.
What  floods  of  light  are  contmuahV  poured  from
the  sun,  we  cannot  estimate ;  but  the  munensity
of  the  sphere  whieh  is  filled  with  particles  even  rf
it  reached  no  farther  than  the  orbit  of  the  earth,
we  can  in  some  sort  compute :  and  we  have  reason
to  believe,  that  throughout  this  whole  region,  the
particles  of  light  he,  in  latitude  at  feast,  near  to
one  another.  The  sdissKude  of  the  sun's  rays  si
the  earth  is  such,  that  the  number  which  fiuss
upon  a  burning-ghss  of  an  inch  diameter,  is  suf-
ficient, when  concentrated,  to  set  wood  on  firs.

The  tenuity  and  the  velocity  of  particles  of
light,  ss  ascertained  by  separate  observations,  mar
be  said  to  be  proportioned  to  each'  other ;  both,
surpassing  our  utmost  stretch  of  comprehension ;
but  proportioned.  And  it  is  this  proportion  alone
which  converts  a  tremendous  element  into  a  wel-
come visitor.

It  has  been  observed  to  me  br  a  learned  friend,
as  having  often  struck  his  mind,  that  if  light  had
been  mens  by  a  common  artist,  it  would  have  been)
of  one  uniform  colour  ;  whereas,  by  tfs  present
composition^  we  have  that  variety  of  colours,
which  is  of  such  infinite  use  to  us  for  the  dnrtin-
w  of  objects;  which  adds  so  modi  tothe

luty  of  the  earth,  and  augments  the  stock  of
our  innocent  pleasures.

With  which  may  be  joined  another  reflection.
viz.  that,  considering  fight  as  compounded  or
rays  of  seven  different  colours,  f of  which  there
can  be  no  doubt,  because  it  can  be  resolved  into
these  rays  by  simply  passing  it  through  a  prism,}
the  constituent  parts  must  be  well  mixed  ana
Mended  together,  to  produce  a  fluid  so  clear  and
colourless,  as  a  beam  of  light  is,  when  received
from  the  sun.


CHAPTER  XXII.

Astronomy.

My  opinion  of  Astronomy  has  always  been,
that  it  is  nor  the  best  medium  through  which  to
prove  the  agency  of  an  intelligent  Creator ;  but
that,  this  being  proved,  it  shows,  beyond  aO  other
sciences,  the  magnificence  of  his  operations.  The
mind  which  is  once  convinced,  it  rajsce  to  sub-
timer  views  of  the  Deity  than  any  other  subject
affords;  but  it  is  not  so  weR  adapted,  as  soma
other  subjects  are,  to  the  purpose  of  argument
We  are  destitute  of  the  means  of  examining  the
constitution  of  the  heavenly  bodies.  The  ^erf
simplicity  of  their  appearance  is  against  them.
We  see  nothing,  but  bright  points,  luminous  cir-
cles, or  the  phases  of  spheres  reflecting  the  fight
which  falls  upon  them.  Now  we  deduce  deter*
from  relation,  aptitude,  and  correspondence  of
parts. Some  degree,  therefore,  of  cotnpicTity  is


*  For  the  articles  in  this  chapter

terwk,  I  am  indebted  to  wme  oMici

received  (through  the  hands  of  the  Lord  Bishop  of  H-
phin)  from  the  Rev.  J.  Brinkley,  M.  A.  Andrew*  Fn>
fessor  of  Astronomy  in  the  University  of  Bufctm.


NATURAL  THEOLOGY.


467


Decenary  to  render  a  subject  lit  for  this  species  of
argument  But  the  heavenly  bodies  do  not,  ex-
cept perhaps  in  the  instance  of  Saturn's  ring,  pre-
sent themselves  to  our  observation  as  compound-
ed of  parts  at  all  This,  which  may  be  a  perfection
in  them,  is  a  disadvantage  to  us,  as  inquirers  after
their  nature.  They  "do  not  come  within  our  me-
chanics.

And  what  we  say  of  their  forms,  is  true  of  their
motions.  Their  motions  are  carried. on  without
any  sensible  intermediate  apparatus ;  whereby  we
are  cut  off  from  One  principal  ground  or  argument-
ation, analogy.  We  have  nothing  wherewith  to
compare  them;  no  invention,  no  discovery,  no
operation 'or  resource  of  art,  whichj  ra  this  respect,
resembles  them.  Even  those  things  which  are
made  to  imitate  and  represent  them,  such  as  or-
reries, planetaria,  celestial  globes,  &£.  bear  no
affinity  to  them,  in  the  cause  and  principle  by .
which  their  motions  are  actuated.  I  can  assign
ftr  this  difference  a  reason  of  utility,  viz.  a  reason
why,  though  the  action  of  terrestrial  bodies  Upon
each  other  tie,  in  almost  all  cases,  through  the  in-
tervention of  solid  or  fluid  substances/yet  central
attraction  does  not  operate  in  this  manner.  It  was
necessary  that  the  intervals  between  the  planetary
orbs  should  be  devoid  of  any  inert  matter  either
fluid  or  solid,  because  such  an  intervening  sub-
stance would,  by  its  resistance,  destroy  those  very
motions,  which  attraction  is  employed  to  preserve.
This  may  be  a  final  cause  of  the  difference;  but
still  the  difference  destroys  the  analogy.

Our  ignorance,  moreover,  of  the  sensitive  na<-
tuies  by  which  other  planets  are  inhabited,  neces-
sarily keeps  from  us  the  knowledge  of  numberless
utilities,  relations,  and  subserviencies,  which  we
perceive  upon  our  own  globe.

After  all;  the  real  subject  of  admiration  is,  that
we  understand  so  much  of  astronomy  as  we  do.
That  an  animal  confined  to  the  surface  of  one  of
the  planets;  bearing  a  Jess  proportion  to  it  than
the  smallest  microscopic  insect  does  to  the  plant
it  lives  upon ;  that  this  little,  busy,  inquisitive
creature,  by  the'  use  of  senses  which  were  given
to  it  for  its  domestic  necessities,  and  by  means  of
the  assistance  of  those  senses  which  it  has  had  the
art  to  procure,  should 'have  been  enabled  to  ob-
serve the  whole  system  of  worlds  to  which  its  own
belongs;  the  changes  of  place  of  the  immense
globes  which  compose  it;  and  with  such  accuracy,
as  to  mark  out  beforehand  the  situation  in  the
heavens  in  which  they  will  be  found  at  any  future
point  of  time;  and  that  these  bodies^ after  sailing
through  regiont  of  void  and  trackless  space,  should
arrive  at  the  place  where  they  were  expected,  not
within  a  minute,  but  within  a  few  seconds  of  a
minute,  of  the  time  prefixed  and  predicted :  all
this  is  wonderful,  whether  we  refer  our  admiration
to  the  constancy  of  the  heavenly  motions  them-
selves, or  to  the  perspicacity  and  precision  with
which  they  have  been  noticed  by  mankind.  Nor
is  this  the  whole,  nor  indeed  the  chief  part,  of
what  astronomy  teaches.  By  bringing  reason  to
bear  upon  observation,  (the  acutest  reasoning
upon  toe  exactest  observation,)  the  astronomer
has  been  able,  out  of  the  "  mystic  dance,"  and  the
confusion  (for  such  it  is)  under  which  the  motions
of  the  heavenly  bodies  present  themselves  to  the
eye  of  a  mere  gazer  upon  the  skies,  to  elicit  their
Older  and  their  real  paths.

Oar  knowledge,  therefore,  of  astronomy' is  ad-
■urabfte,  though  imperfect:  and,  amidst  the  con-
3  M


fessed  desiderata  and  desideranda,  which  impede
our  investigation  of  the  wisdom  of  the  Deity  in
these  the  grandest' of  his  works,  there  are  to  be
found,  in  the  phenomena,  ascertained  circum-
stances and  laws,  sufficient  to  indicate,  an  intel-
lectual agency  in  three  of  its  principal  operations,
*yiz.  in  choosing,  in  determining,  m  regulating ;
in  choosing,  out  of  a  boundless  variety  of  suppo-
sitions which  were  equally  possible,  that  which  is
beneficial;  in  determining,  what,  left  to  itself,
had  a  thousand  chances  against  conveniency,  for
one  in  its  favour ;  in  regulating  subjects,  as  to
quantity  and  degree-,  which,  by  their  nature,  were
unlimited  with  respect  to  either.  It  will  be  our
business  to  offer,  under  each  of  these  heads,  a  few
instances,  such  as  best  admit  of  a  popular  expli-
cation.

1.  Amongst  proofs  of  choice,  one  is,  fixing' the
source  of  light  and  heat  in  the  centre  of  the  sys-
tem. The  sun  is  ignited  and  luminous;  the
planets,  which  move  round  him,  cold  and  dark.
There  seems  to  be  no  antecedent  necessity  for  this
order.  The  sun  might  have  been  an  opaque  mass ;
some  one,  or  two,  or  more,  or  any,  or  all,  the  pla-
nets, globes  of  fire.  There  is  nothing  in  the  na-
ture of  the  heavenly  bodies,  which  requires  that
those  which  are  stationary  should  be  on  fire,  that
those  which  move  should  be  cold:  for,  in  fact,
comets  are  bodies  on  fire,  or  at  least  capable  of  the
most  intense  heat,  yet  revolve  round  a  centre:
nor  does  this  order  obtain  between  the  primary
planets  and  their  secondaries,  which  are  alf  opaque.
When  we  consider,  therefore,  that  the  sun  js  one;
that  the  planets  going  round  it  are,  at  least,  seven;
that  it  is  indifferent  to  their  nature,  which  are  lu-
minous and  which  are  opaque ;  and  also,  in  what
order,  with  respect  to  each  other,  these  two  kinds
of  bodies  are  disposed ;  We  may  judge  of  the  im-
probability of  the  present  arrangement  taking
place  by  chance.

If,  by  way  of  accounting  for  the  state  in  which
we  find  the  solar  system,  it  be  alleged,  (and  this
is  one  amongst  the  guesses  of  those  who  reject  an
intelligent  Creator,;  that  the  planets  themselves
are  only  cooled  or  cooling  masses,  and  were  once,
tike  the  sun,  many  thousand  times  hotter  than
red-hot  iron;  then  it  follows, that  the  son  also
himself  must  be  in  his  .progress  towards  growing
cold ;  which  puts  an  end  to  the  possibility  of  his
having  existed,  as  he  is,  from  eternity.  This  con-
sequence arises  out  of  the  hypothesis  with  still
more  certainty,  if  we  make  a  part  of  it.  what  the
philosophers  who  maintain  it  have  usually  taught,
that  the  planets  were  originally  masses  of  matter.
struck  off  in  a  state  of  fusion,  from  the  body  or  .
the  sun  .by  the  percussion  of  a  comet,  or  by  *
shock  from  some  other  cause,  with  Which  we  are
not  acquainted :  for,  if  these  masses,  partaking  of
the  nature  and  substance  of  the  sun's  body,  have  ,
in  process  of  time  lost  their  heat,  that  body  itseU,
in  time  likewise,  no  matter  in  how  much  longer
time,  must  lose  its  heat  also,  and  therefore  be  in-
capable of  an  eternal  duration  in  the  state  in
which  we  see  it,  either  for  the  time  to  come,  or  the
time  past.

The  preference  of  the  present  to  any  other  mode
of  distributing  luminous  and  opaque  bodies,  I  take
to  be  evident.  It  requires  more  astronomy  than  1
am  able  to  lay  before  the  reader,  to  show,  in  its
particulars,  what  would  be  the  effect  to  the  sys-
tem, of  a  dark  body  at  the  centre,  ancTof  one  of  4
the  planets  being  luminous:  bat  I  think  itmamV


468


NATURAL  THEOLOGY.


ft*,  without  either  plates  of  calculation,  first,  that
supposing  the  nrcessory  proportion  of  magnitude
between  the  central  and  the  revolving  bodies  to  be
preserved,  the  ignited  planet  would  not  be  suffi-
cient to  illuminate  and  warm  the  rest  of  the  sys-
tem; secondly,  that  its  light  and  heat  would  be
imparted  to  the  other  planets  much  more  irregu-
larly than  light  and  heat  are  now  received  from
the  sun.

(*)  II.  Another  thing,  in  which  a  choice  ap-
pears to  be  exercised,  and  in  which;  amongst  the
possibilities  out  of  which  the  choice  was  to  be
made,  the  number  of  those  which  were  wrong
bora  an  infinite  proportion  to  the  number  of  those
which  were  right,  is  in  what  geometricians  call
the  axis  qf  rotation.  This  matter  I  will  endea-
vour to  explain.  The  earth,  it  is  well  known,  is
not  an  exact  globe,  but  an  oblate  spheroid,  some-
thing like  an  orange.  Now  the  axes  of.  rotation,
or  the  diameters  upon  which  such  a  body  may  be
made  to  turn  round,  are  as  many  as  can  be  drawn
through  its  centre  to  opposite  points  upon  its
whole  surface :  but  of  these  axes  none  are  perma-
nent, except  either  its  shortest  diameter,  i.  e.~that
which  passes  through  the  heart  of  the  orange  from
the  place  when  the  stalk  k  inserted  into  it,  and
which  is  but  one:  or- its  longest  diameters,  at
right  angles  with  the  former,  which  must  all  ter-
minate in  the  single  circumference  which  goes
round  the  thickest  part  of  the  orange.  The  short-
eat  diameter  is  that  upon  which  in  fact  the  earth
turns,  and  it  is,  as  the  reader  sees,  what  it  ought
to  be,  a  permanent  axis;  whereas,  had  blind


wrong  axis.  And  what  would  have  been  the
consequence  1  The  difference  between  a  perma-
nent axis  and  another  axis  is  this :  When  a  sphe-
roid in  a  state  of  rotatory  motion  gets  upon  a  per-
manent axis,  it  keeps  there;  it  remains  steady
and  faithful  to  its 'position',  its  poles  preserve  their
direction  with  respect  to  the  plane  and  to  the  cen-
tre of  its  orbit :  but,  whilst  it  turns  upon  an  axis
which  is  not  permanent  (and  the  number  of  those
we  have  seen  infinitely  exceeds  the  number  of  the
other,)  it  is  always  liable  to  shift  and*  vaeHlate
from  one  axis  to  another,  with  a  corresponding
change  in  the  inclination  of -its  poles.  Therefore,
if  a  planet  once  set  off  revolving  upon  any  other
than  its  shortest,  or  one  of  its  -longest  axes,  the
poles  on  its  surface  would  keep  perpetually  chang-
ing, and  it  never  would  attain  a  permanent  axis
ef  rotation.  The  effect  of  this  unfixedness  and
instability  would  be,  that  the  equatorial  parts  of
the  earth  might  become  the  polar,  or  the  polar  the
equatorial;  to  the  utter  destruction  of  plants  and
animals,  which  are  not  capable  of  interchanging
their  situations,  but  are  respectively  adapted  to
their  own.  As  to  ourselves,  instead  of  rejoicing
in  our  temperate  zone,  and  annually  preparing  for
the  moderate  vicissitude,  or  rather  the  agreeable  suc-
cession of  seasons,  which  we  experience  and  ex-
pect, we  might  come  to  be  locked  up  in  the  ice
and  darkness  of  the  arctic  circle,  with  bodies  nei-
ther inured  to  its  rigours,  nor  provided  with  shel-
ter or  defence  against  them.  Nor  would  it  be
much  better,  if  the  trepidation  of  our  pole,  taking
an  opposite  course,  should  place  us  under  the
heats  of  a  vertical  sun.  But  if  it  would  fare  so
ill  with  the  human  inhabitant,  who  can  live  under
greater  varieties  of  latitude  than  any  other  animal;


still  more  noxious  would  this  tranalsttono
nave  proved  to  life  in  the  rest  of  the  creation;
and,  most  perhaps  of  all,  in  {fonts.  The  habita-
ble earth,  and  its  beautiful  variety,  might  have
been  destroyed,  by  a  simple  mwcnaninft  in  the  axis
of  rotation.

(♦)  III.  All  this,  however,  pioeeeds  upon  a  sup-
position of  the  earth  having  been  formed  at  first
an  oblate  spheroid.  There  is  another  supposition;
and  perhaps  our  limited 'information  will  not  ena-
ble us  to  decide  between  them.  The  second  sup-
position is,  that  the  earth,  being  a  mixed  mass
somewhat  fluid,  took,  as  it  might  do,  ite  present
form,  by  the  joint  action  of  the  mutualgmvitatian
of  its  parts  and  its  rotatory  motion.  This,  as  we
have  said,  is  a  point  in  the  history  of. the  earth,
which  our  observations  are  not  sufficient  to  deter-
mine. For  a  very  small  depth  below  the  surface,
(but  extremely  small,  less,  perhaps,  than  an  eight-
thousandth  part,  compared  with  the  depth  of  the
centre,)  we  find  vestiges  of  ancient  fluidity.  But
this  fluidity  must  have  gone  .down  many  nundred
times  farther  than  we  can  penetrate,  to  enable  the
earth  to  take  its  present  oblate  form  i  and  whether
any  traces  of  this  kind  exist  to  that  depth,  we  are
ignorant  Calculations  were  made  a  few  years
age,  of  the  mean  density  of  the  earth,  by  compar-
ing the  force  of  its  attraction  with  the  force  at  at-
traction of  a  rock  of  granite,  the  bulk  of  which
could  be  ascertained :  and  the  upshot  of  the  cal-
culation was,  that  the  earth  upon  an  average,
through  its  whole  sphere,  has  twice  the  density
of  granite,  or  about  five  times  that  of  water. '
Therefore  it  cannot  be  a  hollow  shell,  as- some
have  formerly  supposed;  nor  can  its  internal
parts  he  Occupied  by  central  fire,  or*  by  water.
The  solid  parts  must  greatly  exceed  the  fluid
parts;  and  the  probability  is,  that  it  is  a  solid  mass
throughout,  composed  of  substances  more  ponder-
ous the  deeper  we  go.  Nevertheless,  we  may  con-
ceive the  present  lace  of  the  earth  to  have  origi-
nated from  the  revolution  of  a  sphere,  covered  by
a  surface'  of  a  compound  mixture ;  the  fluid  and
solid  parts-  separating,  as  the  surface  becomes
quiescent  Here  then  comes  in  the  moderating
hand  of  the  Creator.  If  the  water  had  exceeded  its
present  proportion,  even  but  by  a  trifling  quantity
compared  with  the  whole  globe,  all  the  land  would
have  been  covered:  had  there  been  much,  less
than  there  is,  there  would  not  have  been  enough
to  fertilize  the  continent.  Had  the  exsiccation
been  progressive,  such  as  we  may  suppose  to  have
been  produced  by  an  evaporating  heat,  how  came
it  to  stop  at  the  point  at  which  we  see  it  1  Why
ctid  it  not  stop  sooner  1  why  at  all  1  The  mandate
of  the  Deity  will  account  for  this ;  nothing  else
will.

IV.  Op  centripetal  forces.  By  yirtue  of
the  simplest  Jaw  that  can  be  imagined,  viz.  that  a
body  continues  in  the  state  in  which  it  is,  whe-
ther of  motion  or  rest ;  and,  if  in  motion,  goes  on
in  the  line  in  which  it  was  proceeding,  and  with
the  same  velocity,  unless  there  be  some  cause  for
change :  by  virtue,  t  say,  of  this  law,  it  comes  to
pass,  (what  may  appear  to  be  a  strange  conse-
quence,) that  cases  arise,  in  which  attraction,  in-
cessantly drawing  a  body  towards  a  centre,  never
brings,  nor  ever  will  bring,  the  body  to  that  centre,
but  keep  it  in  eternal  circulation  round  it  If  it
were  possible  to  fire  off  a  cannon-ball  with  a  velo-
city of  five  mile*  in  a  second,  and  the  resistance
of  the  air  could  be  taken  'away,  the  Gannon-ball


NATURAL  THEOLOGY.


489


would  for  ewer  wheel  round  the  earth,  instead  of
falling  down  upon  it  This  is  the  principle  which
sustains  the  heavenly  motions.  The  Efeiry,  hay-
ing appointed  this  law  to  matter,  (than  which,  as
we  have  said  before,  no  law  could  be  more  simple,)
has  turned  it  to  a  wonderful  account  in  construct-


i  actuating  cause  in  these  systems,  is  an  at-
traction which  varies  reciprocally  as  the  square
of  the  distance;  {hat  is,  at  double  the  distance,
has  a  quarter  of  the  force;  at  half  the  distance,
four  times  the  strength ;  and  so  on.  Now,  con-
cerning this  law  of  variation,  we  have  three  things
to  observe:  First;  that  attraction,  for  any  thing
we  know  about  it,  was  just-as  capable  of  one  law
of  variation,  as  of  another:  Secondly;  that,  out
ofan  infinite  number  of  possible  laws,  those  which
were  admissible  for  the  purpose  .of  supporting  the
heavenly  motions,  lay  within  certain  narrow  li-
mifc'  Thirdly;  that  of  the  admissible  laws,  or
those  which  come  within  the  limit*  prescribed,  the
law  that  actually  ptevans  is  the  most  beneficial.
So  for  as  these  propositions  can  be  made  out,  we
may  be  said,  I  think,  to  prove  choice  and  regula-
tion; choice,  out  of  boundless  variety;  and  regu-
lation, of  that  which,  by  its  own  nature,  was,  in
respect  of  the  property  regulated,  indifferent  and
indefinite.  -

I.  First  then,  attraction,  for  any  thing  we  know
•bout  it,  was  originally  indifferent  to  all  laws  of
wwiation  depending  upon  change  of  distance,  t.  e.
just  as  susceptible  of  one  law  as  of  another.  It
might  have  been  the  same  at  all  distances;  it
might  have  increased  as  the  distance  increased :
or  it  might  have  diminished  with  the  increase  of
the  distance,  yet  in  ten  thousand  different  propor-
i  from  the  present;  it  might  have  followed  no


stated  law  at  all.  If  attraction  be  what  Cotes,
wish  many  other  Newtonians,  thought  it  to  be,
a  primordial  property  of  matter,  not  dependent
upon,  or  traceable  to,  any  other  material  cause;
then,  by  the  very  nature  and  definition  of  a  pri-
mormal  property,  it  stood  indifferent  to  all  laws.
If  it  be  the  agency  of  something  immaterial ;  then
also,  for  an/  thing  we  know  of  it,  it  was  indiffer-
ent to  all  laws.  If  the  revolution  of  bodies  round
a  centre  depend  upon  vortices,  neither  are  these
limited  to  one  law  more  than  another.

There  is,  I  know,  an  account  given  of  attrac-
tion, which  shonld  seem,  in  its  very  cause,  to  as-
sign to  it  the  law  which  we  find  it  to  observe ;
and  which,  therefore,  makes  that  law,  a  law,  not
of  choice,  but  of  necessity :  and  it  is  the  account,
which  ascribes  attraction  fo  an  emanation  from
the.attracting  body.  It  is  probable,  that  the  in-
fluence of  such  an  emanation  will  be  proportioned
to  the  spissitude  of  the  rays  of  which  it  is  com-
posed; which  spissitude,  supposing  the  rays  to
issue  in  right  lines  on  all  sides  from  a  point,  will
be  reciprocally  as  the  square  of  the  distance.  The
mathematics  of  this  solution  we  do  not  call  in
question:  the  question  with  us  is,  whether  there
he  any  sufficient  reason  for  believing  that  attrac-
tion is  produced  by  an  emanation.  For  my  part,
I  am  totally  at  a  loss  to  comprehend  how  particles
streaming  from  a  centre  should  draw  a  body  to-
ward* it  The  impulse,  if  impulse  it  be,  is  all  the
other  way.  Nor  snail  we  find  less  difficulty  in
conceiving  a  conflux  of  particles,  incessantly
flowing  to  a  centre,  and  carrying  down  all  bodies
along  with  it,  that  centre  also  itself  being  in  a
state  of  japid  motion  through  absolute  space ;  for,


by  what  source  isthe  stream  fed.  or  what
of  the  accumulation  1  Add  to  which,  that  it
to  imply  a  contrariety  of  properties,  to  suppose  an
ethereal  fluid  to  act,  but  not  to  reristi  powerful
enough  to  carry  down  bodies  with  great  force  to-
wards a  centre,  yet,  inconsistently  with  the  nature
of  inert  matter,  powerless  and  perfectly  yielding
with  respect  to  the  motions  which  result  from  the
projectile  impulse.  By  calculations  drawn  from
ancient  notices  of  eclipses  of  the  moon,  we  can
prove  that,  if  such  a  fluid  exist  at  all,  its  resistance
Sias  had  no  sensible  effect  upon  the  moon's  motion
for  two  thousand  five  hundred  years.  The  truth
is,  that,  except  this  one  circumstanoe  of  the  varia-
tion of  the  attracting  force  at  different  distances
agreeing  with  the  variation  of  the  spissitude,  there
is  no  reason  whatever  to  support  the  hypothesis
of  an  emanation;  and,  as  it  seems  to  me,  almost
insuperable  reasons  against  it.

(*)  II.  Our  second  proposition  is,  that{  whilst
the  possible  laws  of  variation  were  infinite,  the
admissible  laws,  or  the  laws  compatible  with  the
preservation  of  the  system,  lie  within  narrow
limits.  '  If  the  attracting  force  had  varied  according
to  any  direct  law  of  the  distance,  let  it  have  been
what  it  would,  great  destruction  and  confusion
would  have  taken  place.  The  direct  simple  pro-
portion of  the  distance  would,  it  is  true,  have  pro-
duced an  ellipse :  but  the  perturbing  forces  would
have  acted  with  so  much  advantage,  as  to  be  con-
tinually changing  the  dimensions  of  the  ellipse,  in
a  manner  inconsistent  with  our  terrestrial  creation.
For  instance;  if  the  planet  Saturn,  so  large  and
so  remote,  had  attracted  the  Earth,  both  in  pro-
portion to  the  quantity  of  matter  contained  in  it,
which  it  does ;  and  also  in  any  proportion  to  its-
distance,  i.  e.  if  it  had  pulled  the  harder  for  being
the  farther  off"  (instead  of  the  reverse  of  it)  it
would  have  dragged  out  of  its  course  the  globe
which  we  inhabit,  and  have. perplexed  its  motions,
to  a  degree  incompatible  with  our  security,  our
enjoyments,  and  probably  our  existence.  -Of  the
intern  laws,  if  the  centripetal  force  had  changed
as  the  cube  of  the  distance,  or  in  any  higher  pro-
portion, that  is,  (for  I  speak  to  the  unlearned  j  if.
at  double  the  distance,  the  attractive  force  had
been  diminished  to  an  eighth  part,  or  to  less  than
that,  the  consequence  would  nave  been;  that  the
planets,  if  they  once  began  to  approach  the  sun,
would  have  fallen  into  his  body ;  if  they  once,
though  by  ever  so  little,  increased  their  distance
from  the  centre,  would  for  ever  have.receded  from
it  The  laws  therefore  of  attraction,  by  which  a
system  of  revolving  bodies  could  be  uphojden  in
their  motions,  lie  within  narrow  limits,  compared
with  the  possible  laws.  I  much  underrate  the  re-
striction, when  I  say  that,  in  a  scale  of  a  mile,
they  are  confined  to  an  inch.  All  direct  ratios  of
the  distance  are  excluded,  on  account  of  danger
from  perturbing  forces :  all  reciprocal  ratios,  except
what  lie  beneath  the  cube  of  the  distance,  by  the
demonstrable  consequence,  that  every  the  least
change  of  distance  would,  under  the  operation  of
such  laws,  have  been  fatal  to  the  repose  and  order
of  the  system.  We  do  not  know,  that  is,  we  sel-
dom reflect,  how  interested  we  are  in  this  matter.
Small  irregularities  may  be  endured ;  but,  changes
within  these  limits  being  allowed  for,  the  perma-
nency of  our  ellipse  is  a  question  of  life  and  death
to  our  whole  sensitive  world.

(*)  III.  That  the  subsisting  law  of  attraction
falls  within  the  limits  which  utility  requires,  when


NATURAL  THEOLOGY.


these  Unite  bear  to  mall a  proportion  to  the  iun
of  possibilities  upon  which  chance  might  equally
have  cast  it,  is  not,  with  any  appearance  of  tea-
ion,  to  be  accounted  for  by  any  other  cause  than  a
regulation  proceeding  from  a  designing  mind.
But  our  next  proposition  carries  the  matter  some-
what farther.  We  say,  in  the  third  place,  that,
but  of  the  different  laws  which  He  within  the
limits  of  admissible  laws,  the  beat  is  made  choice
of;  that  there  are  advantages  |h  this  particular
law  which  cannot  be  demonstrated  to  belong  to
any  other  law ;  and.  concerning  some  of  which,  it
can  be  oVmonstrated  that  they  do  not  belong  to
any  other,

(♦)  1.  Whilst  this  law  prevails  between  each
particle  of  matter,  the  united  attraction  of  a  sphere,
composed  of  that  matter,  observes  the  same  law.
This  property  of  the  law  is  necessary,  to  render
it  applicable  to  a  system  composed  of  spheres,  but
ills  a  property  which  belongs  to  no  other  law  of
attraction  that  is  admissible.  The  law  of  varia-
tion of  the  united  attraction  is  in  no  other  case  the
same  as  the  law  of  attraction  of  each  particle,  one
case  excepted,  and  that  is  of  the  attraction  varying
directly  as  the  distance;  the  inconveniency  of
which  law,  in  other  respects,  we  have  already  no-
ticed.

We  may  follow  this  regulation  somewhat  far-
ther, and  still  more  strikingly  perceive  that  it  pro-
ceeded from  a  designing  mind.  A  law  both  ad-
missible and  convenient  was  requisite;  In  what
way  is  the  law  of  the  attracting  globes  obtained  ?
Astronomical  observations  and  terrestrial  experi-
ments show  that  the  attraction  of  the  globes  of  the
svstem  is  made  up  of  the  attraction  of  their  parts ;
the  attraction  of  each  globe  being  compounded  of
the  attractions  of  its  parts.  Now  the  admissible
and  convenient  law  which  exists,  could  not  be  ob-
tained In  a  system  of  bodies  gravitating  by  taje
united  gravitation  of  their  parts,  unless  each  par-
ticle ofmatter  were  attracted  by  a  force  varying
bV  one  particular  law,  viz.  varying  inversely  as
the  square  of  the  distance :  for,  if  the  action  of  the
particles  be  according  to  any  other  law  whatever,
the  admissible  and  convenient  law,  which  is
adopted,  could  not  be  obtained.  Here  then  are
dearly  shown  regulation  and  design.  A  law
botb  admissible  and  convenient  was  to  be  obtained  :
the  mode  chosen  for  obtaining  that  law  was  by
making  each  particle  of  matter  act.  After  this
choice  was  made,  then  farther  attention  was  to
be  given  to  each  particle  of  matter,  and  one,  and
one  only,  particular  law  of  action  to  be  assigned  to
it  No  other  law  would  have  answered  the  pur-
pose intended). -

(*)  2.  All  systems  must  be  liable  to  perturba-
tion*. And,  therefore,  to  guard  against  these  per-
turbations, or  rather  to  guard  against  their  running
to  destructive  lengths,  is  perhaps  the  strongest
evidence  of  care  and  foresight  that  can  be  given.
Now,  we  are  able  to  demonstrate  of  our  law  of
attraction,  what  can  be  demonstrated  of  no  other,
and  what  qualifies  the  dangers  which  arise  from
cross  but  unavoidable  influences;  that  the  action
of  the  parts  of  our  system  upon  one  another  will
not  cause  permanently  increasing  irregularities,
but  merely  periodical  or  vibratory  ones;  that  is,
they  will  come  to  a  limit,  and  then  go  back  again.
This  we  can  demonstrate  only  ora  system,  in
which  the  following  properties  concur,  viz.  that
ttejforce  shall  be  inversely  as  the  square  of  the
e  ;  the  masses  of  the  revolving  bodies  small,


ccn^redwiththat4^thebodyattheeaomi;(ba
orbits  not  much  inclined  to  one  another;  and
their  eccentricity  little.  In  such  a  system,  the
grand  points  are  secure.  The  mean  distances  and
periodic  times,  upon  which  depend  our  tempera-
ture, and  the  regularity  of  our  year,  are  constant
The  eccentricities,  it  is  true,  will  atiU  vary ;  tat  a?
slowly,  and  to  so  small  an  extent  as  to  produce  no
inconveniency  from  fluctuation  of  temperature  and
season.  The  same  as.  to  the  obliquity  of  the
planes  of  the  orbits.  For  instance,  the  inclination
of  the  ecliptic  to  the  equator  will  newr  chanfe
above  two  degrees  (out  of  ninety,)  and  that  mil
require  many  thousand  years  in  performing.

It  has  been  rightly  also  remarked,  that,  if  tht
great  planets;  Jupiter  and  Saturn,  had  moved  in
lower  spheres,  their  influences  would  have  had
much  more  effect  as  to  disturbing  the  planetary
motions,  than  thev  now  have.  While  they  re-
volve at  so  great  distances  from  the  rest,  they  act
almost  equally  on  the  sun  and  on  tht  inferior
planets;  which  has  nearly  the  same  consequences
as  not  acting  at  all  upon  either.
1  If  it  be  said  that  the  planets:  might  have  bam
sent  round  the  sun  in  exact  chcles,  in  which  case,
no  change  of  distance  from  the  centre  taking
place,  the  law  of  variation  of  the  attracting  power
would  have  never  come  in  question,  one  law
would  have  served  aa  well  as  another ;  an  answer
to  the  scheme  may  be  drawn  from  the  considera-
tion of  these»eame  perturbing  forces.  The  system
retaining  in  other  respects  its  present  constitotion.
though  the  planets  had  been  at  first  sent  round
in  exact  circular  orbits,  .they  could  not  have  kept
them ;  and  if  the  law  of  attraction  had  not  been
what  it  is,  or,  at  least,  if  the  prevailing  law  had
transgressed  the  limits  above  assigned,  every  era*
gation  would  have  been  fatal :  the  planet  once
drawn,  as  drawn  it  necessarily  must  have  been,
out  of  its  course,  would  have  wandered  in  endiesi


(♦)  V.  What  we  have  seen  in  the  law  of  the
centripetal  force,  viz.  a  choice  guided  by  views  of
utility,  and  a  choice  of  one  law  out  of  thousand!
which  might  equally  have  taken  place,  we  see  no
less  in  the  Jigure*  of  the  planetary  orbits.  It  was
not  enough  to  fix  the  law  of  the  centripetal  force,
though  by  the  wisest  choice ;  for,  even  under  that
law,  it  was  still  competent  to  the  planets  to  have
moved  in  paths  possessing  so  great  a  degree  of
eccentricity,  at,  in  the  course  ofevery  revolution,
to  be  brought  very  near  to  the  sun,  and  carried
away  to  immense  distances  irom  him.  The
comets  actually  move  in  orbits  of  this  sort :  and.
had  the  planets  done  so,  instead  of  going  round
in  orbits  nearly  circular,  the  change  from  one  ex-
tremity of  temperature  to  another  must,  in  ours  at
least,  have  destroyed  every  animal  and  plant  upon
its  surface.  Now,  the  distance  from  the  centre
at  which  a  planet  sets, off,  and  the  absolute  force
of  attraction  at  that  distance,  being  fixed,  the
figure  of  its  orbit,  its  being  a  circle,  or  nearer  to,
or  farther  off  from  a  circle,  viz.  a  rounder  or  t
longer  oval,  depends  upon  two  things,  the  velocity
with,  and  the  direction  in  which,  the  planet  »
projected.  'And  these,  in  order  to  produce  a  right
result,  must  be  both  brought  within  certain  narrow
limits.  One,  and  only  one,  velocity,  united  with
one,  and  only  one,  direction,  will  produce  a  per-
fect circle.  And  the  velocity  must  be  near  to
this  velocity,  and  the  direction  also  near  to  thai
direction,  to  produce  orbits,  such  aa  the  pianetanr


NATtTRAL  THEOLOGY.


461


orbit*  are,  nearly  circular ;  that  k,  .ellipses  with
small  eccentricity  The  velocity  and  the  direc-
tion must  both  be  right.  If  the  velocity  be  wrong,
no  direction  will  cure  the  error;  if  the  direction
be  in  any  considerable  degree  oblique,  no  velocity
will  produce  the  orbit  required.  Take  for  exam-
ple the  attraction  of  gravity  at  the  eurface  of  the
cfcrth.  The  force  of  that  attraction  being  what
it  Is,  out  of  all  the  degrees  .of  velocity,  swift  and
■low,  with  which  a  ball  might  be  shot  off,  none
would  answer  the  purpose  of  which  wears  speak-
ing, taut  what  was  nearly  that  of  five  miles  in  a
second.  If  it  were  less  than  that,  the  body  would
not  get  round  at  all,  but  would  some  to*he  ground ;
if  it 'were  in  any  considerable  degree  more  than
that,  the  body  would  take  one  of  those  eccentric
courses,  these  long  ellipses,  of  which  we  have
noticedthe  inconveniency.  If  the  velocity  reached
the  rate' of  seven  miles  in  a  second,  or  went  be-
yond that,  the  ball  would  fly  off  from  the  earth,
smd  never  be  heard  of  more.  In  like  manner  with
respect  tothe  direction ;  out  of  the  innumerable
angles  in  which  the  ball  might  be  sent  off  (I  mean
angles  formed  with*  a  line  drawn 'to  the  centre,)
none  would  serve  but  what  was  nearly  a  right
one:  out  of  the  various  directions  in  which  the
cannon  might  be  pointed,  upwards  and  down-
wards, every  one  vrould  fail,  but  what  was  exactly
or  nearly  horizontal.  The  same  thing  holds  true
of  the  planets :  of  our  own  amongst  the  rest.  We
are  entitled  therefore  to  ask.  and  to  urge  the  ques-
tion, Why  did  the  projectile  velocity  and  projec-
tile direction  of  the  earth  happen  to  be  nearly
those  which  would  retain  it  in  a  circular  form  1
Why  not  one  of  the  infinite  number  of  velocities,
one  of  the  infinite  number  of  directions,  which
would  have  made  it  approach  much  nearer  to,  or
recede  much  farther  from,  the  sun  1
a  The  planets  going  round,  all  in  the  same  direc-
tion, and  all  nearly  lit  the  same  plane,  afforded  to
Buffon  a  ground  for  asserting  that  they  had  all
been  shivered  from  the  sun  by  the  same  stroke  of
a  comet,  and  by  that  stroke  projected  into  their
present  orbits.  Now,  beside  that  this  is  to  attri-
bute to  chance  the  fortunate*  concurrence  of  velo-
city and  direction  which  we  have  been  here
noticing,  the  hypothesis,  as  I  apprehend,  is  incon-
sistent with  the  physical  laws  by  which  the
Aeavenly  motions  are  governed.  If  the  planets
were  struck  off  from  the  surface  of  the  sun,  they
would  return  to  the  surface  of  the  sun  again.
Nor  will  this  difficulty  be  got  rid  of,  by  supposing
that  the  same  violent  Mow  which  shattered  the
sun's  surface,  and  separated  large  fragments  from
it,  pushed  the  sun  himself  out  of  his  place ;  for,
the  consequence  of  this  would  be,  that  the  sun


and  system  of  shattered  fragments  would  have  a

progressive  motion,  which,  indeed,  may  possibly

with  our  system ;  but  then  each  frag-

i.  in  every  revolution,  return  to  the


res:


would.  .

ce  of  the  .sun  again.  The',  hypotb
also  contradicted,  by  the  vast  difference  which  sub-
sists between  the  diameter*  of  the  planetary
orbits.  The  distance  of  Saturn  from  the.  sun  (to
say  nothing  of  the  Georgium  Sidus)  is  nearly
five-end-twenty  times  that  of  Mercury  ;•  a  dispa-
rity, which  it  seems  impossible  to  reconcile  with
Button's  scheme.  Bodies  starting  from  the  same
place,  with  whatever  difference  of  direction  or
velocity  they  set  off;  could  not  have  been  found  at
these  different  distances  from  the  centre,  still
;  their  Marty  circular  orbits.  They  most


have-been  carried  to  their  proper  distances,  before
they  were  projected.*  -

To  conclude :  In  astronomy,  the  great  thins  is
to  raise  the  imagination  to  the  subject{  and  that
oftentimes  in  opposition  to  the  impression  mads
upon  the  senses.  An  illusion,  for  example,  must
be  gotten  over,  arising  from  the  distance  at  which
we  view  the  neavenly  bodies,  viz*  the  apparent
slowness  of  their  motions.  The  moon  shaft  take
some  hours  in  getting  half  a  yard  from  a  star
which  it  touched.  A  motion  so  deliberate,  we  may
think  easily  guided.  But  what  is  the  net  1  The
moon,  in  met,  is.  all  this  while,  driving  through
the  heavens,  at  the  rate  of  considerably  more  than
two  thousand  miles  m  an  hour;  which  is  more
than  double  of  that  with  which  a  hall  is  shot  off
from  the  mouth  of  a  cannon.  Yet  is  this  prodi-
gious rapidity  as  much  under  government,  as  if
the  planet  proceeded  ever  so  slowly,  or  were  con-
ducted in  its  course  inch  by  inch.  It  is  also  diffi-
cult to  bring  the  imagination  to  conceive  (what
yet,  to  judge  tolerably  of  the  matter,  it  is  neces-
sary to  conceive)  how  loose,  if  we  may  so  express
it,  the  heavenly  bodies  are.  Enormous  globes,
held  by  nothing,  confined  by  nothing,  are  turned,
into  free  and  boundless  space,  each  to  seek  its
course  by  the  virtue  of  an  invisible  principle ;
but  a  principle,  one.  common,  and  the  same  in
all ;  and  ascertainable.  To  preserve  such  bodies
from  being  lost,  from  running  together  in  heaps,
from  hindering  and  distracting  one  another's  mo-
tions in  a  degree  inconsistent  with  any  continu-
ing order;  h.  e.  to  cause  them  to  form  planetary
systems,  systems  that  when  formed,  can  be  up-
held, and  most  especially,  systems  accommodated
to  the  organized  and  sensitive  natures  which  the
planets  sustain,  as  we  know  to  be  the  case,  where
alone  we  can  know  what  the  case  is,  upon  our
earth :  all  this  requires  an  intelligent  interposi-
tion, because  it  can,  be  demonstrated  concerning
it,  that  it  requires  an  adjustment  of  force,  dis-
tance, direction,  and  velocity,  out  of  the  teach  of
chance  to  have  produced ;  an  adjustment,  in  its
view  to  .utility,  similar  to  that  which  we  see  in
ten  thousand  subjects  of  nature  which  are  nearer
to  us,  but  in  power,  and  in  the  extent  of  space
through  which  that  power  is  exerted,  stupendous.

But  many  of  the  heavenly  bodies,  as  the  sun
and  fixed  stars,  toe  stationary.  Their  rest  must
be  the  effect  ot  an  absence  or  of  an  equilibrium
of  attractions.  It  proves  also  that  a  projectile
impulse  was  originally  given  to  some  of  the
heavenly  bodies,  and  not  to  others.  But  farther;
if  attraction  act  at  all  distances,  there  can  only
be  one  quiescent  centre  of  gravity  in  the  universe:
and  all  bodies  whatever  must  be  approaching  this
centre,  or  revolving  round  it. According  to  the


*  If  we  suppose  the  matter  of  the  system  to  be  aeco>
moisted  in  the  centre  by  its  gravity,  no  mechanical
principles,  with  the  assistance  of  this  power  of  gravity,
could  separata  the  vast  mass  into  such  parts  as  the  sun
and  planets ;  and,  after  carrying  them  to  their  different
distances,  project  them  in  their  several  directions,  pre-
serving still  the  quality  of  action,  and  reaction,  or  the
state  of  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  system.  Such  as
exquisite  structure  of  things  could  only  arise  from  the
contrivance  and  powerful  influences  of  an  intelligent,
free,  and  most  potent  agent.  The  same  powers,  there,
fore,  which,  at  present,  govern  the  material  universe,
and  conduct  its  various  motions,  ate  vsry  difertnl  from
those  which  were  necessary  to  have  produced  it  from
nothing,  orjto  have  disposed  it  in  the  admirable  form
in  which  ft  now  proceeds."— OfacteaHa's  Asmmt^
JVtotes's  Pktiss.  p.  407.  ed.  a
39*


NATURAL  THEOLOGY.


tint  of  then  suppositions,  if  the  diintion  of  the
worid  had  been  long  enough  to  allow  of  it,  til  its
parts,  all  the  great  bodies  of  which  it  is  composed,
must  have  been  gathered  together  in  a  heap  round
this  point.  No  changes  however  which  have
been  observed,  afford  us  the  smallest  reason  lor
believing,  that  either  the  one  supposition  or  the
other  is  true ;  and  then  it  will  follow,  that  attrac-
tion itself  is  controlled  or  suspended  by  a  superior
•gent ;  that  there  is  a  power  above  the  highest  of
the  powers  of  material  nature;  a  win  which  re-
strains and  circumseribes  the  operations  of  the
most  extensive.*


CHAPTER  XXIII.

•  Qf  the  Personality  qf  the  Deity.

Contrivance,  if  established,  appears  to  me
to  prove  every  thing  which  we  wish  to  prove.
Amongst  other  things,  it  proves  the  personality  of
the  Deity,  as  distinguished  from  what  is  sometimes
called  nature,  sometimes  called  a  principle :  which
terms,  in  the  mouthsof  those  who  use  them  philoso-
phically, seem  to  be  intended,  to  admit  and  toexpress
an  efficacy,  but  to  exclude  and  to  deny  a  personal
•gent  Now  that  which  can  contrive,  which  can
design,  must  be  a  person.  These  capacities  con-
stitute personality,  for  they  imply  consciousness
and  thought  They  require  that  which  can  per-
ceive an  end  or  purpose;  as  well  as  the  power  of
providing  means,  and  of  directing  them  to  their  end.t
They  require  a  centre  in  which  perceptions  unite,
and  from  which  volitions. flow:  which  is  mind.
Thcacts  of  a  mind  prove  the  existence  of  a  mind ;
and  in  whatever  aimnd  itsidesjs  s  person.  The
seat  of  Intellect  is  a  person. .  We  have  no  autho-
rity to  limit  the  properties  of  mind  to  any  corpo-
real form,  or  to  any  particular  circumscription  of
apace.  These  properties  subsist,  in  created  na-
ture, under  a  great  variety  of  sensible  forms.
Also  every  animated  being  has  its  sensorium;
that  is,  a  certain  portion  of  space,  within  which
perception  and  volition  are  exerted.  This  sphere
may  he  enlarged  to  an  indefinite  extent;  may
comprehend  the  universe ;  and,  being  so  imagined,
may  serve  to  furnish  us  with  ss  good  a  notion,  as
we  are  capable  of  forming,  of  the  immensity  of
the  Divine  Nature,  i.e.  of  a  Being,  infinite,  as
well  in  essence  as  in  power;  yet  nevertheless  a
person,

"No  man  hath  seen  God  at  any  time."  And
this,  I  believe,  makes  the  great  difficulty.  Now
it  is  a  difficulty  which  chiefly  arises  from  our  not
duly  estimating  the  state  of  our  faculties. The


*  It  mast  here  however  be  stated,  that  many  astrono-
mer* deny  that  aay  of  the  heavenly  Indies  are  absolute-
ly stationary.  Some  of  the  brightest  of  the  fixed  stars
have  certainly  smalt  motions ;  and  of  the  rest  the  dis-
tance is  too  great,  and  the  intervals  of  our  observation
too  abort,  to  enable  us  to  pronounce  with  certainty  that
they  may  not  have  the  same.  The  motions  in  the  Axed
stars  which  have  been  observed,  are  considered  either
as  proper  to  each  of  them,  or  as  compounded  of  the  mo-
tion of  oar  system,  and  of  motions  proper  to  each  star.
By  a  comparison  of  these  motions,  a  motion  in  our
system  is  supposed  to  be  discovered.  By  continuing
this  analogy  to  other,  and  to  all  systems,  it  is  possible
to  suppose  that  attraction  is  unlimited,  and  that  the
WJ2?,2X?riS!  un,wrP8.ta  waiving  rouna  some  fixed
^i^£^.oanu,D1|WiB!IMB  of  space.
*  mffsf*  ^"m  to  a  "^■^^Uaseliever,


Deity,  it  is  true,  it  the  object  of  none  of  our
but  reflect  what  limited  capacities  euusni
Many  animals  seem  to  have  but  one
_»_;,  or  perhaps  two  at  the  most:  touch  and
taste.  Ought  such  an  animal  to  conclude  against
the  existence  of  odours,  sounds,  and  colonial  To
another  species  is  given  the  sense  of  smelling.
This  is  an  advance  m  the  knowledge  of  the  pow-
ers and  properties  of  nature :  but,  if  this  favoured
animal  should  infer  from  its  superiority  over  the
class  list  described,  that  it  perceived  every  thing
which  was  perceptible  in  nature,  it  is  known  to  us,
though  perhaps  not  suspected  by  the  animal  itself,
that  it  proceeded  upon  a  false  and  presumptuous
estimate  of  its  acuities.  To  another  is  added  the
sense  of  hearing;  which  lets  in  a  class  of  sensa-
tions entirely  unconceived  by  the  animal  besot*
spoken  of;  not  only  distinct,  but  remote  from  any
which  it  had  ever  experienced,  and  greatly  supe-
rior to  them.  Yet  this  last  animal  has  no  mora
ground  for  believing,  that  ita  tenses  comprehend  all
things,  and  all  properties  of  things  winch  exist,  than
might  have  been  claimed  by  the  tribes  of  animals  be-
neath it;  far  we  know,  that  it  is  stiU  possible  to  pos-
sess another  sense,  that  of  sight,  which  shall  dawjoae
to  the  percipient  a  new  world.  This  fifth  sense
makes  tlie  animal  what  the  human  animal  is;  but
to  infer,  that  possibttityetops  here;  that  either  this
fifth  sense  is  the  last  sense,  or  that  the  five  com-
prehend all  existence :  is  just  as  unwarrantable  a
conclusion,  as  that  which  might  have  been  made
by  any  of  the  different  species  which  possessed
fewer,  or  even  by  that  if  such  there  be.  which
possessed  only  one.  The  conclusion  of  the  one-
Sense  animal,  and  the  conclusion  of  the  five-sense
ajiimal,  stand  upon  the  same  authority.  There
may  be  more^nd  other  senses  than  those  which
we  have.  There  may  be  senses  suited  to  the  per-
ception of  the  powers,  properties,  and  substance,
of  spirits.  These  nmy  belong  to  higher  orders  or
rational  agents;  for  there  is  not  the  smallest  rea-
son for  supposing  that  we  are  the  highest,  or  that
the  scale  of  creation  stops  with  us.

The  great  energies  of  nature  are  known  to  us
only  by  their  effects.  The  substances  which  pro-
duce them,  are  as  much  concealed  from  our  sense
as  the  divine  essence  itself.  Gravitation,  though
constantly  present,  though  constantly  exerting  its
influence,,  though  everywhere  around  us,  near  us,
and  within  us ;  though  diffused  throughout  aO
space,  and  penetrating  the  texture  of  all  bodies
with  which  we  are  acquainted,  depends,  if  upon
s  fluid,  upon  a  fluid  which,  though  both  powerful
and  universal  in  its  operation,  is  no  object  of  sense
to  us ;  if  upon  any  other  kind  of  substance  or  ac-
tion, upon  s  substance  and  action,  from  which  vat
receive  no  distinguishable  impressions,  fa  H  then
to  be  wondered  at,  that  it  should,  in  some  mea-
sure, be  the  same  with  the  Divine  nature?

Of  this  however  we  are  certain,  that  whatever
the  Deity  he,  neither  the  universe,  nor  any  put  of
it  which  we  see;  can  be  He.  The  universe  itself
is  merely  a  collective  name:  its  parts  are  all  which
are  real ;  or  which  are  things.  Now  inert  mat-
ter is  out  of  the  question :  and  organised  sub-
stances include  marls  of  contrivance.  But  what-
ever includes  marks  pf  contrivance,  whatever,  in
its  constitution,  testifies  design,  necessarily  carries
us  to  something  beyond  itself,  to  some  other  being,
to  a  designer  prior  to,  and  out  of,  itself.  No  arn-
mal  for  instance,  can  have  contrived  ha  own  Kmbs
and  senses:  can  have  been  the  author  to  itself  of


NATURAL  THEOLOGY.


the  deafen  with  which  they  were  constructed.
That  supposition  involves  all  the  absurdity  of  self-


creation,  t.  e.  of  acting  without  existing.  Nothing
can  be  God,  which  is  ordered  by  a  wisdom  and  a
will,  which  itself  is  void  of;  which  is  Indebted  for
any  of  its  properties  to  contrivance  obex tra.  The
not  having  that  in  his  nature  wbichrrequires  the
exertion  of  another  prior  being  (which  property
is  sometimes  called  self-sufficiency,  and  sometimes
self-comprehension,)  appertains  to  the  Deity,  as
his  essential  distinction,  and  removes  his  nature
from  that  of  alLthings  which  we  see.  Which
consideration  contains  the  answer  to  a  question
that  has  sometimes  been  asked,  namely,  Why,
since  something  or  other  must  have  existed  from
.eternity,  may  not  the  present  universe  be  that
something?  The  contrivance  perceived  in  it,
proves  that  to  be  impossible.  Nothing  contrived,
can,  in  a  strict  and  proper  sense,  be  eternal,  foras-
much as  the  contriver  must  have  existed  before
the  contrivance.

Wherever  we  see  marks  of  contrivance,  we  are
led  for  its  cause  to  an  intelligent  author.  And
this  transition  of  the  understanding  is  founded
upon  uniform  experience.  We  see  intelligence
constantly  contriving ;  that  is,  we  see  intelligence
constantly  producing  effects,  marked  and  distin-
guished by  certain  properties;  not  certain  parti-
cular properties,  but  by  a  kind  and  class  of  pro-
perties, such  as  relation  to  an  end,  relation  of  parts
id  one  smother,  and  to  a  common  purpose.  We
see,  wherever  we  are  witnesses  to  the  actual  form*
ation  4f  things,  nothing  except  intelligence  pro-
ducinffan^ctssoniarkedando^istinguished.  Fur-
nished with  this  experience,  we  view  the  produc-
tions of  nature.  We  observe  them  also  marked
anoVovtinguished  in  the  same  manner.  We  wish
to  account  far  their  origin,  Our  experience  sug-
gests a -cause  perfectly  adequate  to  this  account,
rfo  experience,  no  single  instance  or  example,
can  be  offered1  in  favour  of  any  other. .  In  this
cause  therefore  we  ougbtto  rest ;  in  this  cause  the
common,  sense. of  mankind  has,  in  fact,  rested,
because  it  agrees  with  that,  which,  in  all  cases,'  is
the  foundation  of  knowledge,— the  undeviating
course,  of  their  experience.  •  The  reasoning  is  the
same  as  that,  by  which  we  conclude  any  ancient
appearances  to  have  been  the  effects  of  volcanoes
or  inundations:  namely,  because  they  resemble
the  effects  which  fire  and  water  produce  before  our
i;  and  because  we  have  never  known  these  ef-
i  to  result  from  any  other  operation.  And  this
mblance  may  subsist  in  so  many  circum-
stances, as  not  to  leave  us  under  the  smallest  doubt
in  forming  our  opinion.  Men  are  not  deceived  by
this  reasoning:  for  whenever  it  happens,  as  it  some-
times dees  happen,  that  the  truth  comes  to  be  known
by  direct  information,  it  turns  out  to  be  what  was
expected.  In  nke  manner,  and  upon  the  same  foun-
dation,-(which  in  truth  is  that  of  experience,)  we
conclude  that  the  works  of  nature  proceed  from
intelligence  and  design ;  because  in  the  properties
of  relation  to  a  purpose,  subserviency  to  a  use,
they  resemble  what  intelligence  and  design  are
constantly  producing,  and  what  nothing  except
intelhgenoe  and  design  ever  produce  at  all.  Of
every  argument,  which  would  raise  a  question  as
to  the  safety  of  this  reasoning,  it  may  be  observed,
that  if  such  argument  be  listened  to,  it  leads  to
the  inference,  not  only  that  the  present  order  of
nature  is  insufficient  to  prove,  the  existence  of  an
intelligent  Creator,  but  that  no  imaginable  order


feets'l


would  be  sufficient  to  prove  it;  that  no  contri-
vance, were  it  ever  so  mechanical,  ever  so  precise,
ever  so  clear,  ever  so  perfectly  like  those  which  we
ourselves  employ,  would  support  this  conclusion.
A  doctrine,  to  which,  I  conceive,  no  sound  mind
can  assent.

The  force  however  of  the  reasoning  is  some-
times sunk  by  our  taking  up  with  mere  names.
We  have  already  noticed,*  and  we  must,  here
notice  again-,  the  misapplication  of  the  term  "  law,"
and  the  mistake  concerning  the  idea  which  that
term  expresses  in  physics,,  whenever  such  idea  is*
made  to  take  the  place  of  power,  and  still  more  of
an  intelligent  power,  and,  as  such,  to  be  assigned
for  the  cause  of  any  thing,  or  of  any  property  of
any- thing,  that  exists.  This  is  what  we  are  se-
cretly apt  to  do,  when  we  speak  of  organized
bodies  (plants  for  instance,  or  animals,)  owinjr,
their  production,  their  form,  their  growth,  their
qualities,  their  beauty,  their  use,  to  any  law  or
laws  of  nature ;  and  when  we  are  contented  to  sit
down  with  that  answer  to  our  inquiries  concerning
them.  I  say  once  more.  thaLit  ib  a  perversion  of
language  to  assign  any  (aw,  as  the  efficient  opera-
tive cause  of  any  thing;  A  law  presupposes  an
agent,  for  it  is  only  the  mode  according  to  which
an  agent  proceeds;  it  implies  a  power,  for  it  is  the
order  according  to  which  that  power  acts.  With-
out this  agent,  without  this  power,  which  are
both  distinct  from  itself,  the  "  law"  does  nothing ;


What  has  been  said  concerning  "law,*  holds
true  of  mechanism.  •  Mechanism  is  not  itself
power.  Mechanism,  without  power,  can  do  -no-
thing. Let  a  watch  be  contrived  ana  constructed
ever  so  ingeniously ;  be  its  parts  ever  so  many,
ever  so  complicated,  ever  so  finely  wrought  or  ar-
tificially put  together,  H  cannot  go  wifjiout  a
weight  or  spring,  i.  e.  without  a  force  independent
of,  and  ulterior  to,  its  mechanism.  The  spring
acting  at  the  centre,  will  produce  different  motions
and  different  results,  according  to  the  variety  of
the  intermediate  mechanism.  One  and  the  self-
same spring,  acting  in  one  and  the  same  manner,
viz.  by  simply  expanding  itself,  may  be  the  cause
of  a  hundred  different  and  all  useful  movements.
if  a  hundred  different  and  well-devised  sets  of
wheels  be  placed  between  it  and  the  final  effect;
e.  g.  may  point  out  the  hour  of  the  day,  the  day
of  the  month,  the  age  of  the  moon,  the  position  of
the  planets,  the  cycle  of  the  years,  and  many
other  serviceable  notices;  am]  these  movements
may  fulfil  their  purposes  with-  more  or  less  per-
fection, according  as  the  mechanism  is  better  or
worse  contrived,  or  better  or  worse  executed,  or
in  a  better  or  worse  state  of  repair:  but  in  all
caee»}  it  is  necessary  that^  the  spring  act  at  the
centre.  The  course  of  our  reasoning  upon  such  a
subject  would  be  this:  By  inspecting  the  watch,
even  when  standing  still,  we  get  a  proof  .of  con-
trivance, and  of  a  contriving  mind,  having  been
employed  about  it  In  the  form  and  obvious  rela-
tion of  its  parts,  we  see  enough  to  convince  us  of
this.  If  we  pull  the  works  in  pieces,  for  the
purpose  of  a  closer  examination,  we  are  still  more
fully  convinced.  But,  when  we  see  the  watch
going,  we  see  proof  of  another  point,  viz.  that
there  is  a  power  somewhere,  and  somehow  or
other,  applied  to  it ;  a  power  in  action ;— that
there  is  more  in  the  subject  than  the  mere  wheels

•  Ch.  I.  sect.  vn.


4*4


NATURAL  THEOLOGY.


of  the  machine; —that there  fe  a  tecret  spring,  or
ft  gravitating  plummet ;— in  a  word,  that  there  is
force,  and  energy,  as  well  as  mechanism.

60  then,  the  watch  in  motion  establishes  to  the
observer  two  conclusions:  One;  that  thought,
contrivance,  and  design  have  been  employed  in'
the  forming,  proportioning,  and  arranging  of  its
parts;  and  that  whoever  or  wherever  he  he,  or
were,  such  a  contriver  there  is,  or  was:  The
other;  that  force  or  power,  distinct  from  mecha-
nism, is,  at  this  present  time,  acting  upon  it  If  1
saw  a  handnnll  even  at  rest,  I  should  see  contri-
vance: but  if  I  saw  it  grinding,  I  should  be  as-
sured that  a  hand  was  at  the  windlass,  though  in
another  room.  It  is  the  same  in  nature.  In  the
work*  of  nature  we  trace  mechanism ;  and  this
alone  proves  contrivance :  but  living,  active,  mov-
ing, productive  nature,  proves  also  the  exertion  of
a  power  at  the  centre ;  for:  wherever  the  power
resides  may  be  denominated  the  centre.

The  intervention  and  disposition  of  what  are
called  "  second  causes"  fall  under  the  same  observ-
ation. Thii  disposition  is  or  is  not  mechanism,
according  as  we  can  or  cannot  trace  it  by  our
senses  and  means  of  examination.  That  is  all  the
difference  there  is ;  and  it  is  a  difference  which
respects  our  faculties,  not  the  things  themselves.
Now  where  the  order  of  second  causes  is  mecha-

Ewhat  is  hen  said  of  mechanism  strictly  ap-
to  it  But  it  would  be  always  mechanism
ral  chymistry,  for  instance,  would  be  mecha-
nism.) if  our  senses  were  acute  enough  to  descry
it  Neither  mechanism,  therefore,  in  the  works
of  nature,  nor  the  intervention  of  what  are  caDed
second  causes,  (for  I  think  that  they  are  the  same
thing,)  excuses  the  necessity  of  an  agent  distinct
from  both.

If,  in  tracing  these  causes{  it  be  said,  that  we
find  certain  general  properties  of  matter  which
have  nothing  in  them  that  bespeaks  intelligence,
I  answer,  that,  still,  the  managing  of  these  pro-
perties, .the  pointing  and  directing  them  to  the  uses
which  we  see  madVof  them,  demands  intelligence
in  t  the  highest  degree.  For  example :  suppose
animal  secretions  to  be  elective  attractions,  and
that  such  and  such  attractions  universally  belong
to  such  and  such  substances ;  in  all  which  there  is
no  intellect  concerned ;  still  the  choice  and  colloca-
tion of  these  substances,  the  fixing  upon  right  sub-
stances, and  disposing  them  in  right  places,  must
be  an  act  of  intelligence.  What  mischief  would
follow,  were  there  a  single  transposition  of  the
secretory  organs;  a  single  mistake  in  arranging
th^tai"*  which  compose  them !

There  may  be  many  second  causes,  and  many
courses  of  second  causes,  one  behind  another,
between  what  we  observe  of  nature,  and  the  Deity  :
but  there  must  be  intelligence  somewhere;  there
must  be  more  in  nature  than  what  we  see;  and,
amongst  the  things  unseen,  there  must  be  an  in-
telligent, designing  author.  The  philosopher  be-
holds with  astonishment  the  production  of  things
around'  him.  Unconscious  particles  of  matter
take  their,  stations,  and  severally  range  themselves
in  an  order,  so  as  to  become  collectively  plants  or
animals,  L  e.  organized  bodies,  with  parts  bearing
strict  and  evident  relation  to  one  another,  and  to
the  utility  of  the  whole :  and  it  should  seem  that
these  particles  could  not  move  in  any  other  way
than  as  they  do ;  for  they  testify  not  the  smallest
sign  of  choice,  or  liberty,  or  discretion.  There
may  be  particular  intelligent  beings,  guiding  these


motions  in  each  case:  or  they  maybe  the  result
of  trains  of  mechanical  dispositions,  fixed  before-
hand by  an  intelligent  appointment  and  kept  in
action  by  a  power  at  the  centre.  But,  in  efther
case,  there  must  be  intelligence.

The  minds  ef  most'  men  are  fond  of  what  they
call  a  principle,  and  of  the  appearance  of  simpli-
city, in  accounting  for  phenomena.  Yet  Una
principle,  this  simplicity,  resides  merely  hi  the


in  organized  bodies,  of  producing  bodies  Kke  thenv
eetves,  is  one  of  these  principles.  'Give  a  philoso-
pher this,  and  he  can  get  on.  But  he  does  not
reflect,  what  this  mode  of  production,  this  princi-
ple (if  such  he  cheese  to  call  it)  requires;  how
much  it  presupposes;  what  an  apparatus  of  in-
struments, some  of  which  are  strictly  mechaniral,
is  necessary  to  its  success;  what-  a  train  ifindudes
of  operations  and  changes,  one  succeeding  another,
one  related  to  another,  one  mmistering  to  another;
all  advancing,  by  intermediate,  andf  frequently,
by  sensible  steps,  to  their  ultimate  result !  Yet,
because  the  whole  of  this  complicated  action  is
wrapped-up  in  a  single  term,  generation,  we  are
to  set  it  down  as  an  elementary  principle;  and  to
suppose,  that  when  we  have  resolved  the  things
which  we  see  in  this  principle,  we  have  sufficient-
ly accounted  for  their  origin,  without  the  neces-
sity of  a  designing,  -intelligent  Creator.  The
truth  is,  generation  is  not  a  principle  but  a  streets*.
We  might  as  well  call  the  casting  of  metsira  prin-
ciple ;  we  might,  so  far  as  appears  to  me,  as  wefl
call  spinning  and  weaving  principles:  and,  then,
referring  the  texture  ef  cloths,  the  fabric  of  mus-
lins and  calicoes,  the  patterns  of  diapers  and
damasks,  to  these,  as  principles,  pretend  to  dis-
pense with  intention,  thought,  and  contrivance,
on  the  part  of  the  artist;  or  to  dispense,  indeed,
with  the  necessity  of  any  artist  at  all,  either  in  the
manufacturing  of  the  article,  er  in  the  fabricatioa
of  the  machinery  by  which  the  manufacture  was
carried  on.

And,  after  afl,  how,  or  in  what  sense,  is  it  true,
that  animals  produce  their  Woe?  A  butterfly,
with  a  proboscis  instead  of  a  mouth,  with  four
wings  and  six  legs,  produces  a  hairy  caterpillar,
with  jaws  and  teeth,  and  fourteen  feet  A  frog
produces  a  tadpole.  A  black  beetle,  with  gauze
wings,  and  a  crusty  covering,  produce*  a  white,
smooth,  soft  worm ;  an  ephemeron  fly,  a  cocKbait
maggot.  These,  by  a  progress  through  different
stages  of  life,  ana  action,  and  enjoyment,  (and,  in
each  state,  provided  with  implements  and  ergaas
appropriated  to  the  temporary  nature  which  they
hear,)  arrive  at  last  at  the  form  and  fashion  of  the
parent  animal.  But  all  this  is  process,  not  prin-
ciple ;  and  proves,  moreover,  that  the  property  ef
animated 'bodies,  of  producing  their  like,  belongs
to  them  not  as  a  primordial  property,  not  by  any
blind  necessity  in  the  nature  of  things,  but  as  the
effect  of  economy,  wisdom,  and  design ;  because
the  property  itself  assumes  diversifies,  and  submits
to  deviations  dictated  by  mtettgibte  utflalies,  and
serving  distinct  purposes  of  animal  happiness.

The  opinion,  which  would  consider  "genera-
tion" as  a  princHj>le_  in  nature;  and  which  would
assign  this  principle  as  the  cause,  or  endeavour  to
satisfy  our  minds  with  such  a  cause,  of  the  exist-
ence of  organized  bodies;  is  confuted,  in  my  judg-
ment, not  only  by  every  mark  of  contrivance  dav


NATURAL  THEOLOGY.


4ft


eoverable  in  those  bodies,  for  which  it  rives  us  no
contriver,  offer*  no  account  whatever ;  but  also  by
the  farther  consideration,  that  things  generated^
possess  a  clear  relation  to  things  not  generated.
If  it  were  merely  one  part  of  a  generated  body
bearing  a  relation  to  another  Dart  of  the  same
body ;  as  the  mouth  of  an  animal  to  the  throat,  the
throat  to  the  stomach,  the  stomach  to  the  intes-
tines, those  to  the  recruiting  of  the  blood,  and,  by
means  of  the  blood,  to  the  nourishment  of  the
whole  frame:  or  if  it  were  only  one  generated
body  bearing  a  relation  to  another  generated  body ;
as  the  sexes  of  the  same  species  to  each  other.
animals  of  prey  to  their  prey,  herbivorous  and
granivorous  animals  to  the  plants  or  seeds  upon
which  they  feed ;  it  might  be  contended,  that  the
whole  of  this  oorrespondency  was  attributable  to
generation,  the  common  origin  from  which  these
substances  proceeded.  But  what  shall  we  say  to
agreements  winch  exist  between  things  generated
and  things  not  generated  ?  Can  it  be  doubted,
was  it  ever  doubted,  but  that  the  lungs  of  animals
bear  a  relation  to  the  air,  as  a  permanently  elastic
fluid"?  They  act  in  it  and  by  it ;  they  cannot  act
without  it.  Now,  if  generation  produced  tbe  ani-
mal, it  did  not  produce  the  air :  yet  their  properties
correspond.  The  eye  is  made  for  light,  and  light
for  Jhe  eye.  The  eye  would  be  of  no  use  without
light  ani  light  perhaps  of  Httle  without  eyes;  yet
one  is  produced  by  generation,  the  other  not.  1  he
ear  depend^  upon  undulations  of  air.  Here  ore
two  sets  of  motions :  first,  of  the  pulses  of  the  air ;
secondly,  of  the  drum,  bones,  and  nerves  of  the
ear;  sets  of  motions  bearing  an  evident  reference
to  each  other:  yet  the  one,  and  the  apparatus  for
the  one,  produced  by  the  intervention  of  genera-
tion ;  the  other  altogether  independent  of  it.

If  it  be  said,  that  the  air,  the  light,  the  elements,
the  world  itself, Js  generated,'  I  answer,  that  I
do  not  comprehend  the  proposition.  If  the  term
mean  any  thing  similar  to  what  it  means  when
applied  to  plants  or  animals,  the  proposition  is
certainly  without  proof;  and,  I  think,  draws  as
near  to  absurdity,  as  any  proposition  can  do,  which
does  not  include  a  contradiction  in  its  terms.  I
am  at  a  loss  to  conceive,  how  the  formation  of  the
world  nam  be  compared  to  the  generation  of  an
animal.  If  the  term  generation  signify  something
quite  different  from  what  it  signifies  on  ordinary
occasions,  it  may,  by  the  same  latitude,  signify
any  thing.  In  which  case,  a  word  or  phrase
taken  from  the  language  of  Otaheite,  would  con-
vey as  much  theory  concerning  the  origin  of  the
universe,  as  it  does  to  talk  of  its  being  generated.

We  know  a  cause  (intelligence)  adequate  to
the  appearances  which  we  wish  to  account  for :
we  have  this  cause  continually  producing  similar
appearances :  yet,  rejecting  this  cause,  the  suffi-
ciency of  which  we  know,  and  the  action  of  which
is  constantly  before  our  eyes,  we  are  invited  to  re-
sort to  suppositions  destitute  of  a  single  fact  for
their  support,  and  confirmed  by  no  analogy  with
which  we  are  acquainted.  Were  it  necessary  to
inquire  into  the  motives  of  men's  opinions,  I  mean
their  motives  separate  from  their  arguments;  I
should  almost  suspect,  that,4>ecr.U8e  the  proof  of  a
Deity  drawn  from  the  constitution  of  nature  is  not
only  popular  but  vulgar,  (which  may  arise  from
tbe  cogency  of  the  proof,  and  be  indeed  its  highest
ncommendation,)  and  because  it  is  a  species  al-
most of  puerility  to  take  up  with  it;  for  these
reasons,  minds,  which  are  habitually  in  search  of


invention  and  originality,  feel  a  resistless  inclina-
tion to  strike  off  Into  other  solutions  and  other
expositions.  The  truth  is;  that  many  minds  are
not  so  indisposed  to  any  thing  which  can  be  offer-
ed to  them,  as  they  are  to  the  Jlatness  of  being
content  with  common  reasons:  and,  what  is  most
to  be  lamented,  minds  conscious  of  superiority!
are  the  most  liable  to  this  repugnancy.

The  "  suppositions"  here  alluded  to,  all  agree
in  one  character :  they  all  endeavour  to  dispense
with  the  necessity  in  nature,  of  a  particular,  per-
sonal intelligence;  that  is  to  say,  with  the  exer-
tion of  arr  intending,  contriving  mind,  in  the
structure  and  formation  pf  the  organized  constitu-
tions which  the  world  contains.  They  would  re-
solve all  productions  into  unconscious  energies,  of
a  like  kind,  in  that  respect,  with  attraction,  mag-
netism, electricity ,vOic. ;  without  any  thine  farther.

In  this,  the  old  system  of  atheism  and  the  new
agree.  And  I  much  doubt,  whether  the  new
schemes  have  advanced  any  thing  upon  the  old,
or  done  more  than  changed  the  terms  of  the  no-
menclature. For  instance,  I  could  never  see  the
difference  between  the  antiquated  system  of  atoms,
and  Button's  organic  molecules.  This  philoso^
phcr,  having  made  a  planet  by  knocking  off  from
the  sun  a  piece  of  melted  glass,  in  consequence  of
the  stroke  of  a  comet;  ana  having  set  it  in  motion,
by  the  same  stroke,  both  round  its  own  axis  and
the  sun ;  finds  his  next  difficulty  to  be,  how  to
bring  plants  and  animal*,  upon  it.  In  order  to
solve  this  difficulty,  we  are  to  suppose  the  uni-
verse repleninhed  with  .'particles,  endowed  with
life,  but  without  organization  or  senses  of  their
own ;  and  endowed  also  with  a  tendency  to  mar-
shal themselves  into  organized  forms.  The  con-
course of  these  particles,  by  virtue  of  this  tendency,
but  without  intelligence/  will,  or  direction,  (for  I
do  not  find  that  any  of  these  qualities  are  ascribed
to  them,)  has  produced  the  living  forms  which  we
now  see.  >

Very  few  of  the  conjectures  which  philosophers
hazard  upon  these  subjects,  have  more  of  preten-
sion in  them,  than  the  challenging  you  to  show
the- direct  impossibility  of  the  hypothesis.  In  the
present  example,  there  seemed  to  be  a  positive
objection  to  the  whole  scheme  upon  the  very  face
of  it;  which  was  that,  if  the  case  were  aaiiere  re-
presented, new  combinations  ought  to  be  perpetu-
ally taking  place;  new  plants  and  animals,  or
organized  bodies  which  were  neither,  ought  4o  be
starting  up  before  our  eyes  every,  day.  For  this,
however,  our  philosopher  has  an  answer.  Whilst
so  many  forms  of  plants  and  animals  are  already
in  existence,  and;  consequently,  so  many  "  inter-
nal moulds,"  as  he  calls  them,  are  prepared  and
at  hand,  the  organic  particles  run  into  these
moulds,  and  are  employed  in  supplying  an  acces-
sion of  substance  to  them,  as  well  for  their  growth
as  for  their  propagation.  By  which  means,
things  keep  their  ancient  course.  But,  .says  the
same  philosopher,  should  any  general  loss  or  de-
struction of  the  present  constitution  of  organized
bodies  take  place,  the  particles,  for  want  of
"moulds"  into  which  they  might  enter,  would  run
into  different  combinations,  and  replenish  the
waste  with  new  species  of  organized  substances.

Is  there  any  history  to  countenance  this  notion  ?
[s  it  known,  that  any  destruction  has  been  so  re-
paired 1  any  desert  thus  rc-i>oopled  1

So  far  as  I  remember,  the  only  natural  appear-
ance mentioned  by  our  author,  by  way  ol  fact


466


NATURAL  THEOLOGY.


whereon  to  build  his  hypothesis,  is  the  formation
of  worms  in  the  intestines  of  animals,  which  is
hers  ascribed  to  the  coalition  of  superabundant
organic  particles,  floating  about  iir  the  first  pas-
sages ;  and  which  have  combined  themselves  into
these  simple  animal  forma,  for  want  of  internal
moulds,  or  of  vacancies  in  those  moulds,  into
which  they  might  be  received.  The  thing  referred
U>»  is  rather  a  species  of  facts,  than  a  single  feet ;
as  some  other  cases  may,  with  equal  reason,  be
included  under  it  But  to  make  it  a  feet  at  all,
or,  in  any  sort,  applicable  to  the  question,  we  must
begin  with  asserting  an  equivocal  generation,  con-
trary to  analogy,  and  without  necessity :  contrary
to  an  analogy,  which  accompanies  us  to  the  very
limits  of  our  Knowledge  or  inquiries;  for  wherever,
either  in  plants  or  animals,  we  are  able  to  examine
the  subject,  we  find  procreation  from  a  parent
form:  without  necessity;  for  I  apprehend  that  it
is  seldom  difficult  to  suggest  methods,  by  which
the  eggs,  or  spawn,  or  yet  invisible  rudiments  of
these  vermin,  may  have  obtained  a  nassage  into
the  cavities  in  which  they  are  found.*  Add  to
this,  that  their  constancy  to  their  species,  which,
I  believe,  is  as  regular  in  these  as  in  the  other
vermes,  decides  the  question  against  our  philoso-
pher, if,  in  truth,  any  question  remained  upon  the
subject

Lastly:  These  wonder-working  instruments,
these  "  internal  moulds,"  what  are  they  after  all  ?
what,  when  examined,  but  a  name  without  sig-
nification; unintelligible,  if  not  self-contradictory;
at  the  best,  differing  in  nothing  from  the  "essen-
tial forms"  of  the  Greek  philosophy  ?  One  short
sentence  of  Buflbn'«  work  exhibits  his  scheme  as
follows:  "When  this  nutritious  and  prolific
matter,  which  is  diffused  throughout  all  nature,
passes  through  the  internal  mould  of  an  animal
or  vegetable,  and  finds  a  proper  matrix,  or  recep-
tacle, it  gives  rise  to  an  animal  or  vegetable  of  the
same  species."  Does  any  reader  annex  a  mean-
ing to  the  expression  "internal  mould,"  in  this
sen  ton  e  1  Ought  it  then  to  be  said,  that,  though
we  have  little  notion  of  an  internal-  mould,  we
have  not  much-more  of  a  designing  mind?  The
very  contrary  of  this  assertion  isthe  truth.  When
we  speak  of  an  artificer  or  an  architect,  we  talk
of  what  is  comprehensible  to  our  understanding,
and  familiar  to  our  experience.  We  use  no  other
terms  than  what  refer  us  for  their  meaning  to
our  consciousness  and  observation ;  what  express
the  constant  objects  of  both:  whereas  names  like
that  we  have  mentioned,  refer  us  to  nothing;
excite  no  idea;  convey  a  sound  to  the  ear,  but  i
think  do  no  more.

Another  system  which  has  lately  been  brought
forward,  and  with  much  ingenuity,  is  that  of  ap-
petencies. -  The  principle,  and  the  short  account
of  the  theory,  is  this.  Pieces  of  soft,  ductile  matter,
beinp  endued  with  propensities  or  appetencies  for
particular  actions,  would,  by  continual  endeavours,
carried  on  through  a  tone  series  of  generations,
work  themselves  gradually  into  suitable  forms;
and,  at  length,  acquire,  though  perhaps  by  ob-
scure and  almost  imperceptible  improvements/an
organization  fitted  to  the  action  which  their  res-
pective propensities  led  them  to  exert. A  piece


*  I  trout  I  may  be  excused,  for  not  citing,  as  another
fact  which  is  to  confirm  the  hypothesis,  agrave  assertion
of  this  writer,  that  toe  branches  of  trees  upon  which
the  stag  feeds,  break  out  again  in  his  borns.  Bach /act*
merit  ns  discussion.  I


of  animated  matter.,  for  example,  that  was  endued
with  a  propensity  to/y,  though  ever  so  shapeless,
though  no  other  we  will  suppose  than  a  round
ball  to  begin  with,  would,  in  a  course  of  ages,  if
not  in  a  million  of  years,  perhaps  in  a  hundred
millions  of  years  (for  our  theorists,  having  eternity
to  dispose  of,  are  never  sparing  in  time,}  acquire
wings.  The  same  tendency  to  locomotion  in  an
aquatic  animal,  or  rather  in  an  animated  lump
winch  might  happen  to  be  surrounded  by  water,
would  end  in  the  production  of  Jin*:  in  a  living
substance,  confined,  to  the  solid  earth,  would  pot
out  tegs  and  feet ;  or,  if  it  took  a  different  turn,
would  break  the  body  into  ringlets,  and  conclude
by  crawling  upon  the  ground.  »

Although  I  have  Introduced  the  mention  of  this
theory  into  this  place,  I  am  unwilling  to  give  to
it  the  name  of  an  atheistic  scheme,  for  two  reasons;
first,  because,  so  for  as  I  am  able  to  understand  it,
the  original  propensities  and  the  numberless  va-
rieties of  them  (so  different,  in  this  respect,  from
the  laws  of  mechanical  nature,  which  are  few  and
simple,)  are,  in  the  plan  itself,  attributed  to  the
ordination  and  appointment  of  an  mtelngent  and
designing  Creator:  secondly,  because,  likewise,
that  large  postulatum,  which  is  all  along  assumed
and  presupposed,  the  faculty  in  living  bodies  of
producing  other  bodies  organized  like  themselves,
seems  to  oe  referred  to  the  same  cause;  at  least  is
not  attempted  to  be  accounted  for  by  any  other.
In  one  important  respect  however,,  the  theory
before  us  coincides  with,  atheistic  systems,  viz.  in
that,  in  the  formation  of  plants  and  animals,  in
the  structure  and  use  of  their  parts,  it  does  away
final  causes.  Instead  of  the  parts  of  a  plant  or
animal,  or  the  particular  structure  of  the  parts,
having  been  intended  for  the  action  or  the  use  to
which  we  see  them  applied;  according  to  this
theory,  they  have  themselves  grown  out  of  that
action,  sprung  from  that  use.  The  theory  there-
fore dispenses  with  that  which  we  insist  upon,
the  necessity,  in  each  particular  case,  of  an  intel-
ligent, designing  mind,  for  the  contriving  and  de-
termining of  the  forms  which  organized  bodies
bear.  Give  our  philosopher  these  appetencies;
give  him  a  portion  of  living  irritable  matter  (a
nerve,  or  the  clipping  of  a  nerve,)  to  work  upon;
give  also  to  his  incipient  or  progressive  forma,  the
power,  in  every  stage  of  then*  attention,  of  propa-
gating their  like ;  and,  if  he  is  to  be  believed,  he
could  replenish  the  world  with  all  the  vegetable
and  animal  productions  which  we  at  present  sea
in  it

The  scheme  under  consideration  is  open  to  the
same  objection  with  other  conjectures  of  a  sunuar
tendency,  viz.  a  total  def'.ct  of  evidence.  No
changes,  like  those  which  the  theory  requires,
have  ever  been  observed.  All  the  changes  in
Ovid's  Metamorphoses  might  have  been  elected
by  these  appetencies,  if  the  theory  were  true:  yet
not  an  example,  nor  the  pretence  of  an  example,
is  offered  of  a  single  change  being  known  to  have
taken  place.  Nor  is  the  order  of  generation  obe-
dient to  the  principle  upon  which  this  theory  if
built  The  mammm*  of  the  male  have  not  vanished


*  I  confess  myself  totally  at  a  loss  to  gusts  at  the
reason,  either  final  or  efficient,  for  this  part  of  the  ani-
mal frame;  unless,  there  be  some  foundation  for  an
opinion,  of  which  I  draw  the  hint  from  a  paper  of  Mr.
Everard  Home,  (Phil.  Transact.  1799,  p..*.)  rtt.  that  lbs
minme  of  the  touts  may  be  formed,  before  ts*  sax  Is


NATURAL  THEOLOGY.


4m


briirasitation;  neeewrtorum^per  multa  eaeula,
Judstorwh  jrropagini  deest  vrceputium.  It  is
«iy  to  say,  and  it  has  been  said,  that  the  altera-
tive process  is  too  alow  to  be  perceived ;  that  it
ha*  been  earned  on  through  tracts  of  immeasura-
ble time :  and  that  the  present  order  of  things  is
the  result  of  a  gradation,  of  which  no  human
records  can  trace  the  steps.  It  4s  easy  to  say  this ;
and  yet  it  is  still  true,  that  the  hypothesis  remains
destitute  of  evidence...

The  analogies  which  have  been  alleged,  are
of  the  following  kind :  The  bunch  of  a*  camel,  is
■aid  to  be  no  other  than  the  effect  of  carrying
burdens ;  a  service  in  which  the  species  has  been
employed  from  the  most  artcient  times  of  the  world.
The  first  race,  by  the  daily  loading  of  the  back,
would  probably  mid  a  small  grumous  tumour  to  be
formed  m  the  flesh  of  that  part.  The  next  progeny
would  bring  this  tumour  into  the  world  with  them.
The-ijfe  to  which  they  were  destined,  would  in-
crease it.  The  cause  which  first  generated  the  tu-
bercle being  continued,  it  would  go  on,  through
•very  succession,  to  augment  its  size,  till  it  attained
the  form  and  the  bulk  under  which  it  now  appears.
This  may  serve  for  one  instance:  another,  and
that  also  of  the  passive  sort,  is  taken  from  certain
species  of  birds.  Birds  of  the  crane  kind,  as  the
crane  itself,  the  heron,  bittern,  stork,  have,  in
general,  their  thighs  bare  of  feathers.  This  priva-
tion is  accounted  for  from  the  habit  of  wading  in
water,  and  from  the  effect  of  that  element  to
check  the  growth  of  feathers  upon  these  parts;  in
consequence  of  which,  the  health  and  vegetation
of  the  feathers  declined  through  each  generation
of  the  animal ;  the  tender  down,  exposed  to  cold
and  wetness,  became  weak,  and  thin,  and  rare,  till
the  deterioration  ended  in  the  result  which  we
see,  of  absolute  nakedness.  I  will  mention  a
third  instance,  because  it  it  drawn  from  an  active
habit,  as  the  two  last  were  from  passive  habits ;
and  that  n  the  pouch  of  the  pelican.  The  de-
scription which  naturalists  give  of  this  organ,  k
as  follows :  "  From  the  lower  edges  of  the  under
chap,  hangs  a  bag,  reaching  from  the  whole  length
of  the  bill  to  the  neck,  which  is  said  to  be  capable
of  containing  fifteen  quarts  of  water.  This  bag,
the  bud  has  a  power  of  wrinkling  up  into  the
hollow  of  the  under  chap.  When  the  bag  is
empty,  it  is  not  seen ;  but  when  the  bird  has  fish-
ed With  success,  it  is  incredible  to  what  an  extent
it  is  often  dilated.  The  first  thing  the  pelican
does  in  fishing,  is  to  fill  the  bag  j  and  then  it  re-
turns to  digest  its  burden  at  leisure.  The  bird
preys  upon  the  large  fishes,  and  hides  them  by
ooaens  m  its  pouch.  When  the  bill  is  opened  to  its
widest  extent,  a  person  may  run  his  head  into  the
bird's  mouth;  and  conceal  it  in  this  monstrous
pooch,  thus  adapted  for  very  singular  purposes."*
Now  this  extraordinary  conformation  is  nothing
more,  say  our  philosophers,  than  the  result  of
habit ;  not  of  the  habit  or  effort  of  a  single  pelican,
or  of  a  single  race  of  pelicans,  but  of  a  habit
perpetuated  through  a  long  series  of  generations.
The  pelican  soon  found  the  conveniency  of  reserv-
ing in  its  mouth,  when  its  appetite  was  glutted,
the  remainder  of  its  prey,  which  is  fish.  The  ful-
ness produced  by  this  attempt,  of  course  stretched
the  skin  which  lies  between  the  under  chaps,  as
being  the  most  yielding  part  of  the  mouth.  Every
**  "  increased  the  cavity. The  original

•  Goldsmith,  voLvi.  p. «.


bird,  and  many  generaliotiswhk&siraeeded  him,
might  find  difficulty  enough  in  making  the  pouch
answer  this  purpose :  but  future  pelicans,  entering
upon  life  with  a  pouch  derived  from  their  progeni-
tors, of  considerable  capacity,  would  more  readily
accelerate  its  advance  to  perfection,  by  frequently
pressing  down  the  sac  with  the  weight  of  fisU
which  it  might  now  be  made  to  contain.

These,  or  of  this  kind,  are  the  analogies  relied
upon.  Now,  in  the  first  place,  the  instances  them-
selves are  unauthenticated. by  testimony;  and,  in
theory,  to  say  the  least  of  them,  open  to  great  ob-
jections. Who  ever  read  of  camels  without
bunches,  or  with  bunches  less  than  those  with
which  they  are  at  present  usually  formed'?  A
bunch,  not  unlike  the  camel's,  is' found  between
the  shoulders  of  the  bufialo ;  of  the  origin  of  which
it  is  impossible  to  give  the  account  here  given.  In
the  second  example ;  Why  should  the  application
of  water,  which  appears  to  promote  and  thick-
en the  growth  of  feathers  upon,  the  bodies  and
breasts  of  geese,  and  swans,  and  other  water-fowls,
have  divested  of  this  covering  the  thighs  of  cranes  1
The  thirol  instance,  which  appears  to  me  as  plau-
sible as  any  that  can  be  produced,  has  this  against
it,  that  it  is  a  singularity  restricted  to  the  species;
whereas,  if  it  had  its  commencement  in  the  causa
and  manner  which  have  been  assigned,  the  Ijke
conformation  might  be  expected  to  take  place  in
other  birds,  which  feed  upon  fish.  How  comes  it
to  pass,  that  the  pelican  alone  was  the  inventress,
and  her  descendants  the  only  inheritors,  of  this
curious  resource  ?

But  it  is  the  less  necessary  to  controvert  the  in-
stances themselves,  as*k  is  a  straining  of  analogy
beyond  all  limits  of  reason  and  credibility,  to  as-
sert that  birds,  and  beasts,  and  fish,  with  all  their
variety  and  complexity  of  organization,  have  been
brought  into  their  forms,  and  distinguished  into
their  several  kinds  and  natures,  by  the  same  pro-
cess (even  if  that  process  could  be  demonstrated,
or  had  it  ever  been  actually  noticed)  as  might
seem  to  serve  for  the  gradual  generation  of  a  ca-
mel's bunch,  or  a  pelican's  pouch.

The  solution,  when  applied  to  the  works  of  na-
ture generally,  is  contradicted  by  many  of  the
phenomena,  and  totally  inadequate  to  others.
The  ligaments  of  strictures,'  by  which  the  ten-
dons are  tied  down  at  the  angles  of  the  joints,
could,  by  no  possibility,  be  formed  by  the  motion
or  exercise  ot  the  tendons  themselves;  by  any  ap-
petency exciting  these  part  into  action;  or  by  any
tendency  arising  thereform.  The  tendency  is  au
the  other  way ;  the  conatus  in  constant  opposition
to  them.  Length  of  time  does  not  help  the  case
at  all,  but  the  reverse.  The  valves  also  in  the
blood-vessels,  could  never  be  formed  in  the  man-
ner which  our  theorist  proposes.  The  Mood,  in
its  right  and  natural  course,  has  no  tendency  to
form  them.  When  obstructed  or  refluent,  it  has
the  contrary.  These  parts  could  not  grow  out  of
their  use,  though  they  had  eternity  to  grow  in.

The  senses  of  animals  appear  to  me  altogether
incapable  of  receiving  the  explanation  of  their  ori-
gin which  this  ,theory  affords,  including  under
the  word  "  sense"  the  organ  and  the  perception,
we  have  no  account  of  either.  How  will  our  phi-
losopher get  at  vision,  or  make  an  eye  1  How
should  the  blind  animal  affect  sight,  of  which
blind  animals,  we  know,  have  neither  conception
nor  desire?  Affecting  it,  by  what  operation  of  its
will,  by  what  endeavour  to  aee,  could  it  so  deter-


468


NATURAL  THEOLOGY.


mine  the  fluids  of  its  body,  as  to  inchoate  the  for-
mation of  an  eye?  or,  suppose  the  eye  formed,
Would  the  perception  follow?  The  same  of  the
other  senses.  And  this  objection  holds  it*  force,
ascribe  what  you  will  to  the  hand  of  time,  to  the
power  of  habit,  to  changes  too  slow  to  be  observed
•y  man,  or  brought  within  any  comparison  which
lie  is  able  to  make  of  past  things  with  the  present :
concede  what  you  please  to  these  arbitrary  and
unattested  suppositions,  how  will  they  help  you.1
Here  is  no  inception.  No  laws,  no  course,  no
powers  of  nature  which  prevail  at  present,  nor
any  analogous  to  these,  would  give  commence-
ment to  a  new  sense.  And  it  is  in  vain  to  inquire,
how  that  might  proceed,  which  could  never  begin.
I  think  the  senses  to  be  the  most  inconsistent
with  the  hypothesis  before  us,  of  any  part  of  the
animal  frame.  But  other  parts  are  sufficiently  so.
The  solution  does  not  apply  to  the  parts  of  ani-
mals, which  have  little  in  them  of  motion.  If  we
coula  suppose  joints  and  muscles  to  be  gradually
formed  by  action  and  exercise,  what  action  or  ex-
ercise could  form  a  skull,  and  fill  it  with  brains?
No  efibrt  of  the  animal  could  determine  the  cloth-
ing of  its  skin.  What  ccnalus  could  give  prickles
to  the  porcupine  or  hedgehog,  pr  to-  the  sheep  its

In  the  last  place :  What  dp  these  appetencies
mean  when  applied  to  plants  ?  I  am  not  able  to
give  a  signification  to  the  term,  which  can  be
transferred  from  animals  to  planes ;  or  which  is
common  to  both.  Yet  a  no  It&s  successful  organi-
zation is  found  in  plants,  than  what  obtains  in
animals.  A  solution  is  wanted  for  one,  as  well  as
the  other.

Upon  the  whole ;  -after  all  the  schemes  and
struggles  of  a  reluctant  philosophy,  the  necessary
resort  is  to  a  Deity.  The  marks  of  design  are
too  strong  to  be  gotten  over.  Design  must  have
bad  a  designer.  That  designer  must  have  been  a
person. That  person  is  Goo.


CHAPTER  XXIV.

Of  ike  Natural  Attributes  qf  the  Deity.

It  is  an  immense  conclusion,  that  there  is  a
God  ;  a  perceiving,  intelligent,  designing  Being-,
at  the  head,  of  creation,  and  from  whose  will  it
proceeded.  The  attributes  of  such  a  Being,  sup-
pose his  reality  to  be  proved,  must  be  adequate  to
the  magnitude,  extent,  and  multiplicity  of  his  ope-
rations: which  are  not  only  vast  beyond  compa-
rison wit!)  those  performed  by  any  other  power;
but,  so  far  as  respects  our  conceptions  of  them,
infinite,  because  they  are  unlimited  on  all  sides.
-  Yet  'the  contemplation  of  a  nature  so  exalted,
however  surely  we  arrive  at  the  proof  of  its  exist-
ence, overwhelms  our  faculties.  The  mind  feels
its  powers-  sink  under  the  subject.  One  conse-
quence of  which  is.  that  from  painful  abstraction
the  thoughts  seek'  relief  in  sensible  images. —
Whence  may  bo  deduced  the  ancient,  and  almost
nniversal  propensity  to  idolatrous  substitutions.
They  are  the  resources  of  a  labouring  imagina-
tion. False  religions  usually  fall  in  with  the  na-
tural propensity ;  true  religions,  or  such  as  have
derived  themselves  from  the  true,  resist  it.

ft  is  one  of  the  advantages  of  the  revelations
which  we  acknowledge,  that,  whilst  they  reject


idolatry  with  its  many  pernicious
menu,  they  introduce  the  Deity  to  human  ap-
prehensionf  under  an  idea  more  personal,  mora
determinate,  more  within  its  compass,  than  the
theology  of  nature  can  do.  And  this  they  do  by
representing  him  exclusively  under  the  relation
in  which  he  stands  to  ourselves;  and,  for  the  most
part,  under  some  precise  character,  resulting  from
thai  relation,  or  from  the  history  of  his  provi-
dences :  which  method  suits  the  span  of  our  in-
tellects much  better  than  the  universality  which
enters  into  the  idea  of  God,  as  deduced  from  the
views  of  nature.  When,  therefore,  these  repre-
sentation* are  well  founded  in  point  of  authority,
(for  all  depends  upon  that,)  they  afford  a  conde-
scension to  the  state  of  our  faculties,  of  which,
they  who  have  most  reflected  on  the  subject,  will
be  the  first  to  acknowledge  the  want  and  toe  value.

Nevertheless,  if  we  be  careful  to  imitate  the  do-
cuments of  our  religion,  by  confining  our  explana-
tions to  what  concerns  ourselves,  and  do  not  affect
more  precision  in  our  ideas  than  the  subject  al-
lows of,  the  several  terms  which  are  employed  to
denote  the  attributes  of  the  Deity,  may  be  made,
even  in  natural  religion,  to  bear  a  sense  consistent
with  truth  and  reason,  and  not  surpassing  our
comprehension.

These  terms  are;  Omnipotence,  omniscience,
omnipresence,  eternity,  self-existence,  necessary
existence,  spirituality.

"  Omnipotence,"  "omniscience,"  "infinite"
power,  "infinite"  knowledge,  are  superlatives,
expressing  our  conception  of  these  attributes  in
the  strongest  and  most  elevated  terms  which  lan-
guage supplies.  We  ascribe  power  to  the  Deity
under  the  name  of  "omnipotence,"  the  strict  and
correct  conclusion  being,  that  a  power  which  oould
create  such  a  world  as  this  is,  must  be  beyond  all
comparison,  greater  than  any  which  we  experience
in  ourselves,  than  any  which  we  observe  in  other
visible  agents;  greater  also  than  any  which  we
can  want,  for  our  individual  protection  and  pre-
servation, in  the  Being  upon  whom  we  depend.
It  is  a  power,  likewise,  to  which  we  are  not  au-
thorized, by  our  observation  or  knowledge,  to  as-
sign any  limits  of  space  or  duration.

very  much  of  the  same  sort  of  remark  is
applicable  to  the  term  "omniscience,"  infinite
knowledge,  or  infinite  wisdom.  In  strictness  of
language,  there  is  a  difference  between  knowledge
and  wisdom:  wisdom  always  supposing  action,
and  action  directed  by  it.  With  respect  to  the
first,  viz.  knowledge,  the  Creator  must  know,
intimately,  the  constitution  and  properties  of  the
things  which  he  created;  which  seems  also  to
imply  a  foreknowledge  of  their  action  upon  one
another,  and  of  their  changes ;  at  feast,  so  far  as
the  same  result  from  trains  of  physical  and  neces-
sary causes.  His  omniscience  also,  as  far  as
respects  things  present,  is  deducible  from  his
nature,  as  an  intelligent  being,  joined  with  the


wi'ivi-d. a  uc  WHruvTm  ui uic  Deity,  mb  minium  iu

the  works  of  creation,  suroasses  all  idea  we  have
of  wisdom,  drawn  from  the  highest  intellectual
operations  of  the  highest  class  of  intelligent  beings
with  whom  we  are  acquainted ;  and,  which  is  of
the  chief  importance  to  us,  whatever  be  its  com-
pass or  extent,  which  it  is  evidently  impossible
that  we  should  be  able  to  determine,  it  must  be
adequate  to  the  conduct  of  that  order  of  things


NATURAL  THEOLOGY.


469


under  which  we  live. '  And  this  is  enough.  It
b^of  very  inferior  consequence,  by  what  terms  we
express  our  notion,  or  rather  our  admiration,  of
this  attribute.  The  terms,  which  the  piety  and
the  usage  of  language  have  rendered  habitual  to
us,  may  be  as  proper  as  any  other.  We  can
trace  this  attribute'  much  beyond  what  is  neces-
sary for  any  conclusion  to  which  we  have  occasion,
to  apply  it.  The  degree  of  knowledge  and  power
requisite  for  the  formation  ofcrcated  nature,  cannot,
with  respect  to  us,  be  distinguished  from  infinite.
'  The  Divine  "  omnipresence"  stands,  in  natural
theology,  upon  this  foundation : — In  every  part
and  place  of  the  universe  with  which  we  are  ac-
quainted, we  perceive  the  exertion  of  a  power,
which  we  believe,  mediately  or  immediately  to
proceed*  from  the  Deity.  For  instance ;  in  what
part  or  point  of  space,  that  has  ever  been  ex-
plored, do  we  not  discover  attraction?  In  what
regions  do  we  not  find  light.  In  what  accessible
portion  of  our  globe,  do  we  not  meet  with  gravi-
ty, magnetism,  electricity;  together  with  the  pro-
perties also  and  powers  of  organized  substances,
of  vegetable  or  of  animated  nature?  Nay,  farther,
we  may.  ask,  What  kingdom  is  there  of  nature,
what  corner  of  space,  in  which  there  in  any  thing
that  can  be  examined  by  us,  where  we  do  not  fall
upoa  contrivance' and  design?  The  only  reflec-
tion perhaps  which  arises  in  our  minds  from  tins
view  of  the  world  around  us  is,  that  the  laws  of
nature  everywhere  prevail;  that  they  are  uniform
and  universal.  But  what  dVwe  mean  by  the
laws  of  nature,  or  by  any  law?  Effects  are  pro-
duced by  power,  not  by  laws.  A  law  cannot  exe-
cute itself.  A  law  refers  us  to  an  agent.  Now
an  agency  so  general,  a&  that  we  cannot  discover
its  absence,  or  -assign  the  place  in  which  some
effect  of  its  continued  energy  is  not  found,  may,
in  popular  language  at  least,  and,  perhaps,  with-
out much  deviation  from  philosophical  strictness,
be  called  universal :  and,  with  not  quite  the  same,
}>ut  with  no  inconsiderable  propriety,  the  person
or  Being,  in  whom  that  power  resides,  or  from
whom  it  is  derived,  may  be  taken  to  be  omnipre-
sent. He  who  upholds  all  things  by  his  power,
may  be  said  to  be  every' where  present.

This  is  called  a  virtual  presence.  There  is
also  what  metaphysicians  denominate  an  essen-
tial ubiquity ;  and  which  idea  the  language  of
Scripture  seems  to  favour ;  but  the  former,  I  think,
goes  as  far  as  natural  theology  carries  us.

11  Eternity"  is  a  negative  idea,  clothed  with  a
positive  name.  It  supposes,  in  that  to  which  it  is
applied,  a  present  existence ;  and  is  the  negation
of  a  beginning  or  an  end  of  that  existence.  As
applied  to  the  Deity,  it  has  not  been  contro-
verted by  those  who  acknowledge  a  Deity  at
all.  Most  assuredly,  there  never  was  a  time  in
which  nothing  existed,  because  that  condition  must
have  continued.  The  universal  blank  must  have
remained ;  nothing  could  rise  up  out  of  it ;  nothing
could  ever  have  existed  since;  nothing  could
exist  now.  In  strictness,  however,  we  nave  no
concern  with  duration  prior  to  that  of  the  visible
world.  Upon  this  article  therefore  of  theology,
it  is  sufficient  to  know,  that  the  contriver  neces-
sarily existed  before  the  contrivance.

"  Self-existence"  is  another  negative  idea,  viz.
the  negation  of  a  preceding  cause,  as  of  a  pro-
genitor, a  maker,  an  author,  a  creator.

11  Necessary  existence" means  demonstrable


"  Spirituality*  expresses  an  idea,  made  up  of  ft
negative  part,  and  of  a  positive  part.  The  nega-
tive part  consists  in  the  exclusion  of  some  of  the
known  properties  of  matter,  especially  of  solidity,
of  the  viainertue,  and  of  gravitation.  The  posi-
tive part  comprises  perception,  thought,  will,
power,  action  ;  by  which  last  term  is  meant,  the
origination  of  motion;  the  quality,  perhaps,  in
which  resides  the  essential  superiority  of  spirit
-over  matter,  "which  cannot  move,  unless  it  he
moved;  ana  cannot  hut  move,  when  impelled
by  another."* v  I  apprehend  that  there  can  be  no
difficulty  in  applying  to  the  Deity  both  parts  of
this  idea.


CHAPTER  XXV.
The  Unity  of  the  Deity.

Op  the  "  Unity  of  the  Deity,",  the  proof  is,  the
uniformity  of  plan  observable  in  the  universe.
The  universe  itself  is  a  system ;  each  part  either
depending  upon  other  parts,  or  being  connected
with  other  parts  by  some  common  law  of  motion,
or  by  the  presence  of  some  common  substance^
One  principle  of  gravitation  causes  a  stone  to  drop
towards  the  earth,  and  the  moon  to  wheel  round
it.  One  law  of  attraction  carries  all  the  different
planets  about  the  sun.  This  philosophers  de-
monstrate. There  are  also  other  points  of  agree-
ment, amongst  them,  which  may  be  considered  as
marks  of  the  identity  of  their  origin,  and  of  their
intelligent  Author.  In  all  are  found  the  con-
venience and  stability  derived  from  gravitation.
They  all  experience  vicissitudes  of  days  and
nights,  and  changes  of  season.  They  all,  at
least  Jupiter,  Man,  and  Venus^  have  the  same
advantages  from  their  atmosphere  as  we  have.
In  all  the  planets,  the' axes  of  rotation  are  perma-
nent. Nothing  is  more  probable  than  that  the
same  attracting  influence,  acting  according  to  the
same  rule,  reaches  to  the  fixed  stars :  but,  if  this
be  only  probable,  another  thinff  is  certain,  vix.
that  the  same  element  of  light  does.  The  light
from  a  fixed  star  affects  our  eyes  in  the  same
manner,  is  refracted  and  reflected  according  to
the  same  laws,  as  the  light  of  a  candle.  The
velocity  of  the  light  of  the  fixed  stars  is  also  the
same  as  the  velocity  of  the  light  of  the  sun,
reflected  from  the  satellites  of  Jupiter.  The  heat
of  the  sun,  in  kind,  differs  nothing  from  the  heat
of  a  coal  fire.

In  our  own  globe,  the  case  is  clearer.  New
countries  are  continually  discovered,  but  the  old
laws  of  nature  are  always  found  in  them :  new
plants  perhaps,  or  animals,  but  always  in  com-
pany with  plants  and  animals  which  we  already
Know ;  and  always  possessing  many  of  the  same
general  properties.  We  never  get  amongst  such
original,  or  totally  different,  modes  of  existence,
as  to  indicate,  that  we  are  come  into  the  province
of  a  different  Creator,  or  under  (he  direction  of  a
different  wilL  In  truth,  the  same  order  of  things
attends  us,  wherever  we  go.  The  elements  act
upon  one  another,  electricity  operates,  the  tides
rise  and  fall,  the  magnetic  needle  elects  its  posi-
tion, in  one  region  of  the  earth  and  sea,  as  well


•  Bishop  Wilkin's  Principles  of  Natural  aaligies,
40


470


NATURAL  THEOLOGY.


as  in  toother.  One  atmosphere  invests  all
of  the  globe,  and  connects  ill ;  one  sun  "
nates,  one  moon  exerts  its  specific  attraction  upon
all  parts.  If  there  be  a  variety  in  natural  effects,
ast  e.  g.  in  the  tides  of  different  seas,  that  very
variety  is  the  result  of  the  same  cause,  acting
under  different  circumstances.  In  many  cases
this  is  proved ;  in  all,  is  probable.

The  inspection  and  comparison  of  living  forms,
add  to  this  argument  examples  without  number.
Of  all  large  terrestrial  animals,  the  structure  is
very  much  alike ;  their  senses .  nearly  the  same ;
their  natural  functions  and  passions  nearly  the
same ;  their  viscera  nearly  the  same,  both  in  sub-
stance, shape,  and  office:  digestion,  nutrition,
circulation,  secretion,  go  on,  in  a  similar  manner,
in  all :  the  great  circulating  fluid  is  the  same ;
for,  I  think  no  difference  has  been  discovered  in
the  properties  of  Mood,  from  whatever  animal  it
be  drawn.  The  experiment  of  transfusion  proves
that  the  blood  of  one  animal  will  serve  for  another.
The  skeletons  also  of  the  larger  terrestrial  ani-
mals: show  particular  varieties,  but  still  under  a
greaf  general  affinity.  The  resemblance  is  some-
what less,  yet  sufficiently  evident  between  qua-
drupeds and  birds.  They  are  all  alike  in  five
respects,  for  one  in  which  they  differ.

In  fish,  which  belong  to  another  department,  as
it  were,  of  nature,  the  points  of  comparison  be-
come fewer/  But  we  never  lose  sight  of  our  ana-
logy, e.  g.  we  still  meet  with  a  stomach,  a  liver,  a
spine :  with  faila  and  blood ;  with  teeth ;  with  eyes,
(which  eyes  are  only  slightly  varied  from,  our  own,
and  which  variation  in  truth  demonstrates  not
an  interruption,  but  a  continuance  of  the  same  ex-
quisite plan ;  for  it  is  the  adaptation  of  the  organ
to  the  element,  viz.  to  the  different  refraction  of
light  passing  into  the  eye  out  of  a  denser  me-
dium.) The  provinces,  also,  themselves  of  water
and  earthLare  connected  by  the  species  of  animals
which  inhabk  both ;  and  also  by  a  large  tribe  of
aquatic  animals  which  closely  resemble  the  terres-
trial in  their  internal  structure;  I  mean  the  ceta-
ceous tribe,  which  have  hot  blood,  respiring  lungs',
bowels,  ana  other  essential  parts,  like  those  of  land
animals.  This  similitude,  surely,  bespeaks  the
same  creation  and  the  same  Creator.

Insects  and  sheU-JUh  appear  to  me  to  differ  from
other  classes  of  animals  the  most  widely  of  any.
Yet  even  here,  beside  many  points  of  particular
resemblance,  there  exists  a  general  relation  of  a
peculiar  kind.  It  is  the  relation  of  inversion ;  the
law  of  contrariety:  namely,  that,  whereas,  in
other  animals,  the  hones,  to  which  the  muscles  are
attached,  lie  within  the  body  ;  in  insects  and  shelP
fish,  they  lie  on  the  outside  of  it.  The  shell  of
ft  lobster  performs  to  the  animal  the  office  of  a
done,  by  furnishing  to  the  tendons  that  fixed  basis
or  immoveable  fulcrum,  without  which,  mechani-
cally, they  could  not  act  The  crust  of  an  insect
It  its  shell,  and  answers  the  like  purpose.  The
•hall  also  of  an  oyster  stands  in  the  place  of  a  bone ;
the  bases  of  the  muscles  being  fixed,  to  it,  in  the
same  manner  as,  in  other  animals,  they  are  fixed
to  the  bones.  All  which  (under  wonderful  varie-
ties, indeed,  and  adaptations  of  form,J  confesses  an
imitation,  a  remembrance,  a  carrying  on  of  the
same  plan.

~  The  observations  here  made,  are  equally  appli-
cable to  plants ;  but,  I  think)  unnecessary  to  be
pjwued.  It  is  a  very  striking  circumstance,  and
•tone  •officiant  to  prove  all  which  we  contend  for,  |


that,  in  this  part  likewise  of  arganoed  nature,  w»
perceive  a  continuation  of  the  sexual  system.

Certain  however  it  is,  that  the  whole  argument
for  the  divine  unity,  goes  no  farther  than  to  a  unity
of  counsel.

It  may  likewise  be  acknowledged,  that  no  argu-
ments which  we  are  in  possession  of,  exclude  the
ministry  of  subordinate-  agents.  If  such  there  be,
they  act  under  a  presiding,  a  controlling  will ;  be-
cause they  act  according  to  certain  general  restric-
tions, by  certain  common  rules,  and,  as  it  should
seem,  upon  a  general  plan:  but  still  such  agents,
and  different  ranks,  and  classes,  and  degrees  of
them,  may  be  employed.


CHAPTER  XXVI.
The  Goodness  of  the  Deify.

The  proof  of  the  divine  goodness  rests  upon
two  propositions :  each,  as  wn  contend,  capable  of
being  made  out  by  observations  drawn  from  the
appearances  of  nature.

The  firs}  is,  "that,  in  a  vast  plurality  of  in-
stances in  which  contrivance  is  perceived,  the  de-
sign of  the  contrivance  is  beneficial."

The  second,  "that  the  Deity  has  superadded
•pleasure  to  .animal  sensations,  beyond  what  was
necessary  for  any  other  purpose,  or  when  the  pur-
pose, so  far  as  it  was  necessary,  might  have  been
effected  by  the  operation  of  pain."

First,  "  In  a  vast  plurality  of  instances  in  which
contrivance  is  perceived,  the  design  of  the  contri-
vance is  beneficial."  ^

No  productions  of  nature  display  contrivance  so
manifestly  as  the  parts  of  animate;  and  the  parts
of  animals  have  ail  of  them,  I  believe,  a  real,  and
with  very  few  exceptions,  all  of  them  a  known  ana
intelligible,  subserviency  to  the  use  of  the  animaL
Now,  when  the  multitude  of  animals  is  consider-
ed, the  number  of  parts  in  each,  their  figure  and
fitness,  the  faculties  depending  upon  them,  the
variety  of  species,  the  complexity  of  structure,  the
success,  in  so  many  cases,  and  felicity  of  the  re-
sult, we  can  never  reflect,  without  the  prosonndeat
adoration,  upon  the  character  of  that  Being  from
whom  all  these  things  ljave  proceeded :  we  can-
not help  acknowledging,  what  an  exertion  of  be-
nevolence creation  was ;  of  a  benevolence  how
minute  in  its  care,  how  vast  in  its  comprenen-
*>n!  — y

When  we  appeal  to  the  parts  and  faculties  of
and  sense


animals,  and  to  the  limbs  and  senses  of  animals  in
particular,  we  state,  I  conceive,  the  proper  mecfium
of  proof  for  the  conclusion  which  we  wish  to  es-
tablish. I  will  not  say,  that  the  insensible  parts
of  nature  are  made  solely  for  the  sensitive  parts :
but  this  I  say  .that,  when  we  consider  the  benevo-
lence of  the  Deity,  we  can  only  consider  it  in  re-
lation to  sensitive  being.  Without  this  reference,
or  referred  to  any  thing  else,  the  attribute  has  no
object:  the  term  has  no  meaning.  Dead  matter
is  nothing.  The  parts,  therefore,  especially  the
limbs  and  senses,  of  animals,  although  they  con-
stitute, in  mass  and  quantity,  a  small  portion  of
the  material  creation,  yet,  since  they  alone  are  in-
struments of  perception,  they  compose  what  may
be  called  the  whole  of  visible  nature,  estimated
with  a  view  to  the  disposition  of  its  Author.
Ck>iisequentiy,itbmiAc«thsiweaiet0  8eekliia


NATURAL  THEOLOGY.


471


chancier.  It  is  by  these  that  wje  are  to  prove,
that  the  world  was  made  with  a  benevolent  design.
Nor  is  the  design  abortive.  It  is  a  happy  world
after  all.  The  air,  the-earth,  the  water,  teem  with
delighted  existence.  _  In  a  spring  noon,  or  a  sum-
mer evening^  on  whichever  side  1  turn  my  eves,


myriads  of  happy  beings  crowd  upon  my  view.
"  The  insect  youth  are  on  the  wing."  Swarms
of  new-born  files  are  trying  their  pinions  in  the
air.  Their  sportive  motions,  their  wanton  mazes,
their  gratuitous  activity,  their  continual  change  of
place  without  use  or  purpose,  testify  their  joy,  and
the  exultation  which  they  feel  in  their  lately  dis-
covered faculties.  A  bee  amongst  the  flowers  in
spring,  is  one  of  the  most  cheerful  objects  that  can
be  looked  upon.  Its  life  appears  to  be  all  enjoy-
ment ;  so  busy,  and  so  pleased ;  yet  it  is'  only  a
specimen  of  insect  life,  with  which,  by  season  of
-tie  animal  being  half  qbmesticated,  we  happen  to
be  better  acquainted  than  we  are-  with  that  of
others.  The  whole  wingett  insect  tribe,  His  pro-
bable, are  equally  intent  upon  their  proper  em-
ployments, and,  under  every  variety  of  constitu-
tion, gratified,  and  perhaps  equally  gratified,  by
the  offices  which  the  Author  of  their  nature  has
assigned  to  them.  But  the  atmosphere  is  not  the
only  scene  of  enjoyment  for  the  insect  race.'
Plants  are  covered  with  aphides,  greedily  sucking
their  juices, -and  constantly,  as  it  should  seem,  in
the  act  of  sucking.  It  cannot  be  doubted  but  that
this  is  a  state  of  gratification.  What  else  should
fix  them  so  close  to  the  operation,  and  so  long  ?
Other  species  ax&running  about;  with. an  ala-
crity in  their  motions,  which  carries  with  it  every
mark  of  pleasure.  Large*  patches  of  ground  are
sometimes  half  covered  with  these  brisk  and
sprightly  natures.  If  we  look  to  what  the  vo-
ters prouuce,-shoals  of  the  fry  of  fish  frequent  the
margins  of  rivers,  of  lakes,  and  of  the  sea  itsejf.
These  are  so  happy,  that  they  know  not  what  to
do  with  themselves.  Their  attitudes,  their  viva-
city, their  leaps,  out  of  the  water,  their  frolics  in
it,  (which  I  have  noticed  a  thousand  times  with
equal  attention  and  amusement, J  all  conduce  to
show  their  excess  of  spirits,  and  are  simply  the
effects  of  that  excess.  Walking  by  the  sea-side,
in  a  calm  evening,  upon  a  sandy  shore,  and  with
an  ebbing  tide,  L  have  frequently  remarked  the
appearance  of  a  dark  cloud,  or  rather,  very  thick
mist  hanging  over"  the  edge  of  the  water,  to  the
height,  perhaps,  of  half  a  yard,  and  of  the  breadth
of  two  or  three  yarda  stretching  along  the  coast
as  far  as  the  eye  could  reach,  and  always  retiring
with  the  water.  When  this  cloud  came  to  be  ex-
amined, it  proved  to  be  nothing  else  than  so  much
space,  filled  with  young  shrimps,  in  the  act  of
bounding  into  the  air  from  the  shallow  margin  of
the  water,  or  from  the  wet  sand.  If  any  motion
of  a  mute  animal  could  express  delight,  it  was
this :  if  they  had  meant  to  make  signs  of  their
happiness,  they  could  not  have  done  it  more  in-
telligibly. Suppose  then,  what  I  have  no  doubt
of  each  individual  of  this  number  to  be  in  a  state
of  positive  enjoyment ;  What  a  sum,  collectively,
ef  gratification  and  pleasure  have  we  here  before
our  view!

The  young  of  all  animals  appear  fo  me  to  re-
ceive pleasure  simply  from  the  exercise  of  their
limbs  and  bodily  faculties,,  without  reference  to
any  end  to  be  attained,  or  any  use  to  be  answered
bv  the  exertion.  A  child,  without  knowing  any
thing  of  the  use  of  language,  is  in  a  high  degree


delighted  with  being  able  to  speak. Its  incessant


pleased  with  its  first  successful  endeavours  .to
walk,  6t  rather  to  run,  (which  precedes  walking,)
although  entirely  ignorant  of  the  importance  of
the  attainment  to  its  future  life,  and  even  without
-applying  jt  to  any  present  purpose.  A  child  is
delighted  with  speaking,  without  Having  any  thing
to  say ;  and  with  walking,  without  knowing
where  to  go.  And  prior  to  both  these,  I  am  dis-
posed to  believe,  that  the  waking  hours  of  infancy
are  agreeably  taken  up  with  the  exercise  of  vision^
or  perhaps,  more  properly  speaking,  with  learning
to  see.

But  it  is  not  for  youth  alone  that  the  great  Pa-
rent of  creation  hath  provided.  _  Happiness  is
found  with  the  purring  cat,  no  less  than  with  the
playful  kitten ;  in  the  arm-chair  of  dozing  age,  as
well  as  in  either  the  sprightliness  of  the' dance  or
the  animation  of  the  chase.  To  novelty,  to  acute-
ness  of -sensation,  to  hope,  to  ardour  of  pursuit,
succeeds,  what  is,  in  no  inconsiderable  degree,  an
equivalent  for  thejn  all,  "perception  of  ease/'
Herein  is  the  exact  difference  between  the  young
arid  the  old.  The  young  are  not  happy  but  when
enjoying  pleasure;  the  old  are  happy  when  free
from  pain.  And  this  constitution  suits  with  the
degrees  of  animal  power  which  they  respectively
possess.  The  vigour  of  youth  was  to  be  stimu-
lated to  action  by  impatience  of  rest ;  wnilst  to  the
imbecility  of  age,  quietness  and  repose  become
positive  gratifications.  In  one  important  respect
the  advantage  is  with  the  old.  A  state  of  ease  is,
generally  speaking,  more  attainable  than  a  state
of  pleasure.  A  constitution,  therefore,  which  can
enjoy  ease,  is  preferable  to  that  which  can  taste
only  pleasure.  This  6ame  perception  of  ease
oftentimes  renders  old  age  a  condition  of  great
comfort ;  especially  when  riding  at  its  anchor  after
a  busy  or  tempestuous  life.  It  is  weH-  described
by  Rousseau,  to  be  the  interval  of  repose  and  en-
joyment, between  the  hurry  and  the  end  of  life.
How  for  the  same  cause  extends  to  .other  animal
natures,  cannot  be  judged  of  with  certainty.  The
appearance  of  satisfaction,  with  which  most  ani-
mals, as  their  activity  subsides,  seek  and  enjoy
rest,  affords  reason  to-  believe,  that  this  source  of
gratification  is  appointed  to  advance  tifej  under  all,
or  most  of  its  various  forms.  In  the  species  with
which  we  are  best  acauainted}  namely  out  own,  I
am  far,  even  as  an  observer  of  human  life,  from
thinking  that  youth  is  its  happiest  season,  much
less  the  only  happy  one:  as  a  Christian,  I  am
willing  to  believe  that  there  is  a  great  deal  of  truth
in  the  following  representation  given  by  a  very
pious  writer,  as  well  as  excellent  man  ;♦  "  To  the
intelligent  and  virtuous,  old  age  presents  a  scene
of  tranquil  enjoyments,  of  obedient  appetite,  of
well-regufateda  flections,  of  maturity  in  knowledge,
and  of  calm  preparation  for  immortality.  In  this
serene  and  dignified  state,  placed  as  it  were  on  the
confines  of  two  worlds,  the  mind  of  a  good  man
reviews  what  is  past  with  a  complacency  of  an
approving  conscience  ;  and  looks  forward  with
humble  confidence  in  the  mercy  of  God,  and  with
devout  aspirations  towards  bis  eternal  and  ever-
increasing  favour."


•  Father's  Instructions ;  by  Dr.  Fercival  nf  Manilas
ter,  p.  317.


478


NATURAL  THEOLOGY.


What  10  seen  in  different  stages  of  the  same
life,  is  still  more  exemplified  in  the  lives  of  differ-
ent animal*.  Animal  enjoyments  are  infinitely
diversified.  The  modes  of  life,  to  which  the  or-
ganization of  different  animals  respectively  deter-
mines them,  are  not  only  of  various  but  it  oppo-
site kinds.  Yet  each  is  happy  id  its  own.  For
instance :  animals  of  prey  live  much  alone ;  ani-
mals of  a  milder  constitution,  in  society.  Yet  the
herring,  which  lives  in  shoals,  and  the  sheep,
which  lives  in  flocks,  are  not  more  happy  in  a
crowd,  or  more  contented  amongst  their  compa-
nfon*,  than  is  the  pike,  or  the  lion,  with  the  deep
solitudes  of  the  -pooler  the  forest

But  it  win  be  said,  that  the  instances  which
we  have  here  brought  forward,  whether  of  viva-
city or  repose,  or  of  apparent  enjoyment  derived
from:  either,  are  picked  and  favourable  instances.
We  answer,  first,  that  they  are  instances,  never-
theless, which  comprise  large  provinces  of  sensi-
tive existence ;  that  every  case  which  we  have  de-
scribed, is  the  case  of  millions. .  At  this  moment,
in  every  given  moment  of  time,  how  many  myri-
ads of  animals  are  eating  their  food,  Gratifying
their  appetites,  ruminating  in.  their  holes,  ac-
comphsning  their  wishes,  pursuing  their  pleasures,
taking  their  pastimes  1  In  each  individual,  how
many  things  must  go  right  for  it  to  be  at  ease;
yet  how  large  a  proportion  out  of  every  species  is  so
in  every  assignable  instant !  Secondly,  we  con-
tend in  the  terms  of  our  original  proposition,  that
throughout  the  whole  of  life,  as  it  is  diffused  in
nature,  and  as  far  as  we  are  acquainted  with  it,
looking  to  the  average  of  sensations,  the  plurality
and  the  preponderancy  is  in  favour  of  happiness
by  a  vast  excess.  In  our  own  species,  in  which
perhaps  the  assertion  may  be  more  questionable
than  in  any  other,  the  prepollency  of  good  over  evil,
of  health,  for  example,  and  ease,  over  pain  and
distress,  is  evinced  by  the  very  notice  which  cala-
mities, excite.  What  inquiries  does  the  sickness
of  our  friends  produce !  what  conversation  their
misfortunes !  This  shows  that  the  common  course
of  things  is  in  favour  of  happiness :  that  happiness
is  the  rule,  misery  the  exception.  Were  the  order
reversed;  our  attention  would  be  called  to  exam-
ples of  health  and  competency,  instead  of  disease
and  want.

One  great  cause  of  our  insensibility  to  the  good-
ness of  the  Creator,  is  the  very  extensiveness  of
his  bounty.  We  prize  but  little  what  we  share
only  in  common  with  the  rest,  or  with  the  gene-
rality of  our  species.  When  we  hear  of  blessi  ngs,
we  think  forthwith  of  successes,  of  prosperous  for-
tunes, of  honours,  riches,  preferments,  i.  e.  of  those
advantages  and  superiorities  over  others,  which
we  happen  either  to  possess,  or  to  be  in  pursuit  of,
or  to  covet  The  common  benefits  of  our  nature
entirely  escape  us.  Yet  these  are  the  great  things.
These  constitute  what  most  properly  ought  to  oe
accounted  blessings  of  Providence ;  what  alone,  if
we  might  so  speak,  are  worthy  of  its  care.  Night-
ly rest  and  daily  bread,  the  ordinary  use  of  our
.  limbs-,  and  senses,  a/id  understandings,  are  gifts
which  admit  of  no  comparison  with  any  other.
Yet,  because  almost  every  man  we  meet  with  pos-
eesses  these,  we  leave  them  out  of  our  enumera-
tion. '  They  raise  no  sentiment;  they  move  no
gratitude.  Now,  herein  is  our  j udgment  pervert-
ed by  our  selfishness.  A  blessing  ought  in  truth
to  be  the  more  satisfactory,  the  bounty  at  least  of
the  donor  is  rendered  more  conspicuous,  by  its


very  diffusion,  its  commojmew4  fa  cheapness] ;  by
its  falling  to  the  lot,  and  forming  the  happiness,
of  the  great  bulk  and  hody  of  our  species,  as  well
as  of  ourselves.  Nay,  even  when  we  do  not  pos-
sess it,  it  ought  to  be  matter  of  thankfulness  that
others  do.  Jut  we  have  a  different  way  of  think-
ing. We  court  distinction.  That  is  not  the
worst;  we  see  nothing  but  what  has  distinction  to
recommend  it.  This  necessarily  contracts  our
views  of  the  Creator's  beneficence  within  a  nar-
row compass  j  and  most  unjustly.  It  is  in  those
things  which  are  so  common  as  to  he  no  dtsCinc-
tioo,  that  the  amplitude  of  the  divine  benignity  is
perceived.

But  pain,  no  doubt,  and  privations  exist,* in  nu-
merous instances,  ana  to  a  degree,  which,  collect-
ively, would  be  very  great,  if  they  were  compared
with  any  other  thing  than  with  the  mass  of  ani-
mal fruition.  For  the  Application,  therefore,  of
our  proposition  to  that  mixed  state  of  things  which
these  exceptions  induce,  two  rules  are  necessary,
and  both,  I  think,  just  and  fair  rules.  One  is,
that  we  regard  those  effects  atone  which  are  ac-
companied with  proofs  of  intention :  the  other,  that
when  we  cannot  resolve  all  appearances  into  bene-
volence of  design,  we  make  the  few  give  place  to
the  many ;  the  little  to  the  great;  that  we  take  our
judgment  from  a  large  and  deckled  preponderancy,
if  there  be  one.

I  crave  leave  to  transcribe  into  this  place,  what
I  have  said  upon  thie  subject  in  my  Moral  Philo-
sophy : —

"  When  God  created  the  human  species,  either
he  wished  their  happiness,  or  he  wished  their
misery,  or  he  was  Indifferent  and  unconcerned
about  either.

"  If  he  had  wished  our  misery,  he  might  have
made  sure  of  his  purpose,  by  forming  oar  senses
to  be  so  many  sores  and  pains  to  us,  as  they  are
now  instruments  of  gratification  and  enjoyment:
or  by  placing  us~amidst  objects,  so  ill  suited  to  our
perceptions  as  to  have  continually  offended  us,
instead  of  ministering  to  our  refreshment  and  de-
light. He  might  have  made,  for  example,  every
thing  we  tasted,  bitter ;  every  thing  we  saw,  loath-
some; every  thing  we  touched,  a  sting;  every
smell,  a  stench  ;  and  every  sound,  a  discord.

"  If  he  had  been  indifferent  about  our  happi-
ness or  misery,  we  must  impute  to  our  good  for-
tune (as  all  design  by  this  supposition  is  excluded)
both  the  capacity  of  our  senses  to  receive  pleasure,
and  the  supply  of  external  objects  fitted  to  pro-
duce it.

"  But  either  of  these,  and  still  more  both  of
them,  being  too  much  to  be  attributed  to  accident,
nothing  remains  but  the  first  supposition,  that
God,  when  he  created  the  human  species,  wished
their  happiness;  and  made  for  them  the  provision
which  he  has  made,  with  that  view  and  for  that
purpose.

"  The  same  argument  may  be  proposed  in  dif-
ferent term*;  thus:  Contrivance  proves  design:
and  the  predominant  tendency  of  the  contrivance
indicates  the  disposition  of  the  designer.  The
world  abounds  with  contrivances:  and  aH  the
contrivances  which  we  are  acquainted  with,  are
directed  to  beneficial  purposes.  Evil,  no  doubt,
exists;  but  is  never,  that  we  can  perceive,  the  d>-
jeet  of  contrivance.  Teeth  are  contrived  Jo  eat,
not  to  ache ;  their  aching  now  and  then  is  inci-
dental to  tho  contrivance,  perhaps  inscparalvB
from  iU  or  even,  if  you  will,  let  it  be  called  a  de-


NATURAL  THEOLOGY.


473


feet  in  the  contrivance  but  it  ig  not  the  object  of
it  Thie  is  a  distinction  which  well  deserves  to
be  attended  to.  In  describing  implements  of  hus-
bandry, too  would  hardly  say  of  the  sickle,  that
it  is  maoe  to  cut  the  reaper's  hand ;  though  from
the  construction  of  the  instrument  and  the  man-
ner of  using  it,  this  mischief  often  follows.  But
if  you  had  occasion  to  describe  instruments  of  tor-
ture, or  execution :  this  engine,  you  would  say,  is
to  extend  the  sinews ;  this  to  dislocate  the  joints ;
this  to  break  the  bones ;  this  to  scorch  the  soles
of  the  feet.  Here,  pain  and  misery  are  the  very
objects  of  the  contrivance.  Now,  nothing  of  this
sort  is  to  be  found  in  the  works  of  nature.  We
never  discover  a  train  of  contrivance  to  bring
about  an  evil  purpose.  No  anatomist  ever  disco-
vered a  system  or  organization  calculated  to  pro-
duce pain  and  disease ;  or,  in  explaining  the  parts
of  the  human  body,  ever  said,  this  is  to  irritate;
this  to  inflame;  this  duct  is  to  convey  the  gravel
to  the  kidney*-- this  gland  to  secrete  the  humour
which  forms  the  gout :  if  by  chance  he  come  at  a
part  of  which  he  knows- not  the  use,  the  most  he
can  say  »,  that  it  is  useless;  no  one  ever  suspects
that  it  is  put  these  to  incommode,  to  annoy,  or  to
torment.'

The  two  cases  which  appear  to  me  to  have
the  most  of  difficulty  in  them,  as  forming  the
most  of  the  appearance  of  exception  to  the  repre-
sentation here  given,  are  those  of  venomous  ani-
mals, and  of  animals  preying  upon  one  another.
These  properties  of  animals,  wherever  they  are
found,  must,  I  think,  be  referred  to  design ;  -be-
cause there  is  in  aH  cases  of  the  first,  and  in  most
cases  of  the  second,  an  express  and  distinct  or-
ganization provided  for  the  producing  of  them.
Under  the  first  bead;  the  ftngs  of  vipers,  the
stings  of  wasps  and  scorpions,  are  as  clearly  in-
tended for  their  purpose,  as  any  animal  structure
Is  for  any  purpose  the  most  incontestaUy  benefi-
cial. And  the  same  thing  must,  under  the  second
nead,  be  acknowledged  of  the  talons  and  beaks  of
birds,  of  the  .tusks,  teeth,  and  claws,  of  beasts  of
prey;  of  the  shark's  mouth,  of  the  spider's  web,
and  of  numberless  weapons  of  offence  belonging
to  different  tribes  of  voracious  insects.  We  can-
not, therefore,  avoid  the  difficulty  by  saying,  that
the  effect  was  not  intended.  The  only  question
open  to  us  b.  whether  it  be  ultimately  evil.  From
the  confessed  and  felt  imperfection  of  our  know-
ledge, we  ought  to  presume  that  there  may  be
consequences  of  this  economy  which  are  hidden
tram  us ;  from  the  benevolence  which  pervades  the
general  designs  of  nature,  we  ought  also  to  pre-
sume, that  these  consequences,  if  they  could  enter
into  our  calculation,  would  turn  the  balance  on
the  fevourable  side.  Both  these  I  contend  to  be
reasonable  presumptions.  Not  reasonable  pre-
■omptkms,  if  these  two  cases  were  the  only  cases
which  nature  presented  to  our  observation ;  but
reasonable  presumptions  under  the  reflection,  that
the  cases  in  question  are  combined  with  a  multi-
tude of  intentions,  all  proceeding  from  the  same
author,  and  all,  except  these,  directed  to  ends  of
undisputed  utility.  Of  the  vindications,  however,
of  this  economy,  which  we  are  able  to  assign,
such  as  most  extenuate  the  difficulty  are  the  fol-
lowimg.

Wtth  respect  to  venemotW bites  and  stings,  it
msr  be  observed,--

1.  That,  the  animal  itself  being  regarded,  the
freaky  cornphmeri  of  is  good;  being  conducive,


in  all  cases,  to  the  defence  of  the  animal ;  in  i
cases,  to  the  subduing  of  its  prey ;  and  in  some,
probably,  to  the  killing  of  it,  when  caught,  by  a
mortal  wound,  inflicted  in  the  passage  to  the  sto-
mach, which  may  be  no  less  mercUul  to  the  vic-
tim, than  salutary  to  the  devourer.  In  the  viper,
for  instance,  the  poisonous  fang  may  do  that
which,  in  other  animals  of  prey,  is  done  by  the
crush  of  the  teeth.  Frogs  and  mice  might  be
swallowed  alive  without  it.

2.  But  it  will  be  said ,  that  this  provision,  when
it  comes  to  the  case  of  bites,  deadly  even  to  hu-
man bodies  and  to  those  of  large  quadrupeds,  is
greatly  overdone  ;  Jhat  it  might  have  fulfilled  its
use,  and  yet  have  Been  much  less  deletenouaihan
it  is.  Now  I  believe  the  case  of  bites,  which  pro-
duce death  in  large  «miwMrtf<  (of  stings  I  think
there  are  none/)  to  be  very  few.  The  experiments
of  the  Abbe  Fontana,  which  were  numerous,  go
strongly  to  the  proof  of  this.point  He  found  that
it  required  the  action  of  five  exasperated  vipers  to
kill  a  dog  of  a  moderate  size:  but  that,  to  the  kill-
ing of  a  mouse  or  a  frog,  a  single  bite  was  sufn>
cient ;  which  agrees  with  the  use  we  assign  to  the
faculty.  The  Abbe  seemed  to  be  *f  opinion,  that
the  bite  even  of  the  rattle-snake  would  not  usual*
ly  be  mortal;  allowing,  however,  that  in  certain
particularly  unfortunate  cases,  as  when  the  punc-
ture had  touched  some  very  tender  part,  pricked  ft
principal  nerve  for  instance,  or,  as  it  is  said,  some
more  considerable  lymphatic  vessel,  death  might
speedily  ensue.

3.  It  has  been,  I  think,  very  justly  remarked,
concerning  serpents,  that,  whilst  only  a  few  spe-
cies possess  the  venomous  property,  tnat  property
guarqs  the  whole  tribe.  The  most  innocuous
snake  is  avoided  with  as  much  care  as  a  viper.
Now  the  terror  with  which  large  animals  regard
this  class  of  reptiles,  is  its  protection ;  and  this
terror  is  founded  on  the  formidable  revenge,  which
a  few  of  the  number,  compared  with  the  whole,
are  capable  of  taking.  The  species  of  serpents,  de-
scribed by  Linnaeus,  amount  to  two  hundred  and
eighteen,  of  which  thirty-two  only  are.  poisonous.

4.  It  seems  to  me,  that  animal  constitutions  are
provided,  not  only  for.  each  element,  but  for  each
state  of  the  elements,  1  e.  for  every  climate,  and
for  every  temperature ;  and  that  part  of  the  mis-
chief cqmpbuned  of,  arises  from  animals  (the  hu-
man animal  most  especially)  occupying  situations
upon  the  earth,  which  do  not  belong  to  them,  nor
were  ever  intended  for  their  habitation.  The  fol-
ly and  wickedness  of  mankind,  and  necessities
proceeding  from  these  causes,  have  driven  multi-
tudes of  the  species  to  seek  a  refuge  amongst
burning  sands,  whilst  countries,  blessed  with  hos-
pitable skies,  and  with  the  most  fertile  soils,  ie-
main  almost  without  a  human  tenant.  We  in-
vade the  territories  of  wild  beasts  and  venomous
reptiles,  and  then  complain  that  we  are  infested
by  their  bites  and  stings.  Some  accounts  of
Africa  place  this  observation  in  a  strong  point
of  view.  "  The  deserts,"  says  Adanson,  "  are  en-
tirely barren,  except  where  they  are  found  to  pro-
duce serpents :  and  in  such  quantities,  that  some
extensiveirisins  are  almost  entirely  covered  with
them."  These  are  the  natures  appropriated  to
the  situation.  Let  them  enjoy  their  existence ;
let  them  have  their  country.  Surface  enough
will  be  left  to  man,  though  his  numbers  were  in-
creased a  hundred-fold,  and  left  to  him,  where  he
might  live,  exempt  from  these  annoyances.


474


NATURAL  THEOLOGY.


The  second  case,  viz.  that  of  animal*  devour-
ing  one  another,  furnishes  a  consideration  of
much  larger  extent.  To  judge  whether,  as  a  ge-
neral provision,  this  can  be  deemed  an«rs7,  even
so  far  as  we  understand  its  consequences,  which,
probably,  is  a  partial  understanding,  the  following
reflections  are  fit  to  be  attended  to.

1.  Immortality  upon  this  earth  is  out  of  the
question.  Without  death  there  could  be  no  gene-
ration, no  sexes,  no  parental  relation,  t.  c.  as  things
are  constituted,  no  animal  happiness.  The  parti-
cular duration  of  life,  assigned  to  different  animals,
can  form  no  part  of  the  objection ;  because,  what-
ever that  duration  be,  whilst  iWremaina  finite  and
limited,  it  may  always  be  asfed,  why  it  is  no
longer.  The  natural  age  of  different  animals  va-
ries, from  a  single  day  to  a,  century  of  years.  No
account  can  be  given  of  this ;  nor  could  any  be
given,  whatever  other  proportion  of  hie  had  ■ob-
tained amongst  them.

The  term  then  of  life  in  different  animals  being
the  same  as  it  is,  the-  question  is,  what  mode  of
taking  it  away  is  the  best  even  for  the  animal  it-
self.

Now,  according  to  the  established  order  of  na-
ture, (which  we  must  suppose  to 'prevail,  or  we
cannot  reason  at  all  upon  the  subject,)  the  three
methods  by  which  life  is  usually  put  an  end  to,
are  acute  diseases,  decay,  and  violence.  The  sim-
ple and  natural  life  of  brute*,  is  not  often  visited
by  acute  distempers ;  nor  could  it  be  deemed  an
improvement  of  their  lot,  if  they  were.  Let  it  be
considered,  therefore,  in'  what  a  condition  of  suf-
fering and  misery  a  brute  animal  is  placed,  which
is  left  to  perish  by  decay.  In  human  sickness  or
infirmity,  there  is  the  assistance  of  man's  rational
fellow-creatures,  if  not  to  alleviate  his  pains,  at
least  to  minister  to  bis  necessities,  and  to  supply
the  place  of  his  own  activity.  A  brute,  in  nis
wild  and  natural' stater  does  every  thine  for  him-
self. When'  his  strength,  therefore,  or  nis  speed,
or  his  limbs,  or  his*  senses,  fail  him,  he  is  deliver-
ed over,*teither  to  absolute  famine,  or  to  the  pro-
tracted wretchedness  of  a  life  slowly  wasted  by
the  scarcity  of  food:  Is  it  then  to  see  the  world
filled  with  drooping,  superannuated,  half-starved,
helpless,  and  unhclped,  animals,  that  you  would
alter  the  present  system  of  pursuit  and  prey  1

2.  Which  system  is  also  to  them  the  spring  of
motion  and  activity  on  both  sides.  The  pursuit
of  its  prey  forms- the  employment,  and  appears  to
constitute  the  pleasure,  of  a  considerable  part  of
the  animal  creation.  The  using  of  the  means  of
defence,  or  flight,  or  precaution,  forms  also  the
business  of  another  part.  And  even  of  this  latter
tribe,  we  have'  no  reason  to  suppose,  that  their
happiness  is  much  molested  by  their  fears.  Their
danger  exists  continually;  and  in  some  cases
they  seem  to  be  so  for  sensible  of  it  as  to  provide,
In  the  best  manner  they  can,  against  it ;  but  it  is
only  when  the  attack  is  actually  made  upon  them,
that  they  appear  to  suffer  from  it.  To  contem-
plate the  insecurity  of  their  condition  with  anxiety
and  dread,  requires  a  degree  of  reflection,  which
(happily  for  themselves)  they  do  not  possess.  A
hare,  notwithstanding  the  number  of  its  dangers
and  its  enemies,  is  as  playful  an  animal  as  any
other.

3.  But,  to  do  justice  to  the  question,  the  system
of  animal  destruction  ought  always  to  be  consi-
dered in  strict  connexion  with  another  property
of  animal  nature,  viz.  superfecundUy. They  are


countervailing  qualities.  One  subsists  by  the
correction  of  the  other.  In  treating,  therefore,  of
the  subject^  under  this  view  (which  is,  I  believe,
the  true  one,)  our  business  will  be,  first,  to  point
out  the  advantages  which  are  gained  by  the
powers  in  nature  of  a  superabundant  .multiplica-
tion ;  and,  then,  to  show,  that  these  advantages
are  wo  many  reasons  for  appointing  that  system  of
national  hostilities, which  we  are  endeavouring  to
account  for.

In  almost  all  cases,  nature  produces  her  sup-
plies with  profusion.  A  single  cod-fish  spawns,
in  one  season,  a  greater  number  of  eggs,  than  all
the  inhabitants  of  England  amount  to.  A. thou-
sand other  instances  of  prolific  generation  might
be  stated,  which,  though  not  equal  to  this,  would
carry  on  the  increase  of  the  species  with  a  rapidity
which  outruns  calculation,  and  to  an  immeasura-
ble extent.  The  advantages  of  such  a  constitu-
tion are  two:  first,  that  it  tends  to  keep  the  world
always  full;  whilst,  secondly,  it  allows  the  nro-

rlion  between  the  several  species  of  smimah  to
differently  modified,  as  different  purposes  re-
quire, or  as  different  situations  may  afford  for
them  room  and  food.  Where  this  vast  fecundity
meets  with  a  vacancy  fitted  to  receive  the  species,
there  it  operates  with  its  whole  effect;  there  it


pours  in  its  numbers,  and  replenishes  the  v^
We  complain  of  what  we  call  the  exorbitant
multiplication  of  some  troublesome  insects;  not
reflecting,  that  large  portions  of  nature  might  be
left  void  without  it  If  the  accounts  of  travellers
may  be  depended  upon,  immense  tracts  of  forest  in
North  America  would  be  nearly  lost  to  sensitive
existence,  if  it  were  not  for  gnaU.  "  In  the  thinly
inhabited  regionsjof  America,  in  which  the  waters
stagnate  ana  the  climate  is  warm,  the  whole  air  is
filled  with  crowds  of  these  insects."  Thus  it  is,
that  where  we  looked  for  solitude  and, death- fike
silence,  we  meet  with  animation,  activity,  enjoy-
ment ;  with  a  busy,  a  happy,  and  a  peopled  world.
Again  ?  hosts  of  mice  are  reckoned  amongst  the
plagues  of  the  north-east  part  of  Europe ;  whereas
vast  plains  in  Siberia,  as  we  learn  from  good  au-
thority, would  be  lifeless  without  them.  The
Caspian  deserts  are  converted  by  their  presence
into  crowded  warrens.  Between  the  Volga  and
the  Yaik,  and  in  the  country  of  Hyrcaxua,  the
ground,  says  Pallas,  is  in  many  places  covered
with  little  hills,  raked  by  the  earth  cast  out  in
forming  the  burrows.  "Do  we  so  envy  these
blissful  abodes,  as  to  pronounce  the  fecundity  by
which  they  are  supplied  with  inhabitants,  to  be  an
evil:  a  subject  of  complaint,  and  not  of  praise  1
Farther,  by  virtue  of  this  same  superfecundity,
what  we  term  destruction,  becomes,  almost  in-
stantly, the  parent  of  life.  What  we  call  oughts,
are,  oftentimes,  legions  of  animated  beings,  churn-
ing their  portion  in  the  bounty  of  nature.  What
corrupts  the  produce  of  the  earth  to-  us^preparrt
it  for  them.  And  it  is  by  means  of  their  rapid
multiplication,  that  they  take  possession  of  their
pasture ;  a  slow  propagation  would  not  meet  the
opportunity.

But  in  conjunction  with  the  occasional  use  of
this  fruitfulness,  we  observe,  also,  that  it  allows
the  proportion  between  the  several  species  of
animals  to  be  differently  modified,  as  different

J  purposes  of  utility  may  require.  When  the
brests  of  America  come  to  ue  cleared,  and  the
swamps  drained,  our  gnats  will  give  place  to
other  inhabitants. If  the  population  of  Europe


NATURAL  THEOLOGY.


475


stand  spread  to  the  north  and  the  east,  the  mice
will  retire  before  the  husbandman  and  the  shep-
herd, and  yield  their  station  to  herds  and  flocks.
In  what  concerns  the  human  species,  it  may  be  a
part  of  the  scheme  of  Providence,  that  the  earth
should  be  inhabited  by  a  shifting,  or  perhaps  a
circulating  population.  In  this  economy,  it  is
possible  that  there  may  be  the  following  advan-
tages :  when  old  countries  are  become  exceeding-
ly corrupt,  simpler  modes  of  life,  purer  morals,
said  better  institutions,  may  rise  up  in  new  ones,
whilst  fresh  soils  reward  the  cultivator  with  more
plentiful  returns.  Thus  the  different  portions  of
globe  come  into  use  in  succession  at  the  residence
of  man ;  and,  in  his  absence,  entertain  other  guests,
which,  by  their  sudden  multiplication,  fill  the
In  domesticated  animals,  we  find  the  ef-


fect of  their  fecundity  to  be,  that  we  can  always
command  numbers;  we  can  always  have  as  many
of  any  particular  species  as  we  please^  or  as  we
can  support.  Nor  do  we  complain  of  .its  excess ;
it  being  much  more  easy  to  regulate  abundance,
than  to  supply  scarcity.

But  then  thistupcTfccundity,  though  of  great
occasional  use  and  importance,  exceeds  the  ordi-
nary capacity  of  nature  to  receive  or  support  its
progeny.  All  superabundance  supposes  destruc-
tion, or  must  destroy  itself.  Perhaps  there  is  no
species  of  terrestrial  animals  whatever,  which-
would  not  overrun  the  earth,  if  it  were  permitted
to  multiply  in  perfect  safety :  or  of  fish,  which
would  not  fill  the  ocean:  .at  least,  if  any  single
species  were  left  to  their  natural  increase  without
disturbance  or  restraint,  the  food  of  other  species
would  be  exhausted  by  their  maintenance.  It  is
necessary,  therefore,  that  the  effects  of  such  pro-
lific faculties  be  curtailed.  In  conjunction  with
other  checks  and  limits,  all  subservient  to  the
same  purpose,  are  th&.thinnings  which  take  place
among  animals,  by  their  action  upon  one  another.
In  some  instances  we  ourselves  experience,  very
directly,  the  use  of  these  hostilities.  One  species
of  insects  rids  us  of  another  species;  or  reduces
their  ranks.  A  third  species,  perhaps,  keeps  the
second  within  bounds ;  and  birds  or  lizards  are  a
fence  against  the  inordinate  increase  by  which
oven  these  last  might  infest  us.  In  other,  more
numerous,  and  possibly  more  important,  instances,
this  disposition  of  things,  although  less  necessary
or  useful  to  us,  and  of  course  less  observed  by  us,
may  be  necessary  and  useful  to  certain  other  spe-
cies: or  even  for  the  preventing  of  the  loss  of
certain  species  from  the  universe:  a  misfortune
which  seems  to  be  studiously  guarded  against.
Though  there  may  be  the  appearance  of  failure  in
some  of  the  details  of  Nature's  works,  in  her  great
purposes  there  never  are.  Her  species  never  faiL
The  provision  which  was  originally  made  for
continuing  the  replenishment  of  the  world,  has
proved  itself  to  be  effectual  through  a  long  suc-
cession of  ages.

What  further  shows,  that  the  system  of  de-
struction amongst  animals  holds  an  express  rela-
tion to  the-  system  of  fecundity ;  that  they  are  parts
Indeed  of  one  compensatory  scheme ;  is,  that,  in
each  species,  the  fecundity  bears  a  proportion  to
the  smallness  of  the  animal,  to  the  weakness,  to
the  shortness,  of  its  natural  term  of  life,  and  to
the  dangers  and  enemies  by  which  it  is  surround-
ed. An  elephant  produces  but  one  calf;  a  butter-
fly lays  six  hundred  eggs.  Birds  of  prey  seldom
>  Uian  two  eggs:  the  sparxow  tribe,


and  the  duck  tribe,  frequently  ait  upon  a  dozen.
In  the  rivers,  we  meet  with  a  thousand  minnows
for  one  pike ;  in  the  sea,  a  million  of  herrings  for
a  single  shark.  Compensation  obtains  through-
out. Defencelessness  and  devastation  are  repair-
ed by  fecundity.

'  We  have  dwelt  the  longer  on  these  considera-
tions, because  the  subject  to  which  thdy  apply,
namely,  that  of  animals  devouring  one  another,
forms  the  chief,  if  not  the  only  instance,  in  the
works  of  the  Deity,  of  an.  economy,  stamped'  by
marks  of  design,  in  which  thexharacter  ot  utility
can  be  called  m  question.  The  case  of  venompu*
animals  is  of  much  inferior  consequence  to  the
case  of  prey,  and,  in  sojne  degree,  is  also  included
under  it.  To  both  cases  it  is  probable  that  many
more  reasons  belong,  than  those  of  which  we  are
in  possession.

Our  first  proposition,-  and  that  which  we
have  hitherto  been  defending,  was,  "  that,  in  a
vast  plurality  of  instances,  in  which  contrivance
is  perceived,  the  design  of  the  contrivance  is  be*
neficial."

Our  second  proposition  is,  >"  that  the  Deity
has  added  pleasure  to  animal  sensations,  beyond
what  was  necessary  for  any  other  purpose,  or
when  the  purpose,  so  far  as  it  was  necessary,
might  have  been  effected  by  the  operation  of  pain.

This  proposition  may  be  thus  explained :  The
capacities,  which,  according  to  the  established
course  of  nature,  are  necessary  to  the  support  or
preservation  of  an  animal,  however  manifestly
they  may  be  the  result,  of  an  organization  con*
trived  for  the  purpose,  can  only  be  deemed  an  act
or  a  part  of  the  same  will,  as  t£at  which  decreed
the  existence  of  the  animal  itself;  because,  whe-
ther the  creation  proceeded  from  a  benevolent  or  a
malevolent  being,  these  capacities  must  have  been
given,  if  the  animal  existed  at  all. Animal  pro-

Srties,  therefore,  which  fall  under  this  description,
not  strictly  prove  the  goodness  of  God :  they
may  prove  the  existence  of  the  Deity ;  they  may
prove  a  high  degree  of  power  and  intelligence:
but  they  do  not  prove  his  goodness ;  forasmuch  as
they  must  have  been  found  in  any  creation  which
was  capable  of  continuance,  although  it  is  possible
to  suppose,  that  such  a  creation  might  have  been
produced  by  a  being  whose  views  rested  upon
misery.

But  there  is  a  class  of  properties,  which  may  be
said  to  be  superadded  from  an  intention  expressly
directed  to  happiness ;  an  intention  to  give  a  hap-
py existence  distinct  from  the  general  intention  of
providing  the  means  of  existence ;  and  that  is,  of
capacities  for  pleasure,  in  cases  wherein,  so  far  as
the  conversation  of  the  individual  or  of  tne  species
is  concerned,  they  were  not  wanted,  er  wherein
the  purpose  might  have  been  secured  by  the  ope-
ration of  pain.  The  provision  which  is  made  of  a
variety  of  objects,  not  necessary  to  life,  and  minis-
tering only  to  our  pleasures :  and  the  properties
given  to  the  necessaries  of  life  themselves,  by
which  they  contribute  to  pleasure  as  well  as  pre-
servation! show  a  farther  design,  than  that  of
giving  existence.*

A  single  instance  will  make  all  this  clear.  As-
suming the  necessity  of  food  for  the  support  of


*  See  this  topic  considered  in  Dr.  Balguy'g  Treatise
upon  the  Divine  Benevolence.  This  excellent  author
first,  I  think,  proposed  it ;  and  nearly  in  the  terms  ia
which  It  is  here  stated.  Some  other  observations  alas
under  this  head  are  taken  from  that  treatise.


476


NATURAL  THEOLOGY.


animal  life ;  it  is  requisite,  that  the  animal  be  pro-
vided with  organs,  fitted  for  the  procuring,  ]
ceiving,  and  digesting{  of  its  food.  It  may  also
necessary,  that  the  animal  be  impelled  by  its  sen-
aations  ta  exert  its  organs.  Bat  the  pain  of  hun-
ger would  do  all  this.  Why  add  pleasure  to  the
act  of  eating;  sweetness  and  relish  to  food!  why  a
new  and  appropriate  sense  for  the  perception  of  the
pleasure  1  Why  should  the  juice  of  a  peach,  ap-
plied to  the  palate,  affect  the  part  so  differently
from  what  k  does  when  rubbed  upon  the  palm  of
the  hand  1  This  is  a  constitution  which,  so  far  as

Spears  to  me,  can  be  resolved  into  nothing  but
i  pure  benevolence  of  the  Creator.  Eating  is
necessary;  but  the  pleasure  attending  it  U  not
necessary:  and  that  this  pleasure  depends",  not
only  upon  our  being  in  possession  of  the  sense  of
taste,  which  is  different  from  every  other,  but  upon
a  particular  state  of  the  organ  in  which  it  resides,
a  felicitous  adaptation  of  the  organ  to  the  object,
will  be  confessed  by  any  one,,  who  may  happen  to
have  experienced  that  vitiation  of  taste  which  fre-
quently occurs  in  fevers,  when  every  taste  is  irre-
gular, and  every  one  baa.

In  mentioning  the  gratifications  of  the  palate,  it
may  be  said  that  we  have  made  choice  of  a  trifling
example.  I  am  not  of  that  opinion.  They  afford
a  share  of  enjoyment  to  man ;  but  to  brutes  I  be-
lieve that  they  are  of  very  great  importance.  A
horse  at  liberty  passes  a  great  part  of  his  waking
hours  in  eating.  To  the  ox,  the  sheep,  the  deer,
and  other  ruminating  animals,  the  pleasure  is
doubled.  Their  whole  time  almost  is  divided  be-
tween browsing  upon  their  pasture  and  chewing
their  cud.  Whatever  the  pleasure  be,  it  is  spread
over  a  large  portion  of  their  existence.  If  there  be
animals,  such  as  the  lupous  fish,  which  swallow
their  prey  whole,  and  at  once,  without  any  time,
as  it  should  seem,  for  either  drawing  out,  or  re-
lishing, the  taste  in  the  mouth,  is  it  an  improba-
ble conjecture,  that  the  seat  of  taste  with  them  is
in  the  stomach ;  or,  at  least,  that  a  sense  of  plea-
sure, whether  it  be  -taste  or  not,  accompanies  the
dissolution  of  the  food  in  that  receptacle,  which
dissolution  in  general  is  carried  on  very  slowly  1
If  this  opinion  be  right,  they- are  more  than  repaid
for  the  defect  of  palate.  Thd  feast  lasts  as  long
as  the  digestion.

In  seeking  for  argument,  we  need  not  stay  to
insist  upon  the  comparative  importance  of  our  ex-
ample ;  for  the  observation  holds  equally  of  all,  or
of  three  at  least  of  the  other  senses.  The  neces-
sary purpose  of  hearing  might  have  been  answered
without  harmony ;  of  smell,  without  fragrance ;  of
vision,  without  beauty.  Now,  "  if  the  Deity  had
been  indifferent  about  our.  happiness  or  misery,
we  must  impute  to  our  good  fortune,  (as  all  de-
sign by  this  supposition  is  excluded,)  both  .the  ca-
pacity of  our  senses  to  receive  pleasure,  and  the
supply  of  external  objects  fitted  to  excite  it"  I
allege  these  as  ttoo  felicities,  for  they  are  different
things;  yet  both  necessary :  the  sense  being  formed,
the  pojects.  which  were  applied  to  it,  might  not
have  suited  it;  the  objects  being  fixed,  the  sense
might  not  have  agreed  with  them.  A  coincidence
is  Here  required,  which  no  accident  can  account
for.  There  are  three  possible  suppositions  upon
the.  subject,  and  no  more.  The  first ;  that  the
sense,  by  its  original  constitution,  was  made  to
suit  the  object:  the  second ;  that  the  object,  by  its
original  constitution,  was  made  to  suit  the  sense :
the  third}  thai  the  sense  is  so  constituted,  as  to  be


able,  either  tmiversally,  or  within  certain  limits,
by  habit  and  femilianty,  to  render  every  object
pleasant  Whichever  of  these  suppositions  we
adopt,  the  effect  evinces,  on  the  part  of  the  Au-
thor of  nature,  a  studious  benevolence.  If  the
pleasures  which  we  derive  from  any  of  our  senses,
depend  upon  an  original-  congruity  between  the
sense  and  the  properties  perceived  by  it,  we  know
by  experience,  that  the  adjustment  demanded,
with  respect  to  the  qualities  which  were  conferred
upon  the  objects  that  surround  us,  not  only  choice
and  selection,  out  of  a  boundless  variety  of  possi-
ble qualities  with  which  these  objects  might  have
been  endued,  but  a  proportioning  also  qf  degree,
because  an  excess  or  defect  of  intensity  spoils  the
perception,  as  much  almost  as  an  error  in  the  kind
and  nature  of  the  quality.  Likewise  the  degree
of  dulness  or  acuteness  in  the  sense  itself,  is  no
arbitrary  thing,  but,  in  order  to  preserve  the  con-
gruity  here  spoken  of,  requires  to  be  in  an  exact  or
near  correspondency  with  the  strength  of  the  im-
pression. The  dulness  of  the  senses  forms  the
complaint  of  old  age.  Persons  in  fevers,  and,  1
believe,  in  most  maniacal  cases,  experience  great
torment  from  their  preternatural  acuteness.  An
increased,  no  less  than  an  impaired  sensibility,  in-
duces a  state  of  disease  and  suffering.

The  doctrine  of  a  specific  congruity  between
animal  senses  and  their  objects,  is  strongly  fa-
voured by  what  is  observed  of  insects  in  the  elec-
tion of  their  food.  Some  of  these  will  feed  upon
one  kind  of  plant  or  animal,  and  upon  no  other:
some  caterpillars  upon  the  cabbage  alone;  some
upon  the  black  currant  alone.  The  species  of  cater-
pillar which  eats  the  vine,  will  starve  upon  the
elder ;  nor  will  that  which  we  find  upon  fennel,
touch  the  rose-bush.  Some  insects  confine  them-
selves to  two  or  three  kinds  of  plants  or  animal*
Some  again  show  so  strong  a  preference,  as  to  af-
ford reason  to  believe,  that,  though  they  may  be
driven  by  hunger  to  others,  they  are  led  by  the
pleasure  of  taste  to  a  few  particular  plants  alone:
and  all  this,  as  it  should  seem,  independently  of
habit  or  imitation.

But  should  we  accept  the  third  hypothesis,  and
even  carry  it  so  far,  as  to  ascribe  every  thing
which  concerns  the  question  to  habit  (as  in  certain
species,  the  human  species  most  particularly,  there
is  reason  to  attribute  something,)  we  have  then
before  us  an  animal  capacity,  not  less  perhaps  to
be  admired  than  the  native  congruities  which  the
other  scheme  adopts.  It  cannot  be  shown  to  re-
sult from  any  fixed  necessity  in  nature,  that  what
is  frequently  applied  to  the  senses  should  of  course
become  agreeable  to  them.  It  is,  so  fax  as  it  sub-
sists, a  power  of  accommodation  provided  in  these
senses  by  the  Author  of  their  structure,  and  forms
a  part  of  their  perfection.

In  whichever  way  we  regard  the  senses,  they
appear  to  be  specific  gifts,  ministering,  not  only  to
preservation,  but  to  pleasure.  But  -what  we
usually  call  the  senses,  are  probably  themselves
for  from  being  the  only  vehicles  of  enjoyment,  or
the  whole  of  our  constitution  which  is  *«1«ii«^
for  the  same  purpose.  We  have  many  internal
sensations  of  the  most  agreeable  kind,  hardly  re-
ferable to  any  of  the  five  senses.  Some  physiolo-
gists have  holden,  that  all  secretion  is  pleasurable;
and  that  the  complacency  which  in  health,  with-
out any  external  assignable  object  to  excite  it,  we
derive  from  life  itself,  is  the  effect  of  our  secretions
going  on  well  within  us. All  this  may  be  true:


NATURAL  THEOLOGY.


477


but  if  true,  what  lesson  can  be  assigned  for  it,
except  the  will  of  the  Creator  %  It  may  reasona-
bly be  asked,  Why  is  any  thing  a  pleasure  ?  and
I  know  no  answer  which  can  be  returned  to  the
question,  but  that  which  refers  it  to  appointment.
•  We  can  give  no  account  whatever  of  our  plea-
sores  in  the  simple  and  original  perception ;  and,
even  when  physical  sensations  are  assumed,  we
can  seldom  account  for  them  hi  the  secondary
and  complicated  shapes,  in  which  they  take  the

.  name  of  diversions.  I  never  yet  met  with  a
sportsman,  who  could  tell  me  in  what  the  sport
consisted ;  who  could  resolve  it  into  its  principle,
and  state  that  principle.  I  have  been  a  great  fol-
lower of  fishing  myself  and  in  its  cheerful  soli-

.  tnde  have  passed  some  of  the  happiest  hours  of  a
sufficiently  happy  life ;  but,  to  this  moment,  I
could  never  trace  out  the  source  of  the  pleasure
which  it  afforded  me.

.  The  "  quantum  in  rebus  inane !"  whether  ap-
plied to  our  amusements  or  to  our  graver  pursuits
(to  which,  in  truth,  it  sometimes  equally  belongs,)
is  always  an  unjust  complaint  It  trim  engage,
anil  if  trifles  make  us  happy,  the  true  reflection
suggested  by  the  experiment,  is  upon  the  tendency
of  nature  to  gratification  and  enjoyment,  which
is,  in  other  words,  the  goodness  of  its  Author
towards  his  sensitive  creation.

Rational  natures  also,  as  such,  exhibit  qualities
which  help  to  confirm  the  truth  of  our  position.
The  denes  of  understanding  found  in  mankind,
is  usually  much  neater  than  what  is  necessary
for  mere  preservation.  The  pleasure  of  choosing
for  themselves,  and  of  prosecuting  the  object  of
their  choice,  should  seem  to  be  an  original  source
ef  enjoyment  The  pleasures  received  from  things,
great,  beautiful,  or  new,  from  imitation,  or  from
the  hberai  arts,  are,  in  some  measure,  net  only
superadded,  but  unmixed,  gratifications,  having
no  pains  to  balance  them.*

ido  not  know  whether  our  attachment  to  pro-
perty be  not  something  more  than  the  mere  dic-
tate of  reason,  or  even  than  the  mere  effect  of
association.  Property  communicates  a  charm  to
whatever  is  the  object  of  it  It  is  the  first  of  our
abstract  ideas :  it  cleaves  to  us  the  closest  and
the  longest  It  endears  to  the  child  its  plaything,
to  the  peasant  his  cottage,  to  the  landholder  his
estate.  It  supplies  the  place  of  prospect  and
scenery.  Instead  of  coveting  the  beauty  of  dis-
tent situations,  it  teaches  every  man  to  find  it  in
Bis  own.  It  gives  boldness  and  grandeur  to
plains  and  lens,  tinge  and  colouring  to  clays  and

All  these  considerations  come  in  aid  of  our
second  proposition.  The  reader  will  now  bear  in
mind  what  our  two  propositions  were.  They
were,  firstly,  that  in  a  vast  plurality  of  instances,
in  which  contrivance  is  perceived,  the  design  of
the  contrivsnce  is  beneficial:  secondly,  that  the
Deity  has  added  pleasure  to  animal  sensations
beyond  what  was  necessary  for  any  other  pur-
pose; or  when  the  purpose,  so  far  as  it  was  ne-
cessary, might  have  been  effected  by  the  operation
of  pun.

Whilst  these  propositions  can  be  maintained,
we  are  authorised  to  ascribe  to  the  Deity  the
character  of  benevolence:  and  what  is  benevo-
lence at  all,  must  in  him  be  infinite  benevolence,
by  reason  of  the  infinite,  that  is  to  say,  the  incal-


k  Btlfmy  on  U»  Divine  Benevolancs.


culably  great,  number  of  objects,  upon  which  it  is
exercised.


Of  the  origin  op  evil,  no  universal  solution
has  been  discovered ;  I  mean,  no  solution  which
reaches  to  all  cases  of  complaint.  The  most  com-
prehensive is  that  which  arises  from  the  consi-
deration of  general  rules.  We  may,  I  think,
without  much  difficulty,  be  brought  to  admit  the
four  following  points:  first,  that  important  advan-
tages may  accrue  to  the  universe  from  the  order
of  nature  proceeding  according  to  general  laws :
secondly,  that  general  laws,  however  well  set  and
constituted,  often  thwart  and  cross'  one  another:
thirdly,  that  from  these  tjiwartings  and  crossings,
frequent  particular  inconveniences  will  arise :  and
fourthly,  that  it  agrees  with  our  observation  to
suppose,  that  some  degree  of  these  inconveniences
takes  place  in  the  works  of-  nature.  These
points  may  be  allowed ;  and  it  may  also  be  assert-
ed, that  the  general  laws  with  which  we  are
acquainted,  are  directed  to  beneficial  ends.  On
the  other  hand,  with  many  of  these  laws  we  are
not  acquainted  at  all,  or  we  are  totally  unable  to
trace  them  in  their  branches,  and  in  their  opera-
tion ;  Che  effect  of  which  ignorance  is,  that  they
cannot  be  of  importance  to  us  as  measures  by
which  to  regulate  our  coriduct.  The  conservation
of  them  may  be  of  importance  in  other  respects,
or  to  other  beings,  but  we  are  uninformed  of  their
value  or  use ;  uninformed,  consequently,  when,
and  how  fiur,  they  may  or  may  not  be  suspended,
or  their  effects  turned  aside,  by  a  presiding  and
benevolent  will,  without  incurring  greater  evils
than  those  whieh  would-be  avoided.  The  consi-
deration, therefore,  of  general  laws,  although  it
may  concern  the  question  of  the  origin  of  evil
very  nearly  (which  I  think  it  does,)  rests  in  views
disproportionate  to  our  faculties,  and  in  a  know-
ledge which  we  do  not  possess.  It  serves  rather
to  account  for  Hie  obscurity  ef  the  subject,
than  to  supply  us  with  distinct  answers  to  our
difficulties.  However,  whilst  we  assent  to  the
above-stated  propositions  as  principles,  whatever
uncertainty  we  may  find  in  the  application,  we
lay  a  ground  for  believing,  that  cases  of  apparent
evil,  for  which  we  can  suggest  no  particular  rea-
son, are- governed  by  reasons,  which  are  more
general,  which  lie  deeper  in  the  order  of  second
causes,  and  which  on  that  account  are  removed  to
a  greater  distance  from  us.

The  doctrine  of  imperfections,  or,  as  it  is  called,
of  evils  of  imperfection,  furnishes  an  account
founded,  like  the  former,  in  views  of  universal
nature.  _The  doctrine  is  briefly  this :— It  is  pro-
bable, that  creation  may  be  better  repknished  by
sensitive  beings  of  different  sorts,  than  by  sensi-
tive beings  all  of  one  sort  It  is  likewise  proba-
ble, that  it  may  be  better  replenished  by  different
orders  of  beings  rising  one  above  another  in  gra-
dation, than  by  beings  possessed  of  equal  degrees
of  perfection.  Now,  a  gradation  of  such  beings
implies  a  gradation  of  imperfections.  No  class
can  justly  complain  of  the  imperfections,  which
belong  to  its  place  in  the  scale,  unless  it  were
allowable  for  H  to  complain,  that  a  scale  of  being
was  appointed  in  nature ;  for  which  appointment
there  appear  to  be  reasons  of  wisdom  and  good-

»,  jlnitenest,  or  what  is  resolve-
in  inanimate  subjects,  can


In  like
We  into


<78


NATURAL  THEOLOGY.


newer  be  *  just  subject  of  complaint;  because  if
it  were  ever  so,  it  would  be  always  so :  we  mean,
that  we  can  never  reasonably  demand  that  things
should  be  larser  or  more,  when  the  same  demand
might  be  made,  whatever  the  quantity  or  number


And  to  me,  it  seems,  that  the  sense  of  mankind
has  so  far  acquiesced  in  these  reasons,  as  that  we
seldom  complain  of  evils  of  this  class,  when  we
dearly  perceive  them  to  be  such.  What  1  have
to  ado,  therefore,  is,  that  we  ought  not  to  com-
plain of  some  other  evils,  which  stand  upon  the
same  foot  of  vindication  as  evils  of  confessed  im-
perfection. We  never  complain,  that  the  globe
of  our  earth  is  too  small:  nor  should  we  complain,
if  it  were  even  much  smaller.  But  where  is  the
difference  to  us,  between  a  less  globe,  and  part  of
the  present  being  uninhabitable  1  The  inhabit-
ants of  an  island  may  be  apt  enough  to  murmur
at  the  sterility  of  some  parts  of  it,  against  its
rocks,  or  sands,  er  swamps;  but  no  one  thinks
himself  authorised  to  murmur,  simply  because  the
island  is  not  larger  than  it  is. Yet  these  are  the


The  above  are  the  two  metaphysical  ai
have been given  to this great


ques-


tim.  They  are  not  the  worse  for  being  metaphy-
sical, provided  they  be  founded  (which  I  think
they  are)  in  right  reasoning:  but  they  are  of  a
nature  too  wide  to  be  brougnt  under  our  survey,
and  ft  is  often  difficult  to  apply  them  in  the  detail.
Our  speculations,  therefore,  are  perhaps  better
employed  when  they  confine  themselves  within  a
narrower  circle.

The  observations  which  follow,  are  of  this  more
limited,  but  more  determinate^  kind.

Of  iodily  pain,  the  principal  observation,  no
doubt  is  that  which  we  have  already  made,  and
already  dwelt  upon,  viz.  "  that  it  is  seldom  the'


object  of  contrivance ;  that  when  it  is  so,  the  con-
trivance rests  ultimately  in  good."

To  which,  however,  may  be  added,  that  the  an-


nexing of  pain  to  the  means  of  destruction,  is  a


salutary  provision;  inasmuch  as  it  teaches  vigi-
lance and  caution ;  both  gives  notice  of  danger,
and  excites  those  endeavours  which  may  be  neces-
sary to  preservation.  The  evil  consequence,  which
-  ■ -  t  of  that  ' " '


i  arises  from  the  want  of  that  timely  in-
timation of  danger  which  pain  gives,  is  known  to
the  inhabitants  of  cold  countries,  by  the  example
of  frost-bitten  limbs.  I  have  conversed  with  pa-
tients who  had  lost  toes  and  fingers  by  this  cause.
They  have  in  general  told  me,  that  they  were  to-
tally unconscious  of  any  local  uneasiness  at  the
time.  Some  I  have  heard  declare,  that,  whilst
they  were  about  their  employment,  neither  their
afeuetion,  nor  the  state  of  the  air  was  unpleasant.
They  felt  no  pain ;  they  suspected  no  mischief;
till,  by  the  application  or  warmth,  they  discovered,
too  late,  the  fatal  injury  which  some  of  their  ex-
tremities had  suffered.  I  say  that  this  shows  the
use  of  pain,  and  that  we  stand  in  need  of  such  a
monitor.  I  believe  also  that  the  use  extends  farther
than  we  suppose,  or  can  now  trace ;  that  to  disa-
greeable sensations  we,  and  all  animals,  owe,,  or
have  owed,  many  habits  of  action  which  are  salu-
tary, but  which  are  become  so  familiar,  as  not
easily  to  be  referred  to  their  origin.

Pain  also  itself  is  not  without  its  alleviations.
It  may  be  violent  and  frequent ;  but  it  is  seldom
i  violent  and  long-continued:  and  its  pauses
i  become  positive  pleasures. It


i  the  power*  oi
tervals  of  ease,  which,  I  believe,  few  enjoyments
exceed.  A  man  resting  from  a  fit  of  the  stone  or
gout,  is,  for  the  time,  in  possession  of  feelings
which  undisturbed  health  eannot  impart.  They
may  be  dearly  bought,  but  still  they  are  to.  be  set
against  the  price.  And,  indeed,  it  depends  upon
the  duration  and  urgency  of  the  pain,  whether
they  be  dearly  bought  or  not  I  am  far  from  be-
ing sure,  that  a  man  is  not  a  gainer  by  suffering*
moderate  interruption  of  bodily  ease  for  a  couple
of  hours  out  of  thejbur-and-twenty.  Two  very
common  observations  favour  this  opinion :  one  is,
that  remissions  of  pain  call  forth,  from  those  who
experience  them,  stronger  expressions  of  satisfac-
tion and  of  gratitude  towards  both  the  author  and
the  instruments  of  their  relief,  than  are  excited  by
advantages  of  any  other  kind :  the  second  is,  that
the  spirits  of  sick  men  do  not  sink  in  proportion
to  the  acuteness  of  their  sufferings;  but  rather
appear  to  be  roused  and  supported,  not  by  pain,
but  by  the  high  degree  of  comfort  which  they' de-
rive from  its  cessation,  or  even  its  subsidency,
whenever  that  occurs ;  and  which  they  taste  with
a  relish,  that  diffuses  some  portion  of  mental  com-
placency over  the  whole  of  that  mixed  state  of
sensations  in  which  disease  has  placed  them.

In  connexion  with  bodily  pain  may  be  consider-
ed bodily  di$e<ut}  whether  painful  or  not.  Few
diseases  are  fatal.  I  have  before  me  the  account
of  a  dispensary  in  the  neighbourhood,  which  states
six  years1  experience  as  follows:

Admitted - - - - 6490

Cured 547G

Dead 234

And  this  I  suppose  nearly  to  agree  with  what
other  similar  institutions  exhibit.  Now,  in  aD
these  cases,  some  disorder  must  have  been  felt,  or
the  patients  would  not  have  applied  for  a  remedy ;
yet  we  see  how  large  a  proportion  of  the  ma  lathes
which  were  brought  forward,  have  either  yielded
to  proper  treatment,  or,  what  is  mom  probable,
ceased  of  their  own  accord.  We  owe  these  fre-
quent recoveries,  and,  where  recovery  does  not
take  place,  this  patience  of  the  human  constitution
under  many  of  the  distempers  by  which  it  is  vi-
sited, to  two  benefactions  of  our  nature.  One  is,
that  she  works  within  certain  limits ;  allows  of  a
certain  latitude  within  which  health  may  be  pre-
served, and  within  the  confines  of  which  it  onry
suffers  a  graduated  diminution.  Different  auan-
rities  of  rood,  different  degrees  of  exercise,  differ-
ent portions  of  sleep,  different  states  of  the  atmos-
phere, are  compatible  with  the  possession  of  health.
So  likewise  it  is  with  the  secretions  and  excre-
tions, with  many  internal  functions  of  the  body,
and  with  the  state,  probably,  of  most  of  its  in-
ternal organs.  They  may  vary  considerably,  not
only  without  destroying  life,  but  without  occasion-
ing any  high  degree  of  lnoonvenioncy.  The
other  property  of  our  nature  to.  which  we  are  still
more  beholden,  is  its  constant  endeavour  to  restore
itself  when  disordered,  to  its  regular  course.  The
fluids  of  the  body  appear  to  possess  a  power  of
separating  and  expelling  any  noxious  substance
which  may  have  mixed  itself  with.  them.  This
they  do,  in  eruptive  fevers,  by  a  kind  of  deepuma-
tion,  as  Sydenham  calls  it,  analogous  in  some
measure  to  the  intestine  action  by  which  ferment-
ing liquors  work  the  ycst  to  the  surface.  The  so-
lids, on  their  port,  when  their  action  is  obstructed,
not  only  resume  their  action,  aa  soon  aa  the  oh-


NATURAL  THEOLOGY.


419


atructkm  is  removed,  bat  they  ftrnggle  with  the
impediment  They  take  an  action  as  near  to  the
true  one,  as  the  difficulty  and  the  disorganization,
with  which  they  have  to  contend,  will  allow  of.

Of  mortal  diseases,  the  great  use  is  to  reconcile
ne  to  death..  The  horror  of  death  proves  the'  va-
lue of  fife.  But  it  is  in  the  power  of  disease  to
abate,  or  even  extinguish,  this  horror:  which  it
does  in  a  wonderful  manner,  and,  oftentimes,  by  a
soild  imperceptible  gradation.  Every  man  who
has  been  placed  in  actuation  to  observe  it,  is  sur-
prised with  the  change  which  has  been  wrought
m  himself,  when  he  compares  the  view  which  he
entertains  of  death  upon  a  sick-bed,  with  the
heartpsinking  dismay  with  which  he  should  some
time  ago  have  met  it  in  health.  There  is  no  simi-
litude between  the  sensations  of  a  man  led  to  ex-
ecution,'and  the  calm  expiring  of  a  patient  at  the
close  of  his  disease.  Death  to  him  is  only  the  last
of  a  long  train  Of  changes;  in  his  progress  through
which,  it  is  possible  that  he  may  experience  no
■hocks  or  sudden  transitions. *-

Death  itself,  as  a  mode  of  removal  and  of  suc-
cession, is  so  connected  with  the  whole  order  of
our  animal  world,  that  almost  every  thing  in  that
world  must  be  changed,  to  be  able  to  do  without
it  It  may  seem  likewise  impossible  to  separate
the  fear- of  death  from  the  enjoyment  of  life,  or
the  perception  of  that  fear  from  rational  natures.
Brutes' are  in  a  great  measure  delivered  from  all
anxiety  on  this  account  by  the  inferiority  of  their
acuities;  or  -rather  they  seem  to  be  armed  with
the  apprehension  of  death  just  sufficiently  to  put
them  upon  the  means  of  preservation,  and  no
Jarther.  But  would  a  human  being  wish  to  pur-
chase this  immunity  at  the  expense  of  those  men-
tal powers  which  enable  him  to  look  forward  to
thefature'l

Death  implies  separation:  and  the  loss  of  those
whom  we  love,  must  necessarily,  bo  far  as  we  can
conceive,  be  accompanied  with  pain.  To  the
brute  creation,  nature  seems  to  have  stepped  in
with  some  secret  provision  for  their  relief,  under
the  rupture  of  their  attachments.  In  their  in-
stincts towards  their  oflspring,  and  of  their  off-
spring, to  them,  I  have  often  been  surprised  to  ob-
serve how  ardently  they  love,  and  how  soon  they
forget  The  pertinacity  of  human  sorrow,  (upon
which,  time  also,  at  length,  lays  its  softening  hand,)
is  probably,  therefore,  in  some  manner  connected
with  the  qualities  of  our  rational  or  moral  nature.
One  thins;  however  is  clear,  viz.  that  it  is  better
that  we*  should  possess  affections;  the  sources  of
so  many  virtues,  and  so  many  joys,  although  .they
be  exposed  to  the  incidents  of  life,  as  well  as  the
interruptions  of  mortality,  than,  by  the  want  of
them,  tap  reduced  to  a  state  of  selfishness,  apathy,
sjnd  quietism.

Of  other  external  evils,  (still  confining  ourselves
to  what  are  called  physical  or  natural  evils,)  a  con-
siderable part  come  within  the  scope  of  the  follow-
ing observation : — The  great  principle  of  human
satisfaction  is  engagement,  it  is  a  most  just  dis-
tinction, which  the  late  Mr.  Tucker  has  dwelt
upon  so  largely  in  his  works,  between  pleasures
in  which  we  are  passive,  and  pleasures  m  which
wre  are  active.  And,  I  believe,  every  attentive
observer  of  human  life  will  assent  to  his  posi-
tion, that,  however  grateful  the  sensations  may
occasionally  be  in  which  we  are  passive,  it  is  not
these,  but  the  latter  class  of  our  pleasures,  which
^_. t^.  ^ ._ wnjBn  g^ppiy  jhat  regular


stream  of  moderate  and  miaceHaneouB  enjoyments,
in  which  happiness,  as  distinguished  from  volup-
tuousnem,  consists.  Now  for  rational  occupation,
which  is,  m  other  words,  for  the  very  material  or
contented  existence,  there  would  be  no  place  left,
if  either  the  things  with  which  we  had  to  do  weie
absolutely  impracticable  to  our  endeavours,  or  if
they  were  too  obedient  to  our  uses.  A  world  fur-
nished with  advantages  on  one  side,  and  beset  with
difficulties,  wants,  and  inconveniences,  on  the
other,  is  the  proper  abode  of  free,  rational,  and  so*
tive  natures,  being  the  fittest  to  stimulate  and  ex-
ercise their  faculties.  The  very  refractoriness  of
the  objects  thev  have  to  deal  with  contributes  to
this  purpose.  A  world  in  which  nothing  depended
upon  ourselves,  however  it.  might  have  suited  an
imaginary  race  of  beings,  would  not  have  suited
mankind.  Their  skill,  prudence,  industry ;  their
various  arts,  and  their  best  attainments,  from  the
application  of  which  they  draw,  if  not  their  high-
est, their  most  permanent  gratifications,  would  be
insignificant)  if  things  could  be  either  moulded  by
our  volitions,  or,  of  their  own  accord,  conformed
themselves  to  our  views  and  wishes.  Now  it  is  in
this  refractoriness  that  we  discern  the  seed  and
principle  of  physical  evil,  as  far  as  it  arises  from
that  which  is  external  to  us.  •

Civil  evils,  or  the  evils  of  civil  life,  are  much
more  easily  disposed  of,  than  physical  evils;  be-
cause they  are,  in  truth,  of  much  less  inagnitude,
and  also  because  they  result,  by  a  kind  of  neces-
sity, not  only  from  the  constitution  of  our  nature,
but  from  a  part  of  that  constitution  which  no
one  would  wish  to  see  altered.  The  case  is  this:
Mankind  will  in  every  country  breed  up  torn  cer-
tain point  of  distress/  That  point  may  be  differ-
ent in  different  countries  or  ages,  according  to  the
established  usages  of  life  in  each.  It  will  also
shift  upon  the  scale,  so  as  to  admit  of  a  greater  or
less  number  of  inhabitants,  according  as  the  quan-
tity of  provision,  which  is  either  produced  in  the
country,  or  supplied  to  it  from  other  countries,
may  happen  to  vary.  But  there  must  always  be
such  a  point,  and  the  specie* will  always  breed  up
to  it  The  order  of  generation  proceeds  hy  some-
thing like  a  geometrical  progression.  The  in-
crease of  provision,  under  circumstances  even  the
most  advantageous,  can  only  assume  the  fprm  of
an  arithmetic  series.  Whence  it  follows,  that  the
population  will  always  overtake  the  provision,
will  pass  beyond  the  fine  of  plenty,  and  will  con-
tinue to  increase,  till  checked  by  the  difficulty  of
procuring  subsistence.*  Such  difficulty  therefore,
along  with  its  attendant  circumstances,  must  be
found  in  every  old  country:  and  these  circum-
stances constitute  what  we  call  poverty,  which,
necessarily,  imposes  labour,  servitude,  restraint.

It  seems  impossible  to  people  a  country  with  in-
habitants who  shall  be  all  easy  in  circumstances.
For  suppose  the  thing  to  be  done,  there  would  be
such  marrying  and  giving  in  marriage  amongst
them,  as  would  in  a  few  years  change  the*  face  of
affairs  entirely,  t.  e.  as  would  increase  the  con-
sumption of  those  articles,  which  supplied  .  the
natural  or  habitual  wants  of  the  country,  to  such
a  degree  of  scarcity,  as  must  leave  the  greatest
part  of  the  inhabitants  unable  to  procure  them
without  toilsome  endeavours,  or,  out  of  the  differ-
ent kinds  of  these  articles,  to  procure  any  kind

•  8m  a  statemaat  of  tUs  subject  in  a  lata  treaties
upon  population.


480


NATURAL  THEOLOGY.


ex^  tint  whfehitomorteafy  produced.  And
this,  in  Act,  describes  the  condition  of  the  mass  of
the  community  in  all  countries ;  a  condition  una-
voidably, as  it  should  seem,  resulting  from  the  pro-
vision which  is  made  in  the  human,  in  comm«n
with  all  animal  constitutions,  for  the  perpetuity
and  multiplication  of  the  species.

It  need  not  however  dishearten  any  endeavours
for  the  public  service,  to  know  that  population
naturally  treads  upon  the  heels  of  improvement.
If  the  condition  of  a  people  be  meliorated,  the  con-
sequence will  be  either  that  the  mean  happiness
will  be  increased,  or  a  greater  number  partake  of
it:  or,  which  is  most  likely  to  happen,  that  both
effects  will  take  place  together.  There  may  be
limits  fixed  by  nature  to  both,  but  they  are  limits
not  yet  attained,  nor  even  approached,  in  any
country  of  the  world.

Ana  when  we  speak  of  limits  at  all,  we  have
respect  only  to  provisions  for  animal  wants.
There  are  sources,  and  means,  and  auxiliaries,
and  augmentations,  of  human  happiness,  commu-
nicable without  restriction  of  numbers ;  as  capable
of  being  possessed  by  a  thousand  persons  as  by
one.  Such  are  those,  which  flow  from  a  mild,
contrasted  with  a  tyrannic  government,  whether
civil  or  domestic:  those  which  spring  from  reli-
gion ;  those  which  grow  out  of  a  sense  of  security ;
those  which  depend  upon  habits  of  virtue,  sobriety,
moderation,  order;  those,  lastly,  which  are  found
in  the  possession  of  well-directed  tastes  and  de-
sires, compared  with  the  dominion  of  tormenting,
penurious,  contradictory,  unsatisfied,  and  nnsatis-
fiable  passions.

The  distinction*  of  civil  fife  are  apt  enough  to
be  regarded  as  evils,  by  those  who  sit  under  them ;
but,  in  my  opinion,  with  very  little  reason.

In  the  first  place,  the  advantages  which  the
higher  conditions  of  life  are  supposed  to  confer,
bear  no  proportion  in  value  to  the  advantages
which  are  bestowed  by  nature.  The  gifts  of  na-
ture always  surpass  the  gifts  of  fortune.  How
much,  for  example,  is  activity  better  than  attend-
ance; beauty  than  dress:  appetite,  digestion,  and
tranquil  bowels,  than  all  the  studies  of  cookery,
or  than  the  most  costly  compilation  of  forced  or
far-fetched  dainties!

Nature  has  a  strong  tendency  to  equalization.
Habit  the  instrument  of  nature,  is  a  great  level-
ler ;  the  familiarity  which  it  induces,  taking  off
the  edge  both  of  our  pleasures  and  our  sufferings.
Indulgences  which  are  habitual,  keep  us  in  ease,
and  cannot  be  carried  much  farther.  So  that,
with  respect  to  the  gratifications  of  which  the
senses  are  capable,  the  difference  is  by  no  means
proportionable  to  the  apparatus.  Nay,  so  far  as
superfluity  generates  fastidiousness,  the  difference
iron  the  wrong  side.

It  is  not  necessary  to  contend,  that  the  advan-
tages derived  from  wealth  are  none,  (under  due
regulations  they  are  certainly  considerable,)  but
that  they  are  not  greater  than  they  ought  to  be.
Money  is  the  sweetener  of  human  toil ;  the  substi-
tute fir  coercion ;  the  reconciler  of  labour  with
liberty.  It  is,  moreover,  the  stimulant  of  enter-
prize  in  all  projects  and  undertakings,  as  well  as
of  diligence  in  the  most  beneficial  arts  and  employ-
ments. Now  did  affluence,  when  possessed,  con-
tribute nothing  to  the  happiness,  or  nothing  be-
yond the  mere  supply  of  necessaries;  and  the
secret  should  come  to  be  discovered ;  we  might  be
in  danger  of  teeing  great  part  of  the  uses,  which


are,  at  present,  derived  to  us  through  this
ant  medium.  Not  only  would  (he  tranquillity  of
social  tife  be  put  in  peril  by  the  want  of  a  motive
to  attach  men  to  their  private  concerns:  but  the
satisfaction  which  all  men  receive  from  success  in
their  respective  occupations,  which  collectively
constitutes  the  great  mass  of  human  comfort,
would  be  done  away  in  its  very  principle; .

With  respect  to  etation,  as  it  is  distinguished
from  riches,  whether  it  confer  authority  over
others,  or  be  invested  with  honours  which -apply
solely  to  sentiment  and  imagination,  the  Until  is,
that  what  is  gained  by  rising  through  the  ranks  of
life,  is  not  more  than  sufficient  to  draw  forth  the
exertions  of  those  who  are  engaged  in  the  pursuits
.which  lead  to  advancement,  and  which,  in  gene-
ral, are  such  as  ought  to  be  encouraged.  Distinc-
tions of  this  sort  are  subjects  much  more  of  com-
petition than  of  enjoyment:  and  in  that  com  petition
their  use  consists.  It  is  not  as  hath  been  rightly
observed,  by  what  the  lord  mayor  feels  in  his
coach,  but  by  what  the  apprentice  feels  who  gazes
at  him,  that  the  public  is  served.

As  we  approach  the  summits  of  human  j
ness,  the  comparison  of  good  and  evil,  '
spect  to  personal  comfort^  becomes  stity  more  pro-
blematical ;  even '  allowing  to  ambition  aU  its
pleasures.  The  poet  asks,  "What  is  grandeur,
what  is  power :"  The  philosopher  answers,  "  Con-
straint and  plague:  et  in  maxima*  antique  fortu-
nd  minimum  licere.n  One  very  common  error
misleads  the  opinion  of  mankind  on  this  bead,  vie.
that,  universally,  authority  is  pleasant,  subnrissioa
painful.  In  the  general  course  of  human  affaire,
the  very  reverse  of  this  is  nearer  to  the  truth.
Command  is  anxiety,  obedience  ease.

Artificial  distinctions  sometimes  promote  real
equality.  Whether  they  be  hereditary,  or  be  the
homage  paid  to  office,  or  the  respect  attached  by
public  opinion  to  particular  professions,  they  serve
to  confront  that  grand  unavoidable  distinction
which  arises  from  property,  and  which  is  most
overbearing  where  there  is  no  other.  It  is  of  the
nature  of  property,  not  only  to  be  hregulariy  dis-
tributed, out  to  run  into  large  masses.  Pubhc
laws  should  be  so  contracted  as  to  favour  its  <fi£
fusion  as  much  as  they  can.  But  all  that  can  he
done  by  laws,  consistently  with  that  degree  of  go-
vernment of  ins  property  which  ought  to  be  felt
to  the  subject,  will  not  be  sufficient  to  counteract
this  tendency.  There  must  always  therefore  be
the  difference  between  rich  and  poor:  and  this
difference  will  be  the  more  grinding,  when  no  pre-
tension is  allowed  to  be  set  up  against  it

So  that  the  evils,  if  evils  they  must  be  called,
which  spring  either  from  the  necessary  subordina-
tions of  civil  life,  or  from  the  distinctions  which
have,  naturally,  though  not  necessarily,  grown  up
in  most  societies,  so  long  as  they  are  unaccompa-
nied by  privileges  injurious  or  oppressive  to  the
rest  of  the  community,  are  such,  as  may,  even  by
the  most  depressed  ranks,  be  endured  with  very
little  prejudice  to  their  comfort

The  mischief*  of  which  mankind  are  the  occa-
sion to  one  another,  by  their  private  wickedness
and  cruelties,  by.  tyrannical  exercises  of  power;  by
rebellions  against  just  authority ;  by  wars ;  by  na-
tional jealousies  and-  competitions  operating  to  the
destruction  of  third  countries ;  or  by  other  instannfsi
of  misconduct  either  in  individuals  or  societies,  are
all  to  be  resolved  into  the  character  of  man  as  ft
free  agent. Free  agency  in  its  very*


NATURAL  THEOLOGY.


481


tains  liability  to  abuse.  Yet,  if  von  deprive. roan
of  his  free  agency,  you  subvert  his  nature.  You
may  have  order  from  him  and  regularity,  as  you
may  from  the  tides  or  the  trade-winds,  but  you
put  an  end  to  his  moral  character,  to  virtue,,  to
merit,  to  accountableness,  to  the  use  indeed  of  rea-
son. To  which  must  be  added  the  observation,
that  even  the  bad  qualities  of  mankind  have  an
origin  in  their  good  ones.  The  case  is  this :  Hu-
-  man  passions  are  either  necessary  to  human  wel-
fare, or  capable  of  being  made,  and,  in  a  great
majority  or  instances,  in  feet  made,  conducive  to
its  happiness.  These  passions  are  strong  and
general;  and,  perhaps,  would  not  answer  their
purpose  unless  they  were  so.  But  strength  and
generality,  when  it  is  expedient  that  particular
circumstances  should  be  respected,  become,  if  left
to  themselves,  excess  and  misdirection.  From
which  excess  and  misdirection,  the  vices  of  man-
kind (the  causes,  no  doubt,  of  much  misery)
appear  to  spring.  This  account,  whilst  it  shows
us  the  principle  of  vice,  shows  us,  at  the  same'
time,the  province  of  reason  and  of  self-government :
the  want  also  of  every  support  which  can  be  pro-
cured to  either  from  the  aids  of  religion ;  and  it
shows  this,  without  having  recourse  to  any  native,
gratuitous  malignity,  in  the  human  constitution.
Mr.  Hume,  in  Tub  posthumous  dialogues,  asserts,
indeed,  of  idleness,  or  aversion  to  labour,  f  which
he  states  to  lie  at  the  root  of  a  considerable  part
ef  the  evils  which  mankind  suffer,)  that  it  is  sira-
pjy  and  merely  bad.  But  how  does  he  distinguish
idleness  from  the  love  of  easel  or  is  he  sure,  that
the  love  of  ease  in  individuals  is  not  the  chief
foundation  of  social  tranquillity  1  It  will  be  found,
I  believe,  to  be  true,  that  in  every  community
there  is  a  large  class  of  its  members,  whose  idle-
ness is  the  best  quality  about  them,  being  the
corrective  of  other  bad  ones.  If  it  were  possible,  in
every  instance,  to  give  a  right  determination  to  in-
dustry, we  could  never  have  too  much  of  it.  But
this  is  not  possible,  if  men  are  to  be  free.  And
without  this,  nothing  would  be  so  dangerous,  as
an  incessant,  universal,  indefatigable  activity.  In
the  civil  world,  as  well  as  in  the  material,  it  is  the
vis  inertoewhich  keeps  things  in  their  places.


Natural  Theology  has  ever  been  pressed
With  this  question :  Why,  under  the  regency  of.
the  supreme  and  benevolent  Will,  should  there
be  in  the  world,  so  much,  as  there  is,  of  the  ap-
peaxance  of  chance?

The  suestion  m  its  whole  compass  ties  beyond
oar  rerncn:  but  there  are  not  wanting,  as  in  the
origin  of  evil,  answers  which  seem  to  have  con-
siderable weight  in  particular  cases,  and  also  to
embrace  a  considerable  number  of  cases.
.  I.  There  must  be  chance  in  the  midst  of  design :
fry  which  we  mean,  that  events  which  are  not  de-
signed, necessarily  arise  from  the  pursuit  of  events
which  are  designed.  One  man  travelling  to  York ,
meets  another  man  travelling  to  London.  Their
meeting  is  by  chance,  is  accidental,  and  so  would
be  called  and  reckoned,  though  the  journeys
Which  produced  the  meeting  were,  both  of  them,
undertaken  with  design  and  from  deliberation.
The  meeting,  though  accidental,  was  nevertheless
Jrypotheticany  necessary  (which  is  the  only  sort  of
necessity  that  is  intelligible :)  for  if  the  two  jour-
neys wen  commenced  at  the  time,  pursued  in  the
3P


direction,  and  with  the  speed,  hvwhich  end  with
which,  they  were  in  feet  begun  and  performed,
the  meeting  could  net  be  avoided.  There  was
not,  therefore,  the  less  necessity  in  it  for  its  being
by  chancer  Again,  the  rencounter  might  be
most  unfortunate,  though  the  errands,,  upon  which
each  party  set  out  upon  his  journey,  were  the
most  innocent  or  the  most  laudable.  The  bye
effect  may  be  unfavourable.^vithout  impeachment
of  the  proper  purpose,  for  the  sake  of  which  the
train,  from  the  operation  ofrwhich  these  conse-
quences ensued,  was  pot  in  motion.  Although
no  cause  act  without  a  good  purpose  r  accidental
consequences,  like  these,  may  be  either  good  or

II.  The  appearance  of  chance  ynh  always  bear
a  proportion  to  the  ignorance  of  the  observer.
The  cast  of  a  die  as  regularly  follows  the  laws  of
motion,  as  the  going  of  a  watch ;  yet,  because  we
can  trace  the  operation  of  those  laws  through  the
works  and  movements  of  the  watch,  and  cannot
trace  them  in  the  shaking  and  throwing  of  the
die  ("though  the  laws  be  the  same,  and  prevail
equally  in  both  cases,)  we  call  the  turning  up  of
the  number  of  the  die  chance,  the  pointing  or  the
index  of  the  watch,  machinery,  order,  or  by  some
name  which  excludes  chance.  It  is  the  same  in
those  events  which  depend  upon  the  will  of  a  free
and  rational  agent.  The  verdict  of  a  jury,  the  sen*
fence  of  a  Judge,  the  resolution  of  an  assembly,
the  issue  of  a  contested  election,  will  have  more
or  less  of  the  appearance  of  chance,  might  be  more
or  less  the  subject  of  a  wager,  according  as  we
were  less  or  more  acquainted  with  the  reasons
which  influenced  the  deliberation.  The  differ-
ence resides  in  the  information  of  the  observer,
and  not  in  the  thing  itself;  which,  in  all  the  cases
proposed,  proceeds  from  intelligence,  from,  inind,
from  counsel,  from  design.

Now  when  this  one  cause  of  the  appearance  of
chance,  viz.  the  ignorance  of  the  observer,  comes
to  be  applied  to  the  operations  of  the  Deity,  it  is
easy  to  foresee  how  fruitful  it  must  prove  of  dif-
ficulties and  of  seeming  confusion.  It  is  only  to
think  of  the  Deity,  to  perceive  what  variety  of
objects,  what  distance  of  tims,  what  extent  of
space  and  action,  his  counsels  may,  or  rather
must,  comprehend.  Can.it  be  wondered  at,  that,
of  the  purposes  which  dwell  in  such  a  mind  as
this,  so  small  a  part  should  be  known  to  usl  Ik
is  only  necessary,  therefore,  to  bear  in  our  thought,
that  in  proportion  to  the  inadequateness  of  our  in-
formation, will  be  the  quantity,  in  the  world,  of
apparent  chance.

-III.  In  a  great  variety  of  cases,  and  of  esses
comprehending  numerous  subdivisions,  it  appears,
for  many  reasons,  to  be  better  that  events .  rise  up
by  chance,  or  more  properly  speaking  with  the
appearance  of  chance,  than  according  to  any  ob-
servable rule  whatever.  This  is  not  seldom  the
case  evdn  in  human  arrangements.  Each  persons
place  and  precedency,  in  a  public  meeting,  maybe
determined  by  lot.  Work  and  labour  may  be  al-
lotted. Tasks  and  burdens  may  be  allotted*

Opemmque  laborero

Partibtts  squabal  Justia.  aut  wru  trabebau

Military  service  and  station  may  be  allotted.  The
distribution  of  provision  may  be  made  by  lot,  as  it
is  in  a  sailor's  mess ;  in  some  cases  also,  the  dis-
tribution of  favours  may  be  made  by  lot.  In  all
these  cases,  it  seems  to  be  ackinmlss^,  that  there


489


NATURAL  THEOLOGY.


tie  advantage*  in  permitting  event*  to  chance,
superior  to  those,  which  would  or  could  arise
from  regulation.  In  all  these  cases  also,  though
•vents  rise  up  in  the  way  of  chanee,  it  is  by  ap-
pointment that  they  do  so.

In  other  events,  and  such  as  are  independent  of
human  will,  the  reasons  for  this-  preference  of  un-
certainty to  rule,  appear  to  be  *ti(l  stronger.  For
example :  it  seems  to  be  expedient  that  the  period
of  human  life  should  be  uncertain.  Did  mortality
follow  any  fixed  rule,  it  would  produce  a  security
in  those  that  were  at  a  distance  from  it,  which
would  lead  to  the  greatest  disorders;  and  a  horror
in  those  who  approached  it,  similar  to  that  which
a  condemned [prisoner  feels  on  the  night  before  his
execution.  But,  that  death  be  uncertain,  the
young  must  sometimes  die  as  well  as  the  old.  Also
were  deaths  never  sudden,  they  who  are  in  health
would  be  too  confident  of  life.  The  strong  and
the  active,  who  want  most  Jo  be  warned  and
checked,  would  live  without  apprehension  or  re-
straint On  the  other  hand,  were  sudden  deaths
v/ery  frequent,  the  sense  of  constant  jeopardy
would  interfere  too  much  with  the  degree,  or  ease
and  enjoyment  intended  for  us ;  and  human  life
be  too  precarious  for  the  business  and  interests
which  belong  to  it  There  coufti  not  be  depend-
ence either  upon  our  own  lives,  or  the  lives  of
those  with  whom  we  were  connected,  sufficient
to  cany  on  the  regular  offices  of  human  society.
The  manner,  therefore,  in  which  death  is  made
to  occur,  conduces  to  the  purposes  of  admonition,
without  overthrowing  the  necessary  stability  of
numsn  sfleirs.

Diatom  being  the  forerunner  of  death,  there  is
the  same  reason  for  its  attacks  coming  upon  us
unb>r  the  appearance  of  ojiance,  as  there  is  for
uncertainty  m  the  time  of  death  itself.

The  seasons  are  a  mixture  of  regularity  and
chance.  They  are  regular  enough  to  authorize
expectation,  whilst  their  being,  in  a  considerable
degree,  irregular,  induces,  on  the  part  of  the  cul-
tivators of  the  sod,  a  necessity  for  personal  attend-
ance, for  activity,  vigilance,  precaution.  It  is
this  necessity  which  creates  farmers;  which
divides  the  profit  of  the  soil  between  the  owner
and  the  occupier ;  which  by  reauiring  expedients,
by  increasing  employment,  and  by  rewarding  ex-
penditure, promotes  agricultural  arts,  and  agricul-
tural fife,  of  al|  modes  of  life,  the  best,  being  the
most  conducive  to  health,  to  virtue,  to  enjoyment.
I  believe  it  to  be  found  hi  feet,  that  where  the  soil
is  the  most  fruitful,  and  the  seasons  the  most  con-
stant, there  the  condition  of  the  cultivators  of  the
earth  is  most  depressed  Uncertainty,  therefore,
has  its  use  even  to  those  who  sometimes  complain
of  it  the  most  Seasons  of  scarcitythemselves  are
not  without  their  advantages.  They  call  forth
new  exertions;  they  set  contrivance  and  ingenui-
ty at  work ;  jthey  give  birth,  to  improvements  in
agriculture  and  economy;  they  promote  the  in-
vestigation and  management  of  public  resources.

Again;  there  are  strong  intelligible  reasons,
why  there  should  exist  in  human  society,  great
disparity  of  wealth  and  station ;  not  only  as  these
things  are  acquired  in  different  degrees,  but  at  the
first  setting  out  of  life.  In  order,  for  instance,  to
answer  the  various  demands  of  civil  life,  there
ought  to  be  amongst  the  members  of  every  civil
society  a  diversity  of  education,  which  can  only
belong  to  an  original  diversity  of  circumstances.
As  this  sort  sjf disparity,  wnich  ought  to  take


phee  from  the  beginning  of  fife,  moat,  e*  kffo-
thtsi,  be  previous  to  the  merit  or  demerit  of  the
persons  upon  whom  it  fells,  can  it  be  better  dis-
posed, of  than  by  chance'}  Parentage  is  that  sort
of  chance :  yet  it  is  the  commanding  circumstance
which  in  general  fixes  each  man's  place  in  civil
life,  along  with  every  thing  which  appertains  to
its  distinctions.  It  may  be  the  result  of  a  benefi-
cial rule,  that  the  fortunes  or  honours  of  the  father
devolve  upon  the  son ;  and,  as  it  should  seemyof a
still  more  necessary  rule,  that  the  low  or  laborious
condition  of  the  parent  be'  communicated  to  bis
family;  but  with  respect  to  the  successor  him— if
it  is  the  drawing  of  a  ticket  in  a  lottery.  Inequali-
ties, therefore,  of  fortune,  at  least  the  greatest  part
of  them,  •».  those,  which  attend  us  from  our  birth,
and  depend  'Upon  our  birth,  may  be  left,  as  they
are  left,  to  chance,  without  any  just  cause  for
questioning  the  regency  of  a  supreme  Disposer  of
events.

But  not  only  the  donation,  when  by  the  neces-
sity of  the  case  they  must  be  gifts,  but  even  the
acquirability  of  civil  advantages,  ought,  perhaps,
in  a  considerable  degree,  to  he  at  the  mercy  of
chance.  Some  would  have  all  the  virtuous  rich,
or,  at  least,  removed  from  the  evils  of  poverty,
without  perceiving,  I  suppose,  the  consequence,
that  all  the  poor  must  be^wicked.  And  how  such
a  society  could  be  kept  in  subjection  to  govern-
ment has  not  been  shown :  for  the  poor,  that  is,
they  who  seek  their  subsistence  by  constant  ma-
nual labour,  must  still  form  the  mass  of  the  com-
munity; otherwise  the  necessary  labour  of  fife
could  not  be  carried  on;  the  work  would  not  be
done,  which  the  wants  of  mankind  in  a  state  of
civilization,  and  still  more  in  a  state  of  refinement,
reouire  to  be  done.

It  appears  to  be  also  true,  that  the  exigencies  of
social  life  call  not  only  for  an  original  diversity  of
external  circumstances,  but  for  a  mixture  of  dif-
ferent faculties,  tastes,  and  tempers..  Activity  and
contemplation,  restlessness  and  quiet,  courage  and
timidity,  ambition  and  contentedness,  not  to  say
even  indolence  and  dulness,  are  wanted  in  the
world,  all  conduce  to  the  well  going  on  of  human
afiairs,  just  as  the  rudder,  the  sails,. and  the  bal-
last, of  a  ship,  all  perform  their  part  in  the  navi-
na.  Now,  since  these  characters  require  for
foundation  different  original  talents,  dii
dispositions,  perhaps  also  different  bodily  <
tutions;  and  since,  likewise,  it  is  apparently  ex-
pedient, that  they  be  promiscuously  scattered
amongst  the  different  classes  of  society :  can  the
distribution  of  talents,  dispositions,  and  the  con-
stitutions upon  which  they  depend,  be  bettermade
than  by  chance  ?

The  opposite*  of  apparent  chance,  are  con-
stancy and  sensible  interposition ;  every  degree  of
secret  direction  being  consistent  with  it  Now,  of
constancy,  or  of  fixed  and  known  rules,  we  have
seen  in  some  cases  the  inapplicability :  and  incon-
veniencies  which  we  do  not  see,  might  attend  their


application  in  other  c

Of  sensible  interposition,  we  may  be  permitted  \
to  remark,  that  a  Providence,  always  and  certain-  V"
lv  distinguishable,  would  be  neither  more  nor  less r~
than  miracles  rendered  frequent  and  common.  It V~
is  difficult  to  judge  of  the  state  into  which  this
would  throw  us.  It  is  enough  to  say,  that  it  wonal
cast  us  upon  a  quite  different  dispensation  finoa
that  under  which  we  live. It  would  be  a  total
and  radical  change,  And  the  change  would  deeply


NATURAL  THEOLOGY.


483


great*
dertl


tflect,  or  perhaps  subvert,  the  whole  conduct  of
human  affiun.  I  can  readily  believe,  that,  other
circumstances  being  adapted  to' it,  such,*  state
might  be  better  than  oar  present  state.  It  may
be  the  state  of  other  beings;  it  may  be  ours  here*-
aiter.  Bat  the  question  with  which  we  are  now
concerned  is,  how  far  it  would  be  consistent  wity
our  condition,  supposing  it  in  other  respects  to  re-
main as  it  is  1  And  in  this  question  there  seem  to
be  reasons  of  great  moment  on  the  negative  side.
For  instance :  so  long  as  bodily  labour  continues,
on  so  many  accounts,  to  be  necessary  for  the  bulk
of  mankind,  any  dependency  upon  supernatural
aid,  by  unfixing  those  motives  which  promote  ex-
ertion, or  by  relaxing  those  habits  which  engen-
der patient  industry,  might  introduce  negligence,
inactivity,  and  disorder,  Into  the  most  useful  occu-
pations of  human  life ;  and  thereby  deteriorate  the
condition  of  human  life  itself.

At  moral  agents,  we  should  experience  a  still
~»ter  alteration :  of  which  more  will  be  said  un-

r  the  next  article.  "

.  Although  therefore  the  Deity,  who  possesses
the  power  of  winding  and  turning,  as  he  please*,
the  course  of  causes  which  issue  from  himself,  do
in  fact  interpose  to  alter  or  intercept  effects,  which
withoutsuch  interposition  would  have  takenplacc ;
yet  it  is  by  no  means  incredible,  that  his  provi-
dence, which  always  rests  upon  final  good,  may
have  made  a  reserve  with  respect  to  the  manifest-
ation of  his  interference,  a  part  of  the  very  plan
which  he  has  appointed  for  our  terrestrial  exist-
ence, and  a  part  conformable  with,  or,  in  some
sort,  rjequired  by,  other  parts  of  the  same  plan.  It
is  at  any  rate  evident,  that  a  large  and  ample  pro-
vince remains  for  the  exercise  of  Providence,
without  its*  being  naturally  perceptible  by  us ;  be-
cause obscurity,  when  applied  to  the  interruption
of  Jaws,  bean  a  necessary  proportion  to  the  imper-
fection of  our  knowledge  when  applied  to  the  laws
themselves,  or  rather  to  the  effects  which  these
laws,  under  their  various  and  incalculable  combi-'
nations,  would  of  their  own  accord  produce.  And
if  it  be  said,  that  the  doctrine  of  Divine  Provi-
dence, by  reason  of  the  ambiguity  under  which  its"
exertions,  present  themselves,  can  be  attended
with  no  practical  influence-  upon. our  conduct;
that,  although  we  believe  ever  so  firmly  that  there
is  a  Providence,  we  must  prepare,  and  provide,
and  act,  as  if  there  were  none :  I  answer,  that  this
is  admitted;  and  that  we  farther  allege,  that  so  to
prepare,  and  so  to  provide,  is  consistent  with  the
most  perfect  assurance  of  the  reality  of  a  Provi-
dence :  and  not  only  so,  but  that  it  is  probably,  one
advantage  of  the  present  state  of  our  information,
that  our  provisions  and  preparations  are  not  dis-
turbed by  it.  Or  if  it  be  still  asked,  of  what  use
at  all  then  is  the  doctrine,  if  it  neither  alter  our
measures  nor  regulate  our  conduct?  I  answer
again,  that  it  is  o?  the  greatest  use,  but  that  it  is  a
doctrine  of  sentiment  and  piety,  not  (immediately
at  least)  of  action  or  conduct ;  that  it  applies  to
the  consolation  of  men's  minds,  to  their  devotions,
to  the  excitement  of  gratitude,  the  support  of  pa-
tience, the  keeping  alive  and  the  strengthening
of  every  motive  for  endeavouring  to  please  our
Maker ;  and  that  these  are  great  uses.

Of  all  views  under  which  human  fife  has
ever  been  considered,  the  most  reasonable  in  my
judgment  is  that,  which  regard*  it  as  a  state  of
probation.  If  the  course  of  the  world  was  sepa-
rated from  the  contrivances  of  nature,  1  do  not


know  that  it  would  be  necessary  to  look  for  any
other  account  of  it,  than  what,  if  it  may  be  called
an  account,  is  contained  in  the  answer,  that  events
rise  up  by  chance.  But  since  the  contrivances  of
nature  decidedly  evince  intention ;  and  since  the
course  of  the  world  and  the  contrivances  of  nature
have  the  same  author;  we  are,  by  the  force  of  this
connexion,  led  to  believe,  that  the  appearance,  tin*
der  which  events  take  place,  is  reconcilable  with
the  supposition  of  design  on  the  part  of  the  Deity.
It  is  enough  that  they  be  reconcilable  with  this
supposition ;  and  it  is  undoubtedly  true,  that  they
may  be  reconcilable,  though  we  cannot  reconcile
them.  The  mind,  however,  which  contemplates
the  works  of  nature,  and,  in  those  works,  sees  so
much  of  means  directed  to  ends,  of  beneficial  ef-
fects brought  about  by  wise  expedients,-  of  con-
certed trains  of  causes  terminating  in  the  happiest
results ;  so  much,  in  a  word,  of  counsel,  intention,
and  benevolence ;  a  mind,  I  say,  drawn  into  the
habit  of  thought  which  these  observations  excite,
can  hardly  turn  its  view1  to  the  condition' of  our
own  species,  without  endeavouring  to  suggest  to
itself  some  purpose,  some  design,  for  which  the
state  in  which  we  are  placed  is  fitted,  and  which
it  is  made  to  serve.  Now  we  assert  tne  most  pro-
bable supposition  to  be,  that  it  is  a  state  of  moral
probation ;  and  that  many  things  in  it  suit,  with
this  hypothesis,  which  suit  no  other.  It  is  not  a
state  of  unmixed  happiness,  or  of  happiness  sim-
ply: it  is  not  a  state  of  designed  misery,  or  of
misery  simply :  it  is  not  a  state  of  retribution :  it
is  not  a  state  of  punishment  It  suits  with  none
of  these  suppositions.  It  accords  much  better  with
the  idea  of  its  being  a  condition  calculated  for  the
production,  exercise,  and  improvement  of  moral
qualities,  with  a  view  to  a  future  state,  in  which
these  qualities,  after  being  so  produced,  exercised,
and  improved,  may,  by  a  new  and  more  favouring
constitution  of  things,  receive  their  reward,  or
become  their  own.  If  it  be  said,  that  this  is  to
enter  upon  a  religious  rather  than  a  philosophical
consideration ;  I  answer,  that  the  name  of  Reli-
gion ought  to  form  no  objection,  if  it  shall  turn
out  to  be  the  case,  that  the  more  religious  our
views  are,  the  more  probability  they  contain.  The
degree  of  beneficence,  of  benevolent  intention,  and
of  power,  exercised  in  the  construction  of  sensitive
beings,  goes  strongly  in  favour,  not  only  of  a  cre-
ative{  but  of  a  continuing  care,  that  is,  of  a  ruling
Providence.  The  degree  of  chance  which  appears
to  prevail  in  the  world,  requires  to  be  reconciled
with  this  hypothesis.  Now  it  is  one  thing  to
maintain  the  doctrine  of  Providence  along  with
that  of  a  future  state,  and  another  thing  without
it.  In  my  opinion  the  two  doctrines  must  stand
or  fall  together.  For  although  mare  of  this  ap-
parent chance  may  perhaps,  upon  other  principles,
be  accounted  for,  than  is  generally  suppbsed,  vet
a  future  state  alone  rectifies  all  disorders :  and  if  it
can  be  shown,  that  the  appearance  of  disorder  is
consistent  with  the  uses  of  life  as  a  prtfparatory
state,  or  that  in  some  respects  it  promotes  these
uses,  then,  so  1ar  as  this  hypothesis  may  be  ac-
cepted, the  jrround  of  the  difficulty  is  done  away.
•  In  the  wide  scale  of"  human  condition  there  is
not  perhaps  one  of  its  manifold  diversities,  which
does  not  bear  upon  the  design  here  suggested.
Virtue  is  infinitely  various.  There  is  no  situa-
tion in  which  a  rational  being  is  placed,  from
that  of  the  best  instructed  Christian,  down  to  the
condition  of  the  rudest  barbarian,  which  affords


464


NATURAL  THEOLOGY.


not  man  for  moral  tfftncy;  for  the  acouisition.
exercise,  and  display  of  voluntary  qualities,  good
and  bad.  Health  and  sickness,  enjoyment  and
suffering,  riches  and  poverty,  knowledge  and
ignorance,  power  and  subjection,  liberty  and
bondage,  civilization  and  barbarity,  have  all  their
offices  and  duties,  all  serve  for  the  formation  of
character*,  for  when  we  sneak  of  a  stats  of  trial,
it  must  be  remembered,  that  characters  are  not
only  tried,  or  proved,  or  detected,  but  that  they
are  generated  also,  jand  formed,  by  circumstances.
The  beat  dispositions  may  subsist  under  the  most
depressed,  the  most  afflicted  fortunes.  A  West-
Indian  slave,  who,  amidst  his  wrongs,  retains  his
benevolence,  I,  for  my  part,  look  upon  as  amongst
the  foremost  of  human  candidates  for  the  rewards
of  virtue.  Thejund  master  of  such  a  slave,  that
is,  he  who,  in  the  exercise  of  an  inordinate  autho-
rity, postpones,. in  any  degree,  his  own  interest  to
Bis  slave's  comfort,  is  likewise  a  meritorious  cha-
racter; but  still  he  is  inferior  to  his  slave.  All
however  which  I  contend  for,  is,  that  these  desti-
nies, opposite  as  they  may  be  in  every  other  view,
ate  botn  f  riofe  ;  and  equally  such.  The  observa-
tion may  be  applied  to  every  other  condition ;  to
-  the  whole  range  of  the  scale,  not  excepting  even
its  lowest  extremity.  Savage*  appear  to  us  all
alike;  but  it  is  owing  to  the  distance  at  which
we  view  savage  Kfe  that  we  perceive  in  it  no
discrimination  of  character.  1  make  no  doubt,
bat  that  moral  qualities,  both  food  and  bad,  are
called  into  action  as  much,,  and  that  they  subsist
in  as  great  variety,  in  these  inartificial  societies,
m  they  are.  or  do,  in  polished  life.  Certain  at
least  it  is,  that  the  good  and  ill  treatment  which
each  individual  meets  with,  depends  more  upon
the  choice  and  voluntary  conduct  of  those  about
him,  than  it  does  or  ought  to  do,  under  regular
civil  institutions,  and  the  coercion  of  public  Taws.
Go  again,  to  turn  our  eyes  to  the  other  end  of  the
scale ;  namely ,that  part  of  it  which  is  occupied  by
mankind  enjoying  the  benefits  of  learning,  to-
gether with  the  lights  of  revelation;  there  also,
the  advantage  is  aB  along  probationary.  Chris-
tianity itself,  I  mean  the  revelation  of  Christianity,
is  not  only  a  blessing,  but  a  trial.  It  is  one  of  the
diversified  means  by  which  the  character  is  exer-
cised: and  they  who  require  of  Christianity,
that  the  revelation  of  it  should  be  universal,  may
possibly  be  found  to  require,  that  one  species  of
probation  should  be  adopted,  if  not  to  the  exclu-
sion of  others,  at  least  to  the  narrowing  of  that
variety  which  the  wisdom  of  the  Deity  hath  ap-
pointed to  this  part  of  his  moral  economy.*

Now  if  this  supposition  be  well  foundetj ;  that
is,  if  it  be  true,  that  our  ultimate,  or  our  most  per-
manent happiness,  will  depend,  not  upon  the
temporary  condition. into  wnich  we  are  cast,  but
upon  our  behaviour  in  it ;  then  is  it  a  much  more
fit  subject  of  chance  than  we  usually  allow  or
apprehend  it  to  be,  in  what  manner  the  variety  of
external  circumstances,  which  subsist  in  the  hu-


*  Tim  reader  will  observe,  that  I  speak  of  the  revela-
tion of  Christianity  ai  distinct  from  Christianity  itself.
The  SMMftMifam  may  already  be  universal.  That  part
of  mankind  which  never  heard  of  Christ's  name,  may
nevertheless  be  redeemed,  that  is,  be  placed  in  a  better
condition,  with  respect  to  their  future  state,  by  his  in-
tervention; may  be  the  objects  of  his  benignity  and
intercession,  as  well  as  of  the  propitiatory  virtue  of  his
aassioo.  But  this  is  not "  natural  theology ;"  therefore
I  will  not  dwell  longer  apon  it.


man  world,  isdsjtribttfed  amongst  the  i
of  the  species.  "  This  life  being  a  state  of  pro-
bation, it  is  immaterial, "  says  fidusseaa,  "what
kind  of  trials  we  experience  in  it,  provided  they
produce  their  e fleets. '  Of  two  agents  who  stand
indifferent  to  the  moral  Governor  of  the  universe,
one  may  be  exercised  by  riches,  the  other  by
poverty.  The  treatment  of  these  two  shall  ap-
pear to  be  very  opposite,  whilst  in  truth  it  is  the
same:  for  though,  in  many  respects,  there  be
great  disparity  between  the  conditions  assigned,
in  one  main  article  there  may  be  none,  viz.  in
that  they  are  alike  trials ;  have  both  their  duties
and  temptations,  not  less  arduous  or  less  danger-
ous in  one  case  than  the  other ;  so  that  if  the  final
award  follow  the  character,  the  original  distribu-
tion of  the  circumstances  under  which  that  cha-
racter is  formed,  may  be  defended  uponprincjpks
not  only  of  justice  but  of  equality.  What  hin-
ders, therefore,  but  that  mankind  may  draw  lota
for  their  condition  ?  They  take  their  portion  of
faculties  and  opportunities,  as  any  unknown
cause,  or  concourse  of  causes,  or  as  causes  acting
for  other  purposes,  may  happen  to  set  them  out;
but  the  event  is  governed  by  that  which  depends
upon  themselves,  the  application  of  what  they
have  received.  ~  In  dividing  the  talents,  no  rub
was  observed ;  none  was  necessary :  in  rewarding
the  use  of  them,  that  of  the  most  correct  justice.
The  chief  difference  at  last  appears  to  be  that
the  right  use  of  more  talents,  t.  c.  of  a  greater  trust,
will  be  more  highly  rewarded,  than  the  right  use
of  fewer  talents,  t.  e.  of  a  less  trust  Arid  since,
for  other  purposes,  it  is  expedient  that  there  be
an  inequality  of  concredited  talents  here,  as  well,
probably,  as  an  inequality  of  conditions  hereafter,
though  all  remuneratory;  can  any  rule,  adapted
to  that  inequality,  be  more  agreeable,  even  to  our
apprehensions  of  distributive  justice,  than  this  is  1

We  have  said,  that  the  appearance  of  carnally,
which  attends  the  occurrences  and  events  of  life,
not  only  does  hot  interfere  with  its  uses,  as  a
state  of  probation,  but  that  it  promotes  these  uses.

Passive  virtues,  of  all  others  the  severest  and
the  most  sublime ;  of  all  others,  perhaps,  the  most
acceptable  to  the  Deity;  would,  it  is  evident,  be
excluded  from  a  constitution,  in  which  happiness
and  misery  regularly  followed  virtue  and  vice.
Patience  and  composure  under  distress,  alSfction,
and  pain ;  a  steadfast  keeping  up  of  our  confi-
dence in  God,  and  of  our  reliance  upon  his  final
goodness,  at  the  time  when  every  thing  present  is
adverse  and  discouraging ;  and  (what  is  no  less
difficult  to  retain)  a  cordial  desire  for  the  happi-
ness of  others,  even  when  we  are  deprived  of  oar
own  :x  these  dispositions,  which  constitute/  per-
haps, the  perfection  pf  our  moral  nature,  would
not  have  found  their  proper  office  and  object  in  a
state  of  avowed  retribution  ;  and  in  which,  conse-
quently, endurance  of  evil  would  be  only  submis-
sion to  punishment.
.  A  train :  one  man's  sufferings  may  be  another
man's  trial.  The  family  of  a  sick  parent  is  a
school  of  filial  piety.  The  charities  of  domestic
life,  and  not  only  these,  but  all  the  social  virtues,
are  called  out  by  distress.  But  then,  misery,  to
be  the  proper  object  of  mitigation,  or  of  that  be-
nevolence which  endeavours  to  relieve,  must  be
really  or  apparently  casual.  It  is  upon  such  suf-
ferings alone  that  benevolence  can  operate.  For
were  there  no  evils  in  the  world  but  what  were
punishments,  properly  and  intelligibly  Mien,  be-


NATURAL  THEOLOGY.


485


nevolence  would  only  stand,  in  the  way  of  justice.
Such  evils,  consistently  with  the  administration
of  moral  government,  could  not  be  prevented  or
alleviated:  that  is  to  say,  could  not  be  remitted  in
whole  or  in  part,  except  by  the  authority  which
infficted-them,  or  by  anappeflate  or  superior  autho-
rity. This  consideration,  which  is  founded  in  our
most  acknowledged  apprehensions  of  the  nature
of  penal  justice,  may  possess  its  weight  in  the
divine  counsels.  Virtue  perhaps  is  the  greatest
of  all  ends.  In  human  beings,  relative  virtues
Ibrm  a  large  part  of  the  whole.  Now  relative
virtue  presupposes,  not  only  the  existence  of  evil,
without  which  it  could  have  no  object,  no  material,
to  work  upon,  but  that  evils  be,  apparently  at
least,  misfortunes  ;  that  is,  the  effects  of  apparent
chance.  It  may  be  in  pursuance,  therefore,  and
in  furtherance  of  the-  same  scheme  of  probation,
that  the  evils  of  lift  are  made  00  to  present  them-
selves.

I  have-already  observed,  that  when  we,  let  in  re-
ligious considerations,  we  often  let  in  light  upon
the  difficulties  of  nature.  So  in  the  fact  now  to
be  accounted  for,  the  degree  of  happiness,  which
we  usually  enjoy  in  this  life,  may  be  better  suited
to  a  state  of  trial  and,  probation,  than  a  greater  de-
gree would  be.  The  truth  is,  we  are  rather  too
much  delighted  with  the  world,  than  too  little.
Imperfect,  broken,  and  precarious,  as  our  plea-
sures are,  they  are  more  than  sufficient  to  attach
sjs  to  the  eager  pursuit  of  them.  A  regard  to  a
future  state  can  hardly  keep  its  place  as  it  is.  If
we  were  designed,  therefore,  to  be  influenced  by
that  regard,  might  not  a  more  indulgent  system,
a  higher,  or  more  uninterrupted  state  of  gratifica-
tion, have  interfered  with  the  design !  At  least  it
seems  expedient,  that  mankind  should  be  suscepti-
ble of  this  influence,  when  presented  to  them :
that  the  condition  of  the  world  should  not  be  such
sjs  to  exclude  its  operation,  or  even  to  weaken  it
more  than  it  does.  In  a  religious  view,  (however
we  may  complain  of  them  in  every  other,)  priva-
tion, disappointment,  and  satiety,  are  not  without
the  most  salutary  tendencies.


CHAPTER  XXVH.

Conclusion.

In  all  cases,  wherein  the  mind  feels  itself  in
danger  of  being  confounded  by  variety,  it  is  sure
to  rest'  upon  a  few  strong  points,  or  perhaps  upon
a  single  instance.  Amongst  a  multitude  of  proofs
it  is  one  that  does  the  business.  If  we  observe  in
any  argument,  that  hardly  two  minds  fix  upon
the  same  instance,  the  diversity  of  choice  shows
the  strength  of  the  argument,  because  it  shows
the  number  and  competition  of  the  examples.
There  is  no  subject  in  which  the  tendency  to
dwell  upon  select  or  single  topics  is  so  usual,  be-
cause there  is  no  subject,  of  which,  in  its  full  ex-
tent, the  latitude  is  so  great,  as  that  of  natural
history  applied  to  the  proof  of  an  intelligent  Cre-
ator. For  my  part,  I  take  my  stand  in  human
anatomy;  ana  the  examples  of  mechanism  I
should  oe  apt  to  draw'  out  from  the  copious  cata-
logue which  it  supplies,  are  the  pivot  upon  which
the  head  turns,  the  ligament  within  the  socket  of
the  hip-joint,  the  pully  or  trochlear  muscles  of  the
eye,  the  epiglottis,  the  bandages  which  tie  down


the  tendons  of  the  wrist  and  instep,  the  slit  or  per-
forated muscles  at  the  hands  and  feet,  the  lr™tting
of  the  intestines  to  the  mesentery,  tne  course  o?
the  chyle  into  the  blood,  and  the  constitution  of
the  <sexes  as  extended  throughout  the  whole  of
the  animal  creation.  To  these  instances,  the
reader's  memory  will  go  back,  as  they  axe  several.
ly  set  forth  in  their  places;  there  is  not  one  of  the
number  which  I  do  not  think  decisive;  not  one
which  is  not  strictly  mechanical :  nor  have  I  read
or  heard  of  any  solution  of  these  appearances,
which,  in  the  smallest  degree,  shakes  the  conclu-
sion that  we  build  upon  them.

But,  of  the  greatest  part  of  those,  who,  either
in  this  book  or  any  other,  read  arguments  to  prove
the  existence  of  a  God,  it  will  be  said,  that  they
leave  off  only  where  they  began ;  that  they  were
never  ignorant  of  this  great  truth,  never  doubted
of  it ;  that  it  does  not  therefore  appear,  what  m
gained 'by  researches  from  which  no  new  opinion
is  learnt,  and  upon  the  subject  of  which  no  proofs
were  wanted.  Now  I  answer  that,  by  investigar
Hon,  the  following  points  are  always  gained,,  in
favour  of  doctrines  even  the  most  generally  ac-
knowledged, (supposing  them  to  be  true,)  viz,
stability  and  impression.  Occasions  will  arise  to
try  the  firmness  of  our  most  habitual  opinions.
And  upon  these  occasions,  it  is  a  matter  of  incal-
culable use  to  feel  our  foundation ;  to  find  a  support
in  argument  for  what  we  had  taken  up  upon  au-
thority. In  the  present  case,  the  arguments  upon
which  the  conclusion  rests,  are  exactly  such,  as  a
truth  of  universal  concern  ought  to  rest  upon.
11  They  are  sufficiently  open  to  the  views,  ana  ca-
pacities of  the  unlearned,  at  the  same  time  that
they  acquire  new  .strength  and  lustre  from  the
discoveries  of  the  learned."  If  they  had  been  alto-
gether abstruse  and  recondite,  they  would  not
have  found  their  way  to  the  understandings  of
the  mass  of  mankind ;  if  they  had  been  merely


popular,  they  might  have  wanted  solidity.

But,  secondly,  what  is  gained  by  research  in
the  stability  of  our  conclusion;  is  also  gained  from
It  in  impression.  Physicians  tell  us,  mat  there  is
a  great  deal  of  difference  between  taking  a  medi-
cine, and  the  medicine  getting  into  the  constitu-
tion. A  difference  not  unlike  whichT  obtains  with
respect  to  those  great  moral  propositions,  which
ought  to  form  the  directing  principles  of  human
conduct.  It  is  one  thing  to  assent  to  a  proposition
of  this  sort.;  another,  and  a  very  different  thing,
to  have  properly  imbibed  its  influence.  I  take  the
case  to  be  this :  perhaps  almost  every  man  living
has  a  particular  train  of  thought,  into  which  his
mind  glides  and  falls,  when  at  leisure  from  the
impressions  and  ideas  that  occasionally  excite  it:
perhaps,  also,  the  train  of  thought  here  spoken  of,
more  than  any  other  thing,  .determines  the 'cha-
racter. It  is  of  the  utmost  consequence,  therefbie,
that  this  property  of  our  constitution  be  well  regu-
lated. Now  it  is  by  frequent  or  continued  medi-
tation upon  a  subject,  by  placing  a  subject  in  dif-
ferent points  of  view,  by  induction  of  particulars,
by  variety  of  examples,  by  applying  principles  to
the  solution-  of  phenomena,  by  dwelling  upon

S roofs  and  consequences,  that  mental  exercise  is
rawn  into  any  particular  channel.  It  is  by  these
means,  at  least,  that,  we  have  any  power  over  it
The  train  of  spontaneous  thought,  and  the  choice
of  that  train,  may  be  directed  to  different  ends,
and  may  appear  to  be  more  or  less  judiciously  fix-
ed, according  to  the  puroose,  in  respect  of  which


486


NATURAL  THEOLOGY.


we  consider  it:  bat  in  *  moral  view,  I  ■ball  not, I
believe,  be  contradicted  when  I  say.  that  if  one
train  of  thinking  be  more  deniable  than  another,
it  is  that  which  regards  the  phenomena  of  nature
with  a  constant  reference  to  a  supreme  intelligent
Author.  To  have  made  this  the  ruling,  the  bar
bitual  sentiment  of  our  minds,  is  to  have  laid  the
foundation  of  every  thing  which  is  religious.  The
world  thenceforth  becomes  a  temple,  and  life  it-
self one  continued  act  of  adoration.  The  change
is  no  less  than  this:  that,  whereas  formerly  God
was  seldom  in  our  thoughts,  we  can  now  scarcely
look  upon  any  thing  without  perceiving  its  rela-
tion to  him.  Every  organized  natural  body,  in  the
provisions  which  it  contains  for  its  sustentation
and  propagation,  testifies  a  care,  on  the  part  of
the  Creator,  expressly  directed  to  these  purposes.
We  are  on  all  sides  'surrounded  by  such  bodies ;
examined  in, their  parts,  wonderfully  curious;
compared  with  one  another,  no  less  wonderfully
diversified.  So  that  the  mind,  as  well  as  the  eye,
may  either  expatiate  fa  variety  and  multitude,  or
fix  itself  dowi*  to  the"  investigation  of  particular
divisions  of  the  science.  And  in  either  case  it
will  rise  up  from  its  occupation,  possessed  by  the
subject  in  a  very  different  manner,  and  with  a
very  different  degree  of  influence,  from  what  a
mere  assent,  to  any  verbal  proposition  which  can
be  formed  concerning  the  existence  of  the  Deity,
at  least  that  merely  complying  assent  with  which
•hose  about  us  are  satisfied,  and  with  which  we
are  too  apt  so  satisfy  ourselves,  will  or  can  produce
upon  the  thoughts.  More  especially  may  this  dif-
ference be  perceived,  in  the  degree  of  admiration
and  of  awe,  with  which  the  Divinity  is  regarded,
when  represented  to  toe  understanding  by  its
own  remarks,  its  own  reflections,  and  its  own
reasonings  compared  with  what  is  excited  by  any
language  that  can  be  used  by  others.  The  works
of  nature  want  only  to  be  contemplated.  When
contemplated,  they  have  every  thing  in  them
which  can  astonish  by  their  greatness j  for  of  the
vast  scale  of  operation  through  which  our  disco-
veries carry  us,  at  one  end  we  see  an  intelligent
Power  arranging  planetary  systems,  fixing,  for
instance,  the  trajectory  of  Saturn,  or  constructing
a  ring  of  two  hundred  thousand  miles  diameter,  to
surround  his  body,  and  be  suspended  like  a  mag-
nificent arch  over  the  heads  of  his  inhabitants;
and,  at  the  other,  bending  a  hooked  tooth,  con-
certing and  providing  an  appropriate  mechanism,
for  the  clasping  and  reclasping  of  the  filaments  of
the  feather  of  the  humming-bird.  We  have  proof,
not  only  of*  both  these  wdrks  proceeding  from  an
intelligent  agent,  but  of  their  proceeding  rrom  the
same  agent:  for,  in  the  first  place,  we  can  trace
an  identity  of  plan,  a  connexion  of  system,  from
Saturn  to  our  own  globe :  and  when  arrived  upon
our  globe,  we  can,  in  the  second  place,  pursue  the
connexion  through  all  the  organised,  especially
the  animated,  bodies  which  it  supports.  We  can
observe  marks  of  a  common  relation,  as  well  to
one  another,  as  to  the  elements  of  which  their  ha-
bitation is  composed.  Therefore  one  mind  hath
planned,  or  at  least  hath  prescribed,  a  general  plan
fbr  all  these  productions.  One  Being  hath  been
concerned  in  all.  >

Under  this  stupendous  Being  we  live.  Our
happiness,  our  existence,  is  in  his  hands.  All  we
expect  must  come  from  him.  Nor  ought  we  to
feel  our  situation  insecure.  In  every  nature,  and
in  every  portion  of  nature,  which  we  can  descry,


we  nod  .attentMti  bestowed  upon  even  the  mi-
nutest parts.  The  hinges  in  the  wings  of  an
earwig,  and  the


0  joints  ofits  antenns,  areas  high-
;ht;  as  if  the  Creator  had  nothing  else  to
.  e  see  no  signs  of  diminution  of  care  by
multiplicity  of  objects,  or  of  distraction  of  thought
by  variety.  We  nave  no  reason  to  fear,  therefore,
our  being  forgotten-,  or  overlooked,  or  neglected.

The  existence  and  character  of  the  Deity,  is  in
every  view,  the  most  interesting  of  all  human
speculations.  In  none,  however,  is  it  more  so.
than  as  it  facilitates  the  benef  of  the  fundamental
articles  of  Revelation.  It  is  a  step  to  have  it
proved,  that  there  must  be  something  in  the  world
more  than  what  we  see.  It  is  a'  farther  step  to
know,  that,  amongst  the  invisible  things  of  nature,
there  must  be  an  intelligent  mind,  concerned  in
its  production,  order,  and  support  These  points
being  assured  to  us  by  Natural  Theology,  we
may  well  leave  to  Revelation  the  disclosure  of
many  particulars,  which  our  researches  cannot
reach,  respecting  either  the  nature  of  this  Being,
as  the  original  cause  of  all  things,  or  his  character
and  designs  as  a  moral  governor:  and  not  only  so,
but  the  more  full  confirmation  of  other  particulars,
of  which,  though  they  do  not  lie  altogetner  beyond
pur  reasonings  and  our  probabilities,  the  certainty
is  by  no  means  equal  to  the  importance.  The
true  theist  will  be  the  first  to  listen  to  any  credi-
ble communication  of  Divine  knowledge.  No-
thing which  he  has  learnt  from  Natural  Theology,
will  diminish  his  desire  of  farther  instruction,  or
his  disposition  to  receive  it  with  humility  and
thankfulness.  He  wishes  for  light :  he  rejoices  in
tight.  His  inward  veneration  of  this  great  Being
will  incline  him  to  attend  with  the  utmost  serious-
nesSj  not.  on]  v  to  all  that  can  be  discovered  con-
cerning him  by  researches  into  nature,  but  to  al
that  is  taught  by  a  revelation,  which  dves  reason-
able proof  of  having  proceeded  from  him.

But.  above  every  other  article  of  revealed  refi-
gion,  does  the  anterior  belief  of  a  Deity  bear  with
the  strongest  force  upon  that  grand  point,  which
gives  indeed  interest  and  importance  to  all  the  rest
— the  resurrection  of  the  numan  dead. The
thing  might  appear  hopeless,  did  we  not  see  a
power  at  work,  adequate  to  the  effect,  a  power
under  the  guidance  of  an  intelligent  will,  and  a
power  penetrating  the  inmost  recesses  of  all  sub-
stance. I  am  for  from  justifying  the  opinion  of
those,  who  "  thought  it  a  thing  incredible,  that
God  should  raise  the  dead:" but  I  admit,  that  it
is  first  necessary  to  be  persuaded  that  there  w  a
God,  to  do  so. This  being  thoroughly  settled  in
our  minds,  there  seems  to  be  nothing  in  this  mo-
cess  (concealed  as  we  confess  it  to  be)  which
need  to  shock  our  belief. They  who  have  taken
up  the  opinion,  that  the  acts  of  the  human  mind
depend  upon  organization,  that  the  mind  itself
inaeed  consists  in  organization,  are  supposed  to
find  a  greater  difficulty  than  others  do,  in  admit-
ting a  transition  by  death  to  a  new  state  of  sen-
tient existence,  because  the  old  organization  is  ap-
parently dissolved. But  I  do  not  see  that  any  im-
practicability need  be  apprehended  even  by  these;
or  that  the  change,  even  upon  their  hypothesis,
is  for  removed  from  the  analogy  of  some  other '
operations,  which,we  know  with  certainty  that  the
Deity  is  carrying  on. In  the  ordinary  derivation
of  plants  ajidaiumals,  from  one  another,  a  particle,
in  many  cases,  minuter  than  aH  assignable,  all
conceivable  dimension ;  an  aura,  an  effluvium,  an


NATURAL  THEOLOGY.


487


hmnileshnaj;  determines  the  organization  of  a
future  body :  does  no  leas  than  fix.  whether  that
which  is  about  to  be  produced,  shall  be  a  vegeta-
ble, a  merer/  sentient,  or  a  rational  being;  an  oak,
a  frog, or  aphuospher ;  makes  all  these  differences;
gives  to  the  future  body  its  qualities,  and  nature
and  species.  And  this  particle,  from  which  springs,
and  by  which  is  determined,  a  whole  future  na-
ture, itself  proceeds  from,  and  owes  its  constitu-
tion, to,  a.prior  body:  nevertheless,  which  is  seen
in  plants  most  decisively,  the  incepted  organiza-
tion, though  formed  within,  and  through,  and  by,
a  preceding  organization,  is  not  corrupted  by  its
corruption,  or  destroyed  by  its  dissolution :  but  on
the  contrary,  is  sometimes  extricated  and  developed
by  those  verr  causes;  survives  and  comes  into  ac-
tion, when  the  purpose,  for  which  it  was  prepared,
requires  its  use.  Now  an  economy  which  nature
has  adopted,  when  (he  purpose  was  to  transfer  an
organization  from  one  individual  to  another,  may
have  something  analogous  to  H,  when  the  purpose
is  to  transmit  an  organization  from  one  state  of
being  to  another  state:  and  they  who  found
thought  in  organization,  may  see  something  in  this


analogy  applicable  to  their  difficulties;  for  what-
evei  can  transmit  a  similarity  of  organization  will
answer  their  purpose,  because,  according  even  to
their  own  theory,  it  may  be  the  vehicle  of  conscious-
ness j  and  because  consciousness  carries  identity
and  individuality  along  with  it  through  all  changes
of  form  or  of  visible  qualities.  In  the  most  general
ease,  that,  as  we  have  said,  of  the  derivation  of
plants  and  animals  from  one  another,  the  latent
organization  is  either  itself  similar  to  the  old  or-
ganization, or  has  the  power  of  "communicating  to
new  matter  the  old  organic  form.  But  it  is  not
restricted  to  this  rale.  There  are  other  cases,  es-
pecially in  the  progress  of  insect  life,  in  which  the
dormant  organization  does  not  much  resemble  that
which  encloses  it.  and  still  less  suits  with  the  situ-
ation in  which  tne  enclosing  body  is  placed,  but
suits  with  a  different  situation  to  which  it  Is  des-
tined. In  the  larva  of  the  libellula,  which  lives
constantly,  and  has  still  long  to  live  under  water,
are  descried  the  wings  of  a  fly  which  two  years
afterward  is  to  mount  into  the  air.  Is  there  no-
thing in  tins  analogy  1  It  serves  at  least  to  show
that  even  in  the  observable  course  of  nature,  or-
ganizations are  formed  one  beneath  another;  and,
amongst  a  thousand  other  instances,  it  shows
,  eompmely,  that  the  Deity  can  mould  and  fa-
ahion  the  parts  of  material  nature,  so  as  to  fulfil
-any  purpose  whatever  which  he  i»  pleased  to
appoint.
They  who  refer  the  operations  of  mind  to  a  sub-


stance totally  and  essentially  Afferent  from  mat-
ter, (as  most  certainly  these  operations,  though  ef-
fected by  material  causes,  hold  very' little  affinity,
to  any  properties  of  matter  with  which  we  are  ac-
quainted.) adopt  perhaps  a  iuster  reasoning  and  a
better  philosopnv :  and  by  these  the  considerations
above  suggested  are  not  wanted,  at  least  in  the
same  degree.  But  to  such  as  find,  which  some
persons  do  find,  an  insuperable  difficulty  in  shak-
ing off  an  adherence  to  those  analogies,  which  the
corporeal  world  is  continually  suggesting  to  their
thoughts :  to  such,  I  say,  every  consideration  will
be  a  relief,  which  manifest*  the  extent  of  that  intel-
ligent power  which '  is  acting  in  nature,  the  fruit-
fulness  of  its  resources,  the  variety,  and  aptness,
and  success  of  its  means ;  most  especially  every
consideration^  which  tends  to  show  that,  in  the
translation  or  a  conscious  existence,  there  is  not,
even  in  their  own  way  of  regarding  it,  any  thing
greatly  beyond,  or  totally  unlike,  wnat  takes  place
in  such  parts  (probably  small  parts)  of  the  order
of  nature,  as  are  accessible  to  our  observation.

Again ;  if  there  be  those  who  think,  that  the
contractedness  and  debility  of  the  human  faculties
in  our  present  state,  seem  ill  to  accord  with  the
high  destinies  which  the  expectations  of  religion
point  out  to  us ;  I  would  only  ask  them,  whether
any  one,  who  saw.  a  child  two  hours  after  its  birth,
could  suppose  that  it  would  ever  come  to  under-
atandjluxuma  /*  or  who  then  shall  say,  what  far-
ther amplification  of  intellectual  powers,  what  ac-
cession of  knowledge,  what  advance  and  improve-
ment, the  rational  faculty,  be  its  constitution  what
it  will,  may  not  admit  of;  when  placed  amidst  new
objects,  and  endowed  with  a  sensorium  adapted,
as  it  undoubtedly  will  be,  and  as  our  present  senses
are,  to  the  perception  of  those  substances,  and  of
those  properties  of  things,  with  which  our  concern
maybe.

Upon  the  whole ;  in  every  thing  which  respects
this  awful,  but,  as  we  trust,  glorious  change,  we
have  a  wise  and  powerful  Being  (the  author,  in
nature,  of  infinitely  various  expedients  for  infinitely
various  ends,)  upon  whom  to  rely  for  the  choice
and  appointment  of  means  adequate  to  the  exe-
cution of  any  plan  which  his  goodness  or  his  jus-
tice may  have  farmed  for  the  moral  and  accounta-
ble part  of  his  terrestrial  creation.  That  great
office  rests  with  Aim ;  be  it  ours  to  hope  and  to
prepare,  under  a  firm  and  settled  persuasion,  that,
living  and  dying,  we  are  hjs :  that  life  is  passed  in
his  constant  presence,  that  death  resigns  us  to  his
merciful  disposal.


. *  to  Search's  light  of  Natare,*«Mtsk


A  DEFENCE


on


CONSIDERATIONS  ON  THE  PROPRIETY  OF  REQUIRING  A  SUBSCRIPTION  TO
ARTICLES  OF  FAITH,

- IK  REPLY  TO  A  LITE  ANSWER  FROM  THK  CLABXNDON  PRSSS.


(  The  fair  way  of  conducting  a  dispute,  is  to  ex-
hibit one  by  one  the  arguments  of  jour  opponent,
and  with  each  argument  the  precise  and  specific
answer  yon  are  able  to  give  it.  If  this  method  be
not  so  common,  nor  found  so  convenient,  as  might
be  expected,  the  reason  is,  because  it  suits  not
always  with  the  designs  of  a  writer,  which  are  no
more  perhaps  than  to  make  a  book ;  to  confound
some  arguments,  and  to  keen  others  out  of  sight ;
to  leave  what  is  called  an  impression  upon  the
reader,  without  any  care  to  inform  him  of  the
proofs  or  principles  by  which  his  opinion  should
be  governed.  With  such  views  it  may  be  consis-
tent to  despatch  objections,  by  observing  of  some
"that  they  are  old,"  and  therefore,  like  certain
drugs,  have  lost,  we  may  suppose,  their  strength;
of  others,  that  "  they  have  long  since  received  an
answer:" which  implies,  to  be  sure,  a  confutation :
to  attack  straggling  remarks,  and  decline  the  main
reasoning,  as  'rmere  declamation ;"  to  pass  by  one
passage  because  it  is  "long  winded,"  another  be-
cause the  answerer  "has  neither  leisure  nor  incli-
nation to  enter  into  the  discussion  of  \\ ;"  to  pro-
duce extracts  and  Quotations,  which,  taken  alone,
imperfectly,  if  at  all,  express  their  author^  mean-
ing ;  fcrdismiss  a  stubborn  difficulty  with  a  "  refer-
ence," which  ten  to  one  the  reader  never  looks  at;
and,  lastly,  in  order  to  give  the  whole  a  certain
fashionable  air  of  candour  and  moderation,  to
make  a  concession*  or  two  which  nobody  thanks
him  for,  or  yield  up  a  few  points  which  it  is  no
longer  any  credit  to  maintain. «

cxew  far  the  writer  with  whom  we  have  to  do
is  concerned  in  this  description,  his  readers  will
judge:  he  shall  receive,  however,  from  us,  that
justice  which  he  has  not  shown  the  author  of  the
"Considerations,"  to  have  his  arguments  folly
and  distinctly  stated  and  examined.

After  complaining,  as  is  usual  on  these  occa-
sions, of  disappointment  and  dissatisfaction ;  the
answerer  sets  out  with  an  argument  which  com-
prises, we  are  told,  in  a  "  narrow  compass,"  the
whole  merits  of  the  question  betwixt  us;  and
which  is  neither  more  nor  less  than  this,  that  "  it

*  each  as,  that "  if  people  keep  their  opinions  to  them-
selves, bo  nan  will  hurt  them,"  and  U»  like^-Aaswer,


is  necessary  that  those  who  are  to  be

teachers  in  the  church  should  be  sound  in  the  lakh,
and  consequently  that  they  should  give  to  those
who  ordain  them  some  proof  and  assurance  that
they  are  so,  and  that  the  method  of  this)  proof
should  be  settled  by -public  authority."  Now  the
perfection  of  this  sort  of  reasoning  is,  thai  it  comes
as  well  from  the  mouth  of  the  pope's  imsTiaaui  of
divinity  in  the  university  of  Bologna,  as  ream  the
Clarendon  press.  A  church  has  only,  with  oar
author,  to  call  her  creed  the  "  faithful  word,"  and
it  follows  from  Scripture  that  "we  moat  hold  it
fast*  Her  dissatisfied  sons,  let  her  only  denomi-
nate as  he  does,*  "  vain  talkers  and  deceivers, B
and  St.  £aul  himself  commands  us  to  u  atop  their
mouth*."  Every,  one  that  questions  or  opposes
her  decisions  she  pronounces,  with  him,  a  heretic,
and  "  a  man  that  is  a  heretic,  after  the  first  ana
second  admonition,  reject"  In  like  manner,  call-
ing her  tenets  "  sound  doctrine,"  or  taking  it  far
granted  that  they  are  so,  (which  the  conclave  at
Rome  can  do  as  well  as  the  convocation  at  London,)
and  "soundness  in  the  faith  being  a  neceaaary
qualification  in  a  Christian  teacher, there  is  no


avoiding  the  conclusion,  that  every  (<  Christian
t (in,  and  out  of  the  church  too,  if  yon  can.
catch  him,  "  soundness  in  the  faith"  being  i


-teacher"  (in,  i


necessary"  in  all)  must  have  these  tenets  strap-
ped about  his  neck  by  oaths  and  sub


An  argument  which  thins  fights  in  any  causa,  a
either  side,  deserves  no  quarter.  I  have  said,  that
this  reasoning,  and  these  applications  of  Scripture,
are  equally  competent  to  the  defenders  of  popery
— they  are  more  so.  The  popes,  when  they  as-
sumed the  power  of  the  apostles,  laid  claim  also  to
their  infallibility :  and  in  this  they  were  consistent.
Protestant  churches  renounce  with  all  their  might
this  infallibility,  whilst  they  apply  to  themselves
every  expression  that  describes  it,  and  will  not
part  with  a  jot  of  the  authority  which  is  built  upon
it  But  to  return  to  the  terms  of  the  argument.
"  Is  it  necessary  that  a  Christian  teacher  ahouhi
be  sound  in  the  faith  V

1.  Not  in  nine  instances  out  of  ten  to  which  the
test  is  now  extended. Nor,


•Pageia


468


OP  SUBSCRIPTION  TO  ARTICLES  OP  FAITH.


489


8.  If  it  were,  is  this  -the  way  to  make  him  so;
»  being  aB  little  probability  that  the  detenti-
ons of  a  set  of  men-  whose  good  fortune  had
advanced  them  to*  high  stations  in  the  church
should  be  right,  as  the  conclusions  of  private  in-
quirers. Nor,  ^

3.  Were  they  actually  right,  is  it  possible  to
conceive  how  they  can,  upon  this  author's  princi-

.  pies,  produce  Ike  effect  contended  for,  since'"  we
set  ttam  not  up  as  a  rule  of  frith;"?  since  "they
do  not  decide  matters  for  us,  nor  bind  them  upon
us;"  since  "they  tie  no  man  up  from  altering  his
opinion"  are  <rno  ways  inconsistent  with  the
light  ol  private  judgment,"  are,'  in  a  word,  of  no
xnpre  authority  than  an  old  sermon;  nor,  conse-
quently, much  more  effectual,  either  for  the  pro-
ducing or  securing  of  "soundness  in  the  faith."

„  The  answerer,  not  trusting  altogether  to  the
stsWigth  of  his  <•  argument,"  enxfeavours  next  to
avail  himself  of  a?'  conceeewm"  which-  he  has
gained,  he  imagines,  from  his  adversary,  and
which  he  is  pleased  to  look  upon  K  as  in  a  mariner'

S'ving  up  the  main  point".  Our  business,  there-
re,  wilJjbe  to  show  what  this  concession,  as  he
calls  n\  amounts  to,  and  wherein  it  differs  from
the  "jnain  point,"  the  requisition  of  subscription
to  established  formularies.  It  is  objected  to  the
Articles  of  the  Church  of  England,  that  they  are
at  variance  with  the  actual  opinions  both  of  the
governors  and  members  of  that  church;  so  much,
so,  that  the  men  whn  most  faithfully  aftd  expli-
citly maintain  these  articles,  get  persecuted  for
their  singularity,  excluded  from  orders,  driven
from  universities  arid  are  compelled  to  preach  the
established 'religion  in  (elds  and  conventicles.
Now  this  objection,  which  must  cleave  to  every
"fixed  formulary,  .might,  we  conceive,  be  removed
if  a  test  was-anDstHuted,  supposing  any  test  tor  be
insisted  upon,  which  could  adapt  itself  to  the
opinions,  and  Keep  pace  with  trje  '■  improvements,
of  each  succeeding  age.  This,  in  some  measure,
would-be.  the  case,  if  the  governors  of  the  church
for  the  time  being,,  were  authorized  to  rccejve
from  candidates  for  orders  declarations  of  their  re-
ligious principles  in  their  own  words,  and  allowed,
at  their  discretion,  to  admit  them  into  the  minis-
try. Bishops  being  taken  out  of  (he  lump  of  the
community  will  generally  be  of  tile  same  leaven,
and  partake  both  of  the  opinions  and  moderation
of  the  times  they  live  in.  This  is  the  most  that
can  be  made  of  the  concession ;  and  bow  this  gives
up  the  "  main  point/'  or  indeed  any  thing,  it  is
net  easy  to  discover.

The"  next  paragraph  of  the  Answer  attacks  the
^account  which  the  Considerations  haVe  given  of
the  "  rise". and  "progress"  of  the  custom  in  ques-
tion: "the  reverse  of  which,"  the  answerer  tells'
us,  *"  is  the  truth,"  and  by  weyof  proof  gives  his
.own  account  of  the  matter,  which,  so  Sir  from
beyig.the  "  reverse^"  is  in  effect,  or  very  nearly,  the


The  reader  shall  see  the  two  accounts  side  by
side,' and  it  desired  to  judge  whether  the.  author
of  the  Considerations,  so  far  from  being  confuted
in  this  point,  is  even  contradicted.  .  v

mHib  protectant*,  aware
bow  greatly  they  were  mis-
represented  and  abused,  be-
gan to  think  it  necessary  to
repel  Ute  various  calumnies


1  As  some  who  set  up  fbr
reformers  bad  broached  ma-
ny erroneous  arid  pestilent
doctrines;  the  Lutherans,
first,  and,  after  their  exara-


that.  had  been  cast  upon
them,  by  setting  forth  some
public  Constitutions  or  Con  -
Sessions;  as  a  declaratioirof
their  faith  and  worship.
And  to  make  such  declara-
tion still  more  authentic,
they  likewise  engaged  them-
selves in  a  mutual  bond  of
conformity  to  all  these  Con-
stitutions.'* £onsidera

tions,  page  6.  v


ple.other  protest  anl  church-
es,  thought  n't  to  draw  up
Confessions  of  faith.  And
this  they  did  partly  to  ac-.
quit  therasclveaof  the  scan-
dal of  abetting  wild  and  se-
ditious enthusiasts,  and  de-
claring what  were  their  real
doctrines ;  partly"  (obserat
how  tenderly  this  is  intra  -
duced)  "  to  prevent  such  en-
thusiasts on  the  one  hand,
and  popish  aniissaries  on
the  other,  from  intruding
themselves  into  the  minis-
try.—Answer,  pages  0, 7.

tfow,-were  the'  ''origin"  of  a  custom  of  mere
consequence  than  it  is  to  avquestion  concerning
the  "propriety"  of  it,  can  any  one  doubt,  who
credits  even  the  answerer's  own  account,  but  that
the  motive  assigned  in  the  considerations, both
did  exist,  and  was  the  principal  motive  1  There
is  one  account,  indeed,  of  the  "  origin/'  of  titjs  cus-
tom, which,  were  it  true,  would  directly  concern
the  question.  .  "  This  practice,"  our  author  tells
us  in  another  part  of 'his  Answer*  "is  said  to  be  -
derived  from  the  apostles  themselves."  *  I  care
not  what  "is  said.'1  It  is*  impossible  that  the
practice  complained  of,  the  imposition  of  article*
of  faith  by  "  fallible"  men,  could  originates  from
the  "  apostles, '*Tw  ho,  under  the  direction-ty  widen
they  acted  were  irifallible.*t  .

But  this  practice,  from  whatever  "  root  of  bitter-
ness" it  sprung,  has  been  one>of  the  chief  causes,
we  assert,  of  the  divisions  and  distresses  whiA
we  read  of  in  ecclesiastical  history.  The  matter
of  not  our  author  does  not,  because  he  cannot,
deny.  He  rather  chooses  to  insinuate  that "  such
'divisions  and  disturbances  were'  not  owing  to  the
governors  of  the  church,  but  to  the  perverse  dis-
putings  of  heretics  and  schismatics.'  He  mjtst
know  that  there  is  oppression  as  well  as,  resistance,
provocation  as  well  as  resentment,  abuse  of  power
as  well  as  opposition  to  it:  and  it  is  too  much  to
take  for  .granted,,  without  one'  syllable  ef  proof,
that  those  in  possession .  of  'power  have  been
always  in  the.  right,  and  those  wop.  withstood
them'  in  the  wrong. .  "  Divisions"  and**'  disturb-
ances" have  in  fact,  an/1  in  all  ages,  arisen  on  this
account,' and  it  is  a  poor  shift  to  say,  because  it
may  always  be  said,  that  such  only  are  charge-
able with,  these  mischiefs  as  refused  to  .submit


♦Page  19.  s  ,

f  How  a  creed  hi  to  be  made,  as  .the  Considerations
recommend,  in  which  all  parties  shall  agree,  our  author
cannot  understand.  I  will  tefl  him  how ;  by  adhering
to  Scripture  terms :  and  this  will  suit  the  best  idea  of  a
.Creed  (a  summary  or  compendium  of  a  larger  volume,)
r  and  the  only  fair  purpose  of  one,  rnstruclion.

It  is  observed  in  the  Considerations,  jhat  the  multi-
plicity of  the  propositions  contained  in  the  thirty-nine
Articles  is  alone  sufficient  to  show  the  impossibility  Of
tha(  consent  which  the  Church  imposes  and  requires.—
Now,  what  would  any  man  guess  is  the  answer  to  this?
Why,  "thatthere  are  no  less  than  three  propositions  ia
the  vert  flrat  vecse  of  St.  John's  Qftspel."  Had  there
been  "  three  thousand"  it  would  have  been  nothing  to
the  purpose :  wbeivpropositioQs  are  received  upon  the
authority  of  the  proposer,  it  matters  not  how  many  af
them  there  are;  the  doubt  is  not  increased  with  the
number ;  the  same  reason  which  establishes  one  esta-
blishes all.  But  is  this  the  cam  with  a  system  of  proposi-*
lions  which  derives  no  evidence  from  the  proposer?
which  must  each  stand  upon  it*  own  separate  and  ia-
trinsie  proof  ?— We  thought  it  necessary  to  oppose  note


»  Pages  11. 13. 19,98.
♦30.


to  note  in  the  place  in  which  we  found  it;  though
neither  here  nor  in  the  Answer  is  it  mux*  connected


IwiththetexU


490


OP  SUBSCRIPTION  TO  ARTICLES  OF  tAITH.


to  whatever  their  superiors  thought  proper  to
impose.*

Nor  is  it  much  better  when  he  tells  us,  "that
these  subtleties  of  metaphysical  debate,  which  we
complain  of  in  our  Articled,  were  introduced  by
the  several  heretics  of  those  tiroes ;"  especially  as
it  is  evident  that  whoever  first  introduced,  it  is  the
governors  of  the 'church  who  still  continue  them.

But  our  author  cannot  conceive  what  alSthis,
as  relating  to  "  creeds.'1  only  and  "-confessions,"  to
the  "  terms  of  communion'1  rather  than  of  admis-*
■ion  Into  the  ministry,  is  to  the  purpose.  Will  he
then  give  up  "creeds*  and  "".confeasions  V  or  will
his  church  thank  -him  for  it  if  he^does  ?  a .  church
"Which,  by  transfusing  the  substance  of  .her  Arti-
cles into  the  form  of  her  public  Worship,  has  in
effect  made  the  "terms  of  communion"  and  of  ad-
mission into  the  ministry  the  dame.  This  ques-
tion, like  every  other,  however -naked  you  may
atrip  it  by  abstraction,  must  always  be 'considered
with  a  reference  to  the  practice  you  wish  to
ffafbrm.

The  author  of  the  Considerations  contends
vnj  properly,  that  it  is  one  of  the  first  duties  a
Christian  owes*  to  his  Master,'  "  to  keep  his  mind
open  and  unbiassed"  in  religious  inquiries.  Can
ft  man  be  said  to  do  this,  who  must  brim;  himself
to  assent  to  opinions  proposed  by  another  1  whp
enters  into  a  profession  where  both  his  subsistence
and  success  depend  upon  hi*  continuance-  in*
particular  persuasion  1  In'  answer  to  this  we  ase
mformedl  that  these  Articles  are  no  "rule  of  faij.h;
(what!  not  to  those  who  subscribe  them?>  that
*  the  church  deprives  no  man  df  his  right  of  private
judgment;"(she  cannot-«-she  hangs,  however,  a
dead  weight  upon  it;)  that  it  is  a  "very  unfair
state  of  the  case,  to  call  subscription  a  declaration
of  our  roll  and  final  persuasion  in  matters  of  faith ;"
though  if  it  be  not  a  "  full"  persuasion,  what  is  it  1
and  ten  to  one  it  will  be."  final,"  when  such'con-
seqnence*  attend  a  change. That  "  no  man  is


suspected,  that  a  court  of  justice  would  not  receive
his  evidence  under  half  of  the  same  influence:
"nor  from  altering  his  opinion  if  he  finds  reason
bo  to  do,  which  few,  I  conceive,  will  "find,"  when
the  alteration  must  cost  them  so  dear/  If  one
could  give  credit  to  our  author  in  what  he  says  here;
and  in  some  other  passages  of  his  Answer,  one
would  suppose  that,  in  his  judgment  at  least,  sub-
scription restrained  no  man  from  adopting  what,
opinion  he  pleased,  provided  "  he  does  not  think
himself  bound  openly  to  maintain  it:"  that4' men"
may  retain  theirprelerments,  if  they  wiH  but  keep
their  opinions  to  themselves."  [f  this  be  what  the
•ehurch  of  England  means,  let  her  say  so.  This
Is  indeed  What  our  author  admits  here,  and  yet,
from  the  outcry  he  has  afterwards  raised  against


•The  following  sentiment  of  our  author  is  too  en-
rlotjs  to  b»*omittod :  "  Powiblyloo  be  (the-autbor  of  the
Considerations)  may  think  that  insurrections  and  re-
bellions in  the  state  are  not  owing  lo  the  unnilinese  of
factious  subject*,  but  to  kings  and  miers ;  bt»t  most  rea-
sonable men,  I  believe,  will  think,  otherwise."— A  com-
mon reader  may  think  this  observation  of  the  answerer
a  little  beside  the- question. —But  fhe  answerer  may  say,
with  Cicero  and  Dr.  King,  ••  Suscepto  negotio  majus
miM  qaiddamproposai, inquo  meam in  Rerapublicam
2!UXra*m  *>pu!u8  PeMBleeri  posset."— Motto  to  Dr.


all  vyhq  contirfuc  in  the  chifrch  whilst  they  dissent
from  her  'Articles,  one  would' not  suppose  there
was  a  pardon  left  for  those,  who  w  keep  even  to
themselves  an  opinion"  inconsistent' with  anyone
projjosition'thev  have  subscribed.  The  fact  is,
the  gentleman  has  either  Shifted  his  opinion  in  the
course  of  writing  the  Answer,  or  had  put  down
these  assertions,  not  expecting  that  he  should  have
occasion  afterwards  tocontradict  them:
v  It  seemed  -to  add  strength  tcTthis  objection,  that
the  judgment  of  most  thinking  mcil  being  in  a
progressive  state,  their'  opinions  of  course  must
many  of  them  change ;  the  evil  atyd  iniquity  of
which  the  answerer  sets  forth  with  great  plea-
santry, but  has  lbrgot  At  the  same  time  to  rive  us
any  remedy  for  the  misfortune,  except  the  old
woman's  receipt,  to  leave  off  thinking  for  fear  of
thinking' wrong.  .

"But  our  church  '"pTcachesJ,r  it  seems,  ""no
other  Gospel  than  that  which  she  received*"  nor
propounds  any  other  Articles  for  Gospel,"  nor
"  fixes  any  standards  or  crite ri'ons  of  faith,  sepa-
rate from  this  Gospel :  ahd  so  she  herself  fully  de>
clares;"and  we  are  to  take  her  "  word"  for  it',  when
'the  very  complaint  is,  that  she  has  never  '^  acted"  up
to  this  declaration,  but  in  direct  contradiction  krft
When  she  puts  forth  a  system  of  proposition*
conceived  in  a  new  dialect,  and  in  unscripturai
terms ;  when  she  ascribes  to  these  the  «ame  evi-
dence and  certainty  as  to.  Scripture  itself,  or  de-
crees and  acts  as  if  they  were  eouallv  evident  and
certain;  she  incurs,  we  apprenend,  the  charge
which  these  expressions  imply.  She  claims' imaged
"authority  in  controversies  of  faith,"  but  "only
so  farv"  says  her  apologist,  as  "  to  judge  for  herself
what  should  be  her  own  terms  'of  communion,
and  what  qualifications,  she  shall  require  in  her
own  ministers:"  All  which,  in  plainer  "English,
comes  to  this;  that  two  or  three  men,  betwixt
two  and  throe  centuries  ago,  fixed  a  muttkade  of
obscure  and  dubious  propositions,  which  many
millions  after  must  bring  themselves  to  believe,
before  they  be  permitted  to  share  in  the  provision
which  the  state  has  made  (and  to  which  all  of
every  sect  contribute)  for  regular  opportunities  of
.public  worship,  and  the  giving  and  receiving  of
public  insftuction.  And  this  our  author  calls  the
magistrate's  "judging  for  himself,"*  anUjc^ercis*
ing  the  "  same  right  as  all  other  persons  have  to
judge  for  themselves."  For  the  reasonableness  of
it,  howeveV,  he  has  nothing  to  offer,  but  that  it  "  b
no  more  than  what  other  churches,  popish"  too,  to
Strengthen  the  argument,  "as  well  as  nrotesftant,"
have  done  before.  He.  might  htfve  added,  seeing
"custom"  is  to. determine  the  matter,  that  it  had
been  '-'  customary"  too  from  early  ages'  for  Chris-
tians to  anathematize  and  burn  each  other  for
difference  of  opinion  in  some  points  of  faith,  and
for  difference  pf  practice  in  some  points  of  cere-
mony. "^

We  now  accorripony  the  learned  answerer  to
what  he  is  pleased  to  call  the  "  main  question/'
and  which  tie  is  so  much  "  puzzled  to  keep  in
sight.".  The  argumchtt  in  favour  of  subscription
and  the  arbitrary  exclusion  oftoen  from  the  church
or  ministry,  drawn  from  the  nature  of  a  society


♦  Pa«e  96.

t  What  would  any  man  In  his  wits  think  of  this  ar-
gument, tfnpon  the«treBgth  of  it  they  win  to
law,  that  none  but  red  paired  peofcle  should  be  I
into  orders,  or  even  into  churches.


OP  SUBSCRIPTION- TO  ARTICLES  OP  FAITH.


491


and  the*  rights  ineidenta]  to  society,  our  author
resigns  to  its  fate,  and  to  the  answer  winch-  has
been  given  it  in  the  Conakleratidna.  He. contends
only,  that  the  conduct  of  the  apostles  in  mjmitting
the  eunuch  and  the  centurion  upon  a  general  pro-
fession of  their  frith  in  Christ, t(  has  nothing  to
do  with  the  ease-  o(  subscription,"  as  they  weie
admitted,  not  into  the  ministry,  but  only  the  com-
munion ofthe  church.  Naw}  in  the  first  place,
suppose  the-ehnuch  or  centurion  had  taken  upon
them,  as  probably  they,  did,  to  teach.  Christianity ,
wotikl'they  have  been  inhibited  by  the  apostles  as
not  having  given  sufficient  "proof  or  assurance  of
their  soundness  in  the  faith  V?  And  if  not,  what  be-
comes of  the  necessity  of  such  "  assurances,  from  a
Christian  teacher  1"  In  the  second-place,  suppose
you  consider  the  church  as. one  society,  and  its
teachers  as  another,  is  it  probable,  thajt  those  who
were  stf  tender  in  keeping  any  one  out  of  the  first,
would  have  thought  the  argument  we  were  en-
countering, or.  any  thing  else,  a, pretence. for' a
light  of  arbitrary  exclusion  from  the  latter  %  The
case  Of  Cornelius,  says  our  author,  is  "extraordi-
nary} while  St. -Peter  was  preaching  Xo  him, -the
Holy  Ghost  fell  upon  all  them  which  hea/d  the,
word."  And  is  not  this  author  ashamed  to  own,
that,juiy.  arc  excluded  from  the  communion,  or
even  ministry  of  the  church,  who'  would  have
been. entitled  by  their  faith  "to  the  gifts,  of  the
Hoty£rhostr'

The  answerer  in  the  next  .paragraph  acknow-
ledges, that  to  admit  converts  into  the  church
"UDon  this  one  article'  of.  faith,,  that  Jesus  is  the
Messiah,  was  indeed-  thepractice  of  the  apostles  ;*
but  then,  he  tells  us,  what  must  sound  a  little  odd
to  a  Christian  ear.  amj<comes  the  more  awkward-
ly from  this  author,  whom,,  if  ypii  turn  bvejr  a
page,  you  will  •  find  quoting 'the  "  practice  ef  the
apostles21  with  a  vengeance;  he  tolls  us.  I  say,
"that  no  argument  can  be  drawn  from  toe-prac-
tice of  the  apostles/'t  -  Now,  with  regard  to  the
"  practice  df  the  apostles,"  and  the  application  of
it  to  ourselves,  the  case  seems  to  be  this  (the  very
reverserobserve,  of  our  author's  rule,)  that  we
are  always  bound  not  "  to  go  beyond"  the  pre-
cedent, though,  for  want  of  the  same  authority,
we  may  not  always  "  advance  up  to  it."  It  surely
at*  least  becomes  us  to  be  cautious  of "  proceed-
ing," Where  they,  in  the  plenitude  of  their  eom-
mission,  thought  proper  "  to  stop."

•It  is  alleged  in  the  Considerations,  that*  annex-
ing emoluments  to  the  profession  of  particular
opinions,  is  a'  strong  and  dangerous  inducement.
to  prevarication ;  and  the  danger  is  the  greater,
ee  prevarication  in  one  instance  Jias  a  tendency
to  relax  the  most  sacred  obligations,  and  make
— lyibr  perfidy  in  every  other. But  "this,"  it

jms,  "  has'  nothing  to  do  with  the  question."*


*  Although  the  question,  whether  to  believe  that
Jems  is  the  Motairfh,  be  not  the  only  neceaiary  article  of
faith,  is  a  question  in  which  we  have  no.  concern  ;  our
author,  with  the  best  inclination  in  the  world,  not  be-
ing able  to  fix  nuch'an  opinion  upon  w;  yet  I  cannot
help  ohservrn*,  that  he  has  put  two  of  the  oddest  con-
IrtitMitions  upon  the  term*  of  the -propositions  that -ever
entered  into  (he  fancy  of  man  toconcei  ve.  One  is.  which
you  may  be  sure  he  intend*  for  Jiia  adversaries,  §  "  that
it  is-ncce«fsary  to  believe  Jesua  to  be  a  true  propfwt,  yet
not  necessary  to  believe  one  dnctriru;  that  lie  has  taughf."
The  other,  which  he  means  fbr  himselfvis,  that "  by  the
Messiah  we  are  to  understand  the  only  brgntlen  Bon  of
Ood,  anointed,  and  sent  by  the  Father  to  make  propitia-
tion for  the  sins  of  tho  whole  world."

t  Paf«  16. , J  Pases  10,  SO.  §  Page  16.


Why,  it-is  the  very;  question,  Whether  the  ma-
gistrate ought  to  ionfine  the  provision  he  makes
lor'  religion'  to  those  who  assent,  or /declare  their
assent,  to  a  particular  system  of  controverted
divinity:  and  this  is  one  direct  objection  agaihsf
it.  But  "  must  the  magistrate,  then,",  exclaim?  .
onpr*  alarmed  adversary,  "  establish  no  tithes,  no
rich  benefices',-  no  dignities,  or  bishoprics  1"  Am
-many  as  .he  pleases,  only  let  him  not  convert  them
into  snares  and  traps  by  idle  and  unnecessary
conditions.,,  ■ (<  But  must  he  -admit  ail  persons
indiscriminately  to  these  advantages  ?"  The  au-
thor of.  the  Considerations  has  told  him,  that  he
may  require  conformity  to  the  liturgy,  ntcs,  and
offices  he  .shall  prescribe^  he  may  trust  his  offi-
cers with  a  discretion  as  to. the  religious  princi-
ples of  candidates  for  orders,  similar  to  what  they
now  exercise  with  regard  to  their  qualifications ;
he  may  censure  extravagant  preaching  when  it
"  ajlpears  ;w  precautions  surely  surfiaent  either  to
keep  the  "  wildest  sectaries"  out  of  the  church,  or
prevent 'their-  doing  any  mischief  if-  they  gpt  in.
The*  exclusion  of  papists  is  a  separate  considera-
tion. The  laws  against  popery,  as  far  as  they
are  justifiable,  proceed  upon  principles  with  which
the  author  of  the  Considerations  has  nothing  to
da  Where,  from  the ,  particular  ^circumstance*  .
of  a  country,  attachments. and  dispositions  hostile  '
and  dangerous  to  the  state,  are  accidentally  ror
otherwise  connected  with  certain  opinions  in  reli-
gion, it  may  -be  necessary  to  lay  encumbrance*
au4  restraints  upon  tha  profession  or  propagation
of  such  'opinions.  Where  a  greaC  part  of  any
sect  or  religious  order  of  men  are  enemies  "to  the
constitution,  and  you  have  no  way  of  distinguish-
ing those  who  -are  not  so,  it  is  right  perhaps  to
fence  the  whole  order  out  of  your  bivd  arid  reli-
gious establishment:  it  is  the  right  at  least  of
self-defence,  and  of  extreme  necessity.  -^But  even
this  is  not  on  account  of  the  religions  .opinions
themselves,  but  as' they  are  probable  marks,  and
the  only  marks  you  have,  of  designs  and  princi-
ples which  it  is  necessary  to  disarm.  I  would
observe,  however,  that  in  proportion  as^this  con-
nexion between  the  civil  .and  religious  principles
of  the  papists  is  dissolved,  in  the.  same  proportion
ought -the  state' to  mitigate  the  hardshipa  and
relax-the  restraints  to  which  they  are  made  subr
ject.

If  we  complain  of  severities,  of  pains  aiul  pe-
nalties, the  answerer  cannot  discover  ft  whom  or
what  we  mean :"  and  lest  his  reader  should,  by  a
figure-  extremely  well  known  in  the  craft  of  con*
trovcrsy,  he  proposes  a. string  oCqucstioris  in  the
person  of  his  adversary, -to  which'  he  gives  his
.own  peremptory  and  definitive  no.*  We  will
rake  a  method,  not  altogether  so  compendious,
hut,  we  .trust,  somewhat  more  satisfactory.  We
-will  repeat  the  same  questions,  and  let  thefhurch,
and  state  answer  fbr  themselves. First,  then.,  ~

"  Does  our  church  or  our  government  inflict
any  corporal  punishment,  or  levy  any  fines  or
penalties  on  those  who  will  not  comply  with  the
terms  of  her  communion  T— "  Be  it  enacted,  that
all  and  every  person  or  persons  that  shall  neglect
or  refuse  to  receive  the  sacrament -of  the  LonVs
Supper  according  to  the  usage  of  the  Church  of
England,  and  yet,  after  such  neglect  or  refusal;
shall  execute  any  office  or  offices,  civil  or  military,
after  the  times  be  expired  wherein  he  of  they


Pate  81.


Op  subscription  to  articles  qf  faith.


499

Otight  to  have  take*  the  same,  •hall,  upon  cnn-
fiction  thereof,  besides  the  lorn  of- the  office,  for-
feit the  sum  -of  five  hundred  pounds  >M*  Stat  25*
Car.  II.  c.  2.  Now,  although  starving  be  no
"  corporal  punishment,"  nor'the  loss  of  all  a  man
•  has.  a  ""  fine,"  or  "  penalty,"  yet  depriving  men
of  toe  common  -benefits  of  society,  and  rights  even
of  lay  subjects,  because  "  they  will  not  comply
with  the  terms  of  Church  communion,"  is  a  "  se-
verity" that  might  have  deserved  from  our  author
some  other  apology  besides  the  mere  suppression*
tfthefact 7^

2.  "Doth  it  deny  them  the  right  or  privilege
of  worshipping  God  in  their  own  way  V — "  Who-
ever shall  ta^e  upon  him  to  preach  or  teach  in
any  meeting,  assembly,  or  conventicle,  and  shall
thereof  be  convicted,  shall- forfeit  for  the' first
offence  twenty  pounds,  and  for  every  other  offence
forty  pounds :"  Stat.  22-Car,  II.  c.  1.—"  No  per-
son snaU  presume  to  consecrate  or  "administer  the
sacrament  of  the  Lord's  Supper  before  he  be
ordained  priest,  after  the  manner  of  the  church
of  England,  on  pain  of  forfeiting' one  hundred
pounds  for  eve/y  such  offence :"  Stat.  13  &  14
Car.  11.  c.  4.  These  laws  are  in  .full  force
against  all  who  do  not  subscribe  to  the  39  Arti-
cles of  the  Church  of  England,  except  the  34th;
35th,  and  36th,  *nd  part  of  the~20th  "Article.

3.  "  Are  men  denied  the  liberty  of  free  debate  V
-—"If  any  person,  having  been  educated  in,  or  at
anytime,  having  made  profession  of,  the.  Chris-


tian faith  within  the  realht,  shall  by  writing,
printing,  teaching,  nor  advised  speakings  deny
any  one  of  the 'persons  of  |he  r^oly  Trinity  to  be
God— he  shalTfor  the  first  offence  be  disabled  to
hold  any  office  or  employment,  or  any  profit  ap*
pertaining  thereto;  for  the  second  offence  shall
oe  disabled  to  prosecute-any  action  or  information
In  any  court  or  law  er  equity,  or  to  be  guardian  of
any  child;  or  executor) or  administrator  of  any
person,  or  capable  of  any  legacy  or  deed  of  gift,
or  to  bear  any  office  for  ever  within  this  realm,
and  shall  also  suffer  imprisonment  for  the  apace
of  three  years  from  the  time  of  suclr  conviction."
Stat  9  &  10  W>» .  JlLc.  32.

It  hssjbeen  tnought  to  detract  considerably  from
the  pretended  use"  of  these  subscriptions,  that  they
excluded  none  but  the  conscientious;  a  species  of
men  more  wanted,  we  conceive,  than  formidable
to  any  religious  establishment.  This  objection
applies  equally, -says  our  answerer^  to  the  "  oaths
of  allegiance  and  supremacy ;"  and.  so  far  as  it
does  apply,  it  ought  to  be  attended  to ;.  and  the
truth  is,  these  oaths  might  in  many  instances  be
spared  without  either  danger  or  detriment  to  the
community. '  There  is,  however,  an  essential
difference-  between  the  two 'cases :  a  scruple  con-
cerning the  oath  *of  allegiance  implies  principles
which  may  excite  to  acts  of  hostility  against  the
state :  a  scruple  about  the  truth  of  the  articles  im-
plies no  such  thing.*

Our.  author,  good  man,  "is  wefl  persuaded,
that  the  generality  of  the  clergy,  when- they  offer


tb«nseJw*forordmatkm,eobaU*
office  they  take  upon  them,  and  firmly  W*?e
what  they  subscribe  to."  I  am  persuaded  much
.otherwise.  But  as  this  is  a  "  fret,"  the  leader,  if
be  be  wise,  will  neither  lake  the  answerer's  word
for  it  nor  mine ;  "put  form  his  own  jo4gmenUrom
his  own  observation.  Bishop  Burnet  complained
above  60  years  ago,  that u  the  greater  part,"  eve*
then,  "  subscribed  the  Articles  without  evet  eta-
mining  them>  and  others  did  neecaoae  the}  must
do  it.77  Is  it  probable,  thai  in  point  either  of
seriousness  or  orthodoxy,  me  clergy  are  much
mended  since  *?

Theple«soh^redmsjipportofthiip»c6ceof
subscription  come  next  to  be  considered.  ~  "One
of  these  is  drawn  from  the  sacred  writings  beinff
capable  of  such  a  variety  of  senses,  that  men  of
widely  different  persuasions  shelter  theajsebej
under  the  same  forms  of  expression*"  Our  Mr
thor,  after  quarrelling  with  ihis/apreaentataoo  of
the  plea,  gives  his  readers  in  its  stead,  a  Jong  quo-
tation from  the  archdeacon  of  Oxford's  ehtrge.t
What  he  is  to  gain  by  the  change,  or  the  quota*
tion,  I  cannot  perceive,,  as  the  same  first  qeeiy
still  recurs,  <<  Is  it  true,  that  the  Scriptures  arc  m
reality  so  differently  interpreted  in  points  of  real
consequence  1"  In  answer  Jo  which,  me  arch-
deacon of  Oxford,  wis  are  toid,  "  has  shows  tmt
points  of.  real  consequence  are  difierenuy  inaa>
preted,"  and  "  the  plainest  tejcteexplauedtwaj,
and  has  "instanced  in  the  first  chapter  of  St
John's  Gospel."  The  plea,  we  conceivable**
much  indebted  to  the  archdeacon  of  QxfanL
But  be  these  Scriptures  interpreted  as-they  «v>
each  man  has  still  a  right  to  interpret  them  fa?
himself.  The  Church  of  Rome,  who  alwew
pushed  her  conclusiona  with  a  courage  and  con-
sistency unknown  to  the  timid  pations  of  f*>
testant  imposition,  saw,  inuned&tely,  thataf  the
laity  had  no  right  to  interpret  the  Scripture*,  they
could  have  no  occasion  to  read  them,  and  fata*


*  Toil  and  the  Corporation  Act,  an  otherwise  excel-
lent person  calls  the  law*  which  secure  both  our  civil
and  religious  liberties.— Blackatone's  Coinm,  vol.  iv.
■.«.

t  Pases*,.

I  The  answerer  mifeht  have  found  8  parallel  below
in  some  other  oath*,  which  he  dees  not  care  to  speak  of,
etx.  the  case  of  college  statutes,  page  34  of  the  Const-


fore  very  property  locked  .them  up  from  the  in-
trusion of  popular  curiosity.  Our  author  aw
the  above-mentioned  query  from  the  C0"™^
tions  as  the  Jtrst  query,  which  would  had  a»
reader  tp  expect  a  second.  The  reader,  however,
may  eeek  that  second  for  himself,  the  answerer  a
not  obliged  to  produce  it — it  stands  thus :  S»n>
pose-  the  Scriptures  thus  variously  mtejpret«d,
does  subscription  mend  the  matter  1  The  leader
too  is  left  to  find  an  answer  for  himself ,

<The  next,  the  strongest,  the  only  tolerable  jm
for  subscription,  is,  "that  all  sorts  of  parent
heresies  might  be  taught  from  the  pulpit,  if  no
such  restraint  as  this  was  laid  upon  the  preacher  *
How  for  it  is  probable  that  this  would  be  theeoa-
sequence  of  removing  the  subscription,  and  by
what  other  means-  it  might  be  guarded  against,
has  been  hinted  already,  and  will  again  he  coo*
sidered  in  another  place.  "VVe  will  here  only  take
notice  of  one  particular  expedient  sugs^stedui
the  Considerations,  and  which  has  often  mow
elsewhere  been  proposed,  jiamely,  ".that  the
church,  instead  oiiwjuiriiig%subscription  before-
hand, to  the  present,  or  to  any  other  AitWeiaf
faith;  might  censure  her  clergy  afterwards,  if  the jf
opposed  or  vilified  them  in  their preaching.


•  Burnet's  History  of  his  Own  Times. OoiKtaaioa.

t  See  this  whole  Charge  answered  in  the  Loadoa
Chronicle  by  Priscilla.  TOeljonl  hath  sold  Bissra  ta»
the  hand  of  a  woman !.

X  PageM.


of  Subscription  to  articles  of  faith.


The  advantage  o£  which  acbeme  above  the  pre-
sent is  inanifest,  if  it  was  only/or  this  reason,  that
you  distress  and  corrupt  thousands  now-,  for  one
that  you  would  ever  have  occasion  to  punjalj.
Our  author,  nevertheless,  "  is  numbly  of  opinion,
that  it  is  much  better,  to  take  proper  precautions
i,  with  all  his  "4lumili$y,,,


totakepre-
atnors


beforehand^  he  must,
know  that  when  jt  has  beeif
per  precautions  of  the  press,
to  an  imprimatur  before  publication,  instead  of
punishment  after  it ;  the  proposal  has  been  re-
sented, '  as  ah  open  attack  upoji  the  rights  and
interests  of  mankind.' v  The  common  sense  and
spirit  of  the  nation  could  eee  and  feel  this  distinc-
tion and  the  importance,  of  it,  in  the  case  of  pub-
lishers;  and  why  preachers  should  be  left  in  a
w6rae  situation,  it  is  not  very  easy  to  say.

The  example  of  the  Arminian  concession  id,
upon  this  occasion,  recommended  by  the  author
of  the  Considerations';  a  confession "  which  was
compiled  for  the  edification  and  instruction  of  the
members  of  that  church,  without  peremptorily  in-
sisting upon  any  one's  assent  to  it. But  it  is  the

-misfortune  of  the  Arminian  to  be-  no  nations/
church— the  mjsfortune,  alas !  of  Christianity  her-
self in  her  purest  period ;  when  she  was  under
the  government  of  the  apostles :  witheu^alhapce
wkh  the  states  of  this  world ;  when  she  composed,

\  nevertheless,  a  church  as.  real,  we  conceive,  and
as  respectable,  as  any  national  church  that  hasex-


Our  author,  who  can  much  sooner  make  a  dis-
tinction, than  see  one,  does,  not  Comprehend,  fr> ,
seems,  any  difference  between  confessions  of  faith
tad  preaching,  as  to  the  use  of  unscriptural  terms.
Bid  a  preacher,  when  he  had  finished  his  sermon,
call  upon  his  congregation  .teeubscribe  their  names
and  assent  to  it,  or  never  to  come  more  within  the
doors  oC his  church;  there  would,- indeed,  be  some,
sort  of  resemblance  betwixt  the  two,  cases :  but  as
the  hearem  are  at  liberty  to  Relieve  preachers  or
no,  as  they  see,  or  he  produces,  reasons  for  what
he  says ;  there  can  be  no  harm,  and  there  is*  ma-
nifest utility ,  in  trusting  him  with  the  liberty  of
explaining  nis  own  meaning  in  his  own  terms.

We  now  come,  and  with  the  tenderest  regret,
to  the  case  of  those  who  continue  in  the  church
without  being  able  to  reconcile  to  their  belief  every
proposition  imposed  upon  them  by  subscription  r
over  whose  distress  our  author  is  pleased  to  in-
dulge a  wanton  and  ungenerous  triumph.  They
had  presumed,  it  seems,  that  it  was  .some  apology
lor.  their  conduct,  that  they  sincerely  laboured  to
lender  to  religion  their  best  services;  and  thought
their  present  stations  the  fairest  opportunities  of
performing  it  This  may  not,  perhaps,  amount
to  a  complete  vindication;  .it  certainty  does  not
fully;  satisfy  even  their  own  scruples :  else  where
would  be  the  sense  of  complaint  1  What  need  of
relief  or  what  reason  for  their  petitions*  ?  It  might
have  been  enough,  however,  to  have  exempted
them  frorobeing  absurdly  and  indecently  compered
witjx  nuthless  hypocrites,  with  Papists  and  Jesuits,
who,  mr  other  purposes,  and  with  even  opposite
designs,  are  supposed  to  creep'  into  the  church
through'  the'  same  door.  For  the  fullest  and  fairest
representation  of  their  case,  I  referour  author  to
the  excellent  Hoadly :  or,  as  Hoadly  possibly  may
be  no  booafin  our  author's  library,  wul  it  provoke
his  "raillery"  to  ask,  what  he  thinks  might  be  the
if  all  were  at  once  to  withdraw
i  the  church  who  were  dissatisfied


with  Wdc^trmes?  -Might  not  the  church  Jose,
what  she  can  ill  spare,  the  service**  of  many  note
and  industrious  ministers  1  -Would  those  she  re-  -
tainedf  he  such  as  acquiesced  in  herdeanons  from
inquiry  and  conviction  1  Would  not  many,  or
most  of  them,  be  those  who  keep  out  of  the  way:
of  religions  scruples  try  fives  of  seculanty  and  w>
luptuonsness?  hjr  mixing  wkh  the  crowd  in  'the
most  eager  of  their  pursuits  after  pleasure  or  ad-
vantage! One  word  with  the  answerer  before
we  part  upon  this  head.  Whence  all  this  past
inooisitiveness,  this  solicitude  to  be  acquainted
with  the  person  Jtoe  opinions',  and  associates  of
his  adversary  1  Whence  that  impertinent  wish
that  he  had  been  "more  explicit  in  particular witfc
regard  to  the  doctrine  of  tne  TrinitjT  is  it  out
era  pious  desire  to  iasten-aome  heresy, orthe  im-
putation of  it,  upon  Jlim  1  Is  he  "  called  out  ofthe.
-clouds"  to-  be  committed  to  the  flames  1  ♦

The  40th  page  of  the  Answer  mtroduee*  a  pa-
ragraph of  considerable  lenffth,  the  sum,  however,
and  substance  of  whfefai  is  this—that  if  snbserip-
tion  to  articles  of  Jaith  were  removed,  eomfianan
would  ensue ;  the  people  would  be  distracted  with*
the  disputes,  of  their  teachers,  and  the  pulpits  filled
with  controversy  arid  contrauiction.  Upon  this
"  fact*1  we  Join  issue,  and  the  more  readily  as  tine
is  a  sort  of  reasoning  we  ail  understand.  The*
extent  of  the  legislator's  right  may  be  an  Abstruse
inquiry;  but  whether  a  law  does  more  good  or
harm,  is  a  plain  question  whish  every  l
ask.  Now,  that  ^stressing-  many  of  th
and  corrupting  others :  that  keeping  out  ofchu
iroitf  Christians  and  ftuth^
parties  in  the  state,  by  ^v^  occasion  to  sects  snd
separations  in  religion;  that  these  are  inconve-
niences, no  man  in'  his  senses,  will  deny.  The
question  therefore  is,  what  advantage  do  yon  find
in  the  opposite,  scale  to  balance  these  inconve-
niences 1  The  simple  advantage  pretended  is,  that
you  hereby  prevent  "  wrangling*  and  contention
m  the  pulpit  Now,  in  .the  first  place)  1  observe,
that  allowing  tins  evil  to  be. as  grievous  and  as
certain  as  you  please,  the  most  that  can  be  neces-
sary for  the  prevention  of  it  is,' to  enjoin  your
preachers  as  ,to  such  points,  silence  and  neutrality,
in  the  next  place,  1  am  convinced,  that  the  dan-
ger is  greatly  magnified.  We  hear  little  of  these
points  at  present  in  our  churches  and  public
teaching,  audit  is  not  probable  that;  leaving  .them
at  large  would  elevate  them  into  more  importance,
or  make  it  mote  worth  -men's  while  to  V Arret
about  them.  They- would  sleep  in  the  same  grave
with.many~other  questions,  of  equal  importance
with  themselves,  or  sink  back,  i^to  their  proper
place,  into  topics  of  speculation,  or  matters  of  de-
bate from  the  press.  -  fcfone  but.  men  of  some  re-
flection would  be  forward  to  engage  in  such  sub-
jects, and  the4  least  reflection  would  teach  a  man


•  We  were  unwilling  to  decline  the  defence  of  the  par-
sons  here  described,  though  the  expression  mthe  Con-
siderations .which  brought  on  the  attack,  manifestly
related  to  a  different  subject.  The  author  of  the  Con-
siderations speaks  of"  being  bound"  to  "keep  up**  these
flntas  until  relievsd  by-proper  authority ;  of  "  ministe-
rially" complying  with  what  we  are  not  able  to  remove ;
alluding,  no  doubt,  to  the  case  of  Church  governors,
who  are  the  'instruments'  of  imposing  a  subscription
which  they  may  disapprove.  But  the  answerer,  taking
it  for  granted,  that  "  ministerially  complying"  meant
the  compliance  of  ministers,  £  s.  of  derkyinen  officiating
in  their  functions,  has,  by  a  quibbte,  or  a  blunder,
transferred  the  passage  to  a  sssm  fox  which  it  was  not

43


194


OP  SUBSCRIPTION  TO  ARTICLES  OF  FAIT&


that  pleaching  is  not  the  proper  vehicle  of  contro-
vtnr.  Even  at  present, sajs* our  author,  "we
•peak  and  write  what  we  pleaae  with  impunity."
And  when  w  the  mischief?  or*  what  worse  could
ensue  if  subscription  were  removed  1  Nor  can  I
discover  any  thing  in  the  disposition  of  the  peti-
tioning cleqy  that  need*  alarm  our  apprehensions.
If  they  are  impatient  under  the  yoke,  it  is  not
from  a  desire  to  hold  forth  their  opinions  to  their
osngregabons,  but  tbjat  they  may  he  at  liberty  to
entertain  themselves,  without  offence  to  their  con-
sciences, or  rain  to  their  fortunes.

Ov  author  has  added,  by  way  of  make-weight
to  his  arffOment,  "that  many' common  Chris-
tians," he  believes,  "  woulJ  be  greatly  scandalised
if  jou  take  away. their  creeds  and  catechisms,  and
strike  eat  of  the  liturgy  such  things  as  they  nave
always  esteemed  essential. ">  Whatever  reason
there  may  be  for  this  belief  at  present,  there,  cer-
tainty was  much  greater  at  'the  Reformation,  as
the  Popish  ritual,  Which  was  then  "  taken  sway,"
had  a  Asrinstion  and  antiquity  which  ours  cannot
pretend  to.  Many  were  probably  "scandalized*'
ac^parting  with  their  beads  and.  their  mass-books,
that  Hved  afterwards  to  thank  those  who  taught
them  better  things.  Reflection,  we  hope,  in  some,
and  time,  we  ate  sure,  in  all,  will  reconcile  men
to  alterations  established  in  reason.  If  there  be
any  danger,  it  is,  from  some  of  the  clergy,  who,
with  the  answerer,  would  rather  suffer  the  u  vine-
yard" to  be  overgrown  with  „"  weeds,"  than  "  stir
the  ground,"  or,  what 'is  worse,  call  these  weeds
u  the  surest  flowers  in  the  garden."  Such  might
be  ready  enough  to  raise  a  hue  and  cry  against  ail
innovators  in  religion,  as  " overt uroers  ofchurches''
and  spoilers  of  temples.

But  the- cause^ which -of  all  others  stood  most 'in
the  way  of  the  late  petitions  for  relief;  was  an  ap-
prehension that  rengisjus-  institutions  cannot  be
disturbed  withotit  awakening  animosities  and  dis-
sensions in  the  state,  of  which  no  man  knows  the
consequence. ,  Touch  but  religion,  we  are  told,  -
and  it  Bursts  forth  into  a  flame.  -Civil  distractions
may  be  composed  by  fortitude  and  perseverance;
but  -neither  reason  nor  authority  can  controul,
there  is  neither  charm  nor  drug  which  will  assuage;
the  passions  of  mankind^when  called  forth  in  the


i-  and  to  the  battles  of  religion.  -We  were
concerned  to  hear  this  language  irom  some  who,
in  other  instances,  have  manifested  a  constancy
and  resolution  which  no  confusion  nor  ill  •  as-'
pecttW  public  affairs,  could  intimidate.  .  After
all;  is  there  any  real  foundation  for  these -ter-
rors'? Is  not  this  whole"  danger,  like*  the  Uon  of
the  .slothful,  the  creature  of  our  fears,  ana  the
excuse  of  Indolence  1  Was  it  proposed  to  make
articles  instead  oC  removing  them,  there  would
be  room,  for  the  objection.  But  it  is  obvious
that  subscription 'to  the  39  4rtjrtes-  might  be
altered  or  withdrawn*  upon  general  principles  of
justice  and*expedfcncy,  without  reviving  one  reli-
gious controversy,  or  calling  into  dispute  a  single
proposition  they  contain.  Who  should  excite  dis-
turbances ?  Those  who  are  relieved  will  not ;  and,
unless  subscription  were  like  a  tax,  which,  being
taken  from  one  must  be  laid  with  additional  weight
upon  another,  is  it  probable  that  any  will  com-
plain that  they  are  oppressed,  -  because  their
Brethren  are  relieved  1  ox  that  Chose  who.  are  so

+  Pates  41, 49


"strong  in.the  frith"  will  refuse  to  "hear  with  the
infirmities  of  the  Weak  ?*;  The  few  who  upon
principles  of  this  sort,  opposed  tfye  application  of
the  Dissenters, .  were  repulsed  fronj  parliament
with  disdain,  even  by  those  who  were'  no  friends
to  the  application  itself.  ,

The  uuestion  concerning  the  p)ijeet  of  worship
is  attended,  I  confess,  with  difficulty;  it  seems- at
most  directly,  to  divide  the  worshippers.  But  let
the  Church  pare  down  *  her  excrescences  tul  she
comes  to  this  question;  let  her  discharge  from  her
liturgy- controversies  unconnected  with  devotion;

let  bet.  try  what  may  be  done  f

shipping  God  in  that  generalil,
\  which  he  himself  has  left  some  {
miss  many  of  her  Articles,  an$J  convert  those  which
she  retains  into  terms  of  peace:  let  her  recall  the
terrors  she  suspended  over  freedom  of  inquiry;  let
the  toleration  she  allows  to  dissenters  be  made
"  absolute ;"  let  her,  invite  men  to  search  the  Scrip-
tures ;•  let  her  governors  encourage  the  studious
and  learned  of  all  persuasions : — Let  her  do  this—
and  she  will  be  secure  of  the 'thanks  of  her  own
clergy,  and  what  is  more,  of  their  sincerity.  A
greater  consent  may  grow  out  of  inquiry  than
man/  at  present  are  aware  of;  and  the  few,  who,
after  all  shall  think  it  necessary  to  recede  from  our
communion,  will  acknowledge  the  necessity  to  be
inevitable ;  wiH  respect  the  equity  and  moderation
'oft  he  established  church,,  and  lisie,  in  .peace  with
all  its  members.'  *

I  know  not  whether  I  ought  to  mention,  among
so  many  more  serious  irasons,  that  even  the  go-
vernors df  the  church  themselves  would  find  their
ease  and  account  in-consenting  to  ah  alteration* —
For  besides,  the  diinculty  of  defending  those  de-
cayed fortifications,  and  the  indecency  of  desert-
ing them,  they  either  arc  or  will  soon  find;  them-
selves in  the  situation  of  a  -master'  of  a  family,
whose  servants  know  more  of  his  secrets  than  it
is  proper  for  them  to  know,  and  whose  whispers
ana  whose  threats  must  be  bought.  ofT  at  an  ex-
pense which  will  drain  the  "  apostolic  chamber"
dry.

Having  thus  examined  in  their  order,  and,  as
far  as  T  understood  them,  the  several  answerst

*  If  a  Christian  can  think  it  an  intolerable  thins  u»
worship  one  God  tin  ouch  one  mediator  Jesus  Christ,  is
company  with  any  such  as  differ  from  him  in  their  no-
tion»  about  the  metaphysical  nature  of  Christ,  or  of  the
Holy  Ghost„or  the  like';  I  am  sorry  for  it.  I  remember
the  like  objection  made  at  the  banning  of  the  Refor-
mation by  the  Lutherans  against  the  lawfulness  of
communicating  wilh  Zuingliutr  and  his  follower*,  he-
cause  they  had  not  the  same  notion-. with  them  of  the
elements  ill  the  sacrament*  And  there  was  the  smaw
objection  once  against  holding  communion  with  any
such  as  bad  not  Hie  name  notion  a  with  themsel  vesnbnot
the  secret  decrees  of  God  relating  to  the  predestination
and  reprobation  of  particular  parsons.  But  whatever
those  men  may  please  themselves  with  thinking  whs
are  sure  they  are  arrived  al  the  perfect  knowledge  of
the  most  ahel/u*e  point*,  this  they  may  be  certain  of,
that  in  the  present  state  of  the  church,  even  supposing
only  such  as  are  accounted  orthodox  to  be  joined  toge-
ther in  one  visible  communion,  they  communicate  ic^
gelher  with  a  very  great  variety  and  con  fusion  of  no-
tions, either  comprHlienaingnotbing^lain  and  distinct,
or  differing  from  one  a  mother  as  truly  and  as  essentially
as  olhere  differ  from  them  all ;  nay,  with  more  certain
difference  with. relation  ts  ths  object  of  woranip  than
if  all  prayers  were  directed  (as.bjshon  Bull  says? almost
all  were  in  the  first  ages)  to  God  or  the  Father,  through
the  Son.— Hoadly's  Answer  to  Dr.  Hare's  Sermon*

t  Tn  his  last  note  our  author  Breaks  forth  into  M  asto-
nishment" and  indignation,  at  the  "ibirjr,  isdossioa,


OP  SUBSCRIPTION  TO  ARTICLES  OP  FAITH.


495


given  by  oar  author  to  the  objections  against  the
present  mode  of  subscription,  it  now  remains,  by
way  of  summing  up  the' evidence,  to  bring  "  for-
ward" certain  other  ajpoments  contained  in  the
Considerations,  to  which  no  answer  has  been  at-
tempted. It  is  contended,  then,

I.  That  stating  any  doctrine  m  a  confession  of
faith  with  a  greater  decree  of  "  precision'"  than
the  Scriptures  have  done,  is  in  effect  to  say,
that  the  Scriptures  have  not  stated  it  "with
"precision"  enough;* in  other  words,  that  the

' Scriptures  are  not  sufficient. — "  Mere  declama-


II.  That  this  experiment  of  leaving  men  at  liber-
ty, and  points  of  doctrine  at  large,  has  been  at-1
tended  with  the  improvements  of  religious
knowledge,  where-  and  whenever  it  has  Deen
tried.  And  to  this  cause,  so  far  as  we  can  see,
is  owing  the  advantage  which  protestant  coun-
tries in  this  respect  possess  above  their  polish
neighbours. — No  answer.

III.  That  keeping  people  out  of  churches  who.
. might  be  admitted  consistently  with  every  end  of

public  worship^  and  excluding  men  from  com-
- munion  who  desire  to  embrace-it  upon  the  terms
tha&God  prescribes,  is  certainly  not  encouraging,
.  .■  - * «  '  » ■

and  indecency"  of  comparing  our  church  to  tbe  Jswisb
in  oar  Saviour's  time,  and  even  to  the  "«,  tower  of  Babel ;"
mistaking  the  church,  in  this  last  comparison,  for  one
•f  her  monuments  (which  indeed,  with  most  people  of

"  his  complexion,  stands  for  the  same  thing)  •reeled  to
present  our  dispersion  frsm  that  grand  centre  of  catho-
lic dominion,  or,  in  the  words  of  a  late  celebrated  cas-,
tie-builder,"  to  keepus  together." If  there  be  any"1;  in-

.  decency1'  ia  such  a  comparison,  it  must  be  chargeable
on  .those  who  lead  us  to  it,  by  making  use  of  .the  same
ternts  with  the.  original  architects,  and  to  which  the
author  of  the  Considerations  evidently  alludes..  This
detached  note  is  concluded  with  si  detached,  and  no
less  curious,  an  observation,  which  the  writer  things
may  be  a" sufficient  answer"  to  the  whole,  namely,
that  the  author  of  the  Considerations  "  has  wrought  no
miracles* for  the  conviction  of  the  auswerer  and  his  as-
sociates."  For  what  purpose  this  observation  can  be
**  sufficient,"  it  is  not  easy  to  guess,  except  it  be  design-
ed to*  insinuate,  what  may  perhaps  really  be  the  case,
tirat.no  less  than  a  miracle  will  serve  to  cast  out  that
kind  of  spirit  which  has  taken  so  full  possession  of
them,  or  ever  bring  them  to  a  sound  mind,  and  a  sia*
«ere  love  of  truth.


but  rather -causing  men  to  forsake,  the  i
bling  of  themselves  together.2— No  answer.

IV.  That  men  are  deterred  from  searching  the
Scriptures  by  the  fear  of  finding  there  more  or

/less  than  they  look  for;  that  is,. something  in-
consistent with  what  they  have  already  given

-  their  assent  to,  and  must  at  their  peril  abide  by.
— No  answer.

V.  That  it  is  not  giving  tenth  a  fair  chance,  to
decide  pbints.<at-one  certain  time,  and  tfy  one
set  of  men,  which  Ijad  much  better  be  left  to
the  successive  inquiries  p£  different  ages  and
different  persons.— No  answer.

VI.  That  it  tends  to  multiply  infidels  amongst
us,  by  exhibiting  Christianity  under  a  form  and
in  a  system  which  many  are  disgusted  with,

-  who  yet  will  not  be  at  the  pains  to  inquire  after
any  otner.r-No  answer.

"  At  the  conclusion  of  his  pamphlet,  our  author
is  pleased  to.  acknowledge,  what  few,- 1  find,' care
any  longer  to  deny,  "  that  there  are  some  things
in  our  Articles  and  Liturgy  which  he  should  be
glad  to  see  amended,  many  which  he  should  be
willing  to  give  up  to  (he  scruples  of  others,"  but
that  the  heat  and  violence  with  which  redress  has)
been  pursued,. preclude  all  hope  o/ accommodation
and  tranquillity — that "  we  had  belter  wait,  there-
fore, for  more  peaceable  times,  and  be  contented
with  our  present  constitution  as  itfs,"until  a  fairer
prospect  shall  appear  of  changing  it  for  the  better.
— After  returning  thanks,',  in  flic"  name  of  the
"  fraternity,'.'  to  him  and  to  all  who  touch  the  bur-
den of  subscription  with  but  one  of  their  fingers,
I  would  wish- to  leave  with  them  this  observation,
— That  a&fhe  man  who  attacks  a  flourishing  es-
tablishment writes  with  a  halter  round  his  neck,
few  ever  will  be  found  to  attempt  alterations  but
men  of  more  spirit  than  prudence,  of  more  sin-
cerity than  caution,  vpf  warm,  eager,  and  impetu-
ous tempers;  that,  consequently,  if  we  are  to
Wait  for  improvement  till  the  cool,  the  calm,  the
discreet  part  of  mankind  begin  it,  till  church  go-
vernors solicit,  or  ministcrs'of  state  propose  it — I
will  venture  Jto  pronounce,  that  (without  Hit  in-
terposition with  whom  nothing  is  impossible)  we
may.  remain -as  we  are  till  the  "renovation  of  all
thing*"


REASONS  FOR  CONTENTMENT,


'  ADDRIMED  TO  THE


LABOURING  PART  OF  THE  BRITISH  COMMUNITY.


Buman  life  has  been  said  to  resemble  the  equa-
tion of  spectators  in  •  theatre,  where,  whilst  each
person  ia  engaged  by.  the  scene-which  panes  be-
fore him,  no  one  thinks  about  .the  place  in  which
he  is  seated.  It  ia  only  when  the  business  is  in-
terrupted, or  when,  the  spectator's  attention  to  it
grows  idle  and  remiss,  that  he  begins  to  consider
at  all,  who  is  before  nim  or  who  is  rbehind  him,
whether  others  are  better  accommodated  than
himself,  or  whether  many  be  not  much  worse.  It
is  thus  with  the  various  ranks  and.  stations  of  so-
ciety. So  long  as  a  man  is  intent  upon  the  du-
ties and  concerns  of  his  own  condition,  he  never
thinks  of  comparing  it. with  any  other;  he  is
never  troubled  with  reflections  upon  thedinerent
classes  and  orders  of  mankind,  the  advantages  and
disadvantages  of  each,  the  necessity  or  non-ne-
cessity of  civil  distinctions,  much  less  does  he  feel
within  -himself  a  disposition  to  covet  pr  envy  any
of  them.  He  is  too  much  taken  up  with  the  oc-
cupations of  his  calling;  its  TOirsuits,  cares,  and
business,  to  bestow  unprofitable  meditations  upon
the  circumstances  in  which  he  sees  others  placed.
And  by  this  means  a  man  of  a  sound  and  active
mind  has,  in  his  very  constitution,  a  remedy  against
the  disturbance  of  envy  and  discontent  These
passions  gain  no  admittance  into  his  breast,  be-
cause there  is  no  leisure  there  or  .vacancy  for  the
trams  of  thought  which  generateTthem.  He  en-
joys, therefore,  ease  in  this  respect,  and  ease  result-
ing from  the  best  cause,  the  power  of  keeping  his
imagination  at  home ;  of  confining  it  to  what  be-
longs to  himself,  instead  of  sending  it  forth  to
wander  amongst  speculations  which  nave  neither
limits  nor  use,  amidst  views  of  unattainable  gran-
deur; fancied  happiness,  of  extolled,  because  un-,
experienced,  privileges  and  delights.

The  wisest  advice  that  can  be  given  is,  never  to
allow  our.  attention  to  dwell  upon  comparisons  be-
tween our  own  condition  and  that  of  others,
but  to  keep  it  fixed  upon  the  duties  and  con-
cerns of  the  condition  itself  But  since  every,
man  has  not  this  power ;  since  the  minds  of
some  men  will  be  Wy  in  contemplating  the
advantages  which  they  see  others  possess  j  and
since  persons  in  laborious  stations  of  life  are  wont
to  view  the  higher  ranks  of  society,  with  senti-
ments which  not  only  tend  to  make  themselves
unhappy,  but  which  are  very  different  from  the
truth;  it  may  be  an  useful  office  to  point  out  to
them  some  of  those  considerations  which,  if  they
will  turn  their  thoughts  to  the  subject,  they  should
endeavour  to  take  fiirly  into  the  account.

And,. first;  we  are  most  of  us  apt  to  murmur,
496


when  we  see  exorbitant  fortunes  placed  in  the
hands  of  single  persons;  larger,  we  are  sure,  than
they  can  want,  or,  as  we  think,  than  they  can  use.
This  is  so/common  a  rejection,  that  I  will  not  sty
it  is  not  natural.  But  whenever  .the  complaint
conies  into  our  minds,  we  ought  to  recollect,  .that
(he  thing  happens  in  consequence  of  those  very
rules  and  laws  which  secure  to  oursejves  our  pro-
perty, be  it  ever  so  small.  'The  laws  which  acci-
dentally cast  enormous  estates  into  one  great
matfs  posocsaien,  are,  after  all,  the  self-same  laws
.which  protect  and  guard  the  poor  man.  •  Fixed
rules  of  property  are  established  -for  one  as  well
an  another,  without  knowing,  before-hand,  whom
they  may  effect  *Jf  these  rules  sometimes  throw
an  excessive  or  disproportionate  share  to  one  man's
lot,  who  can  help  itf  It  is  mush  better  that  k
should  he  so,  than  that  the  rulesjthemselves  should
be  broken  up;  and  you  can  only  have  one  aide  of
the  .alternative  or  the  other.  To  abolish  riches,
Would  not  be  to  abolish  poverty;  but,  on  the  con-
trary, to  leave  it  without  protection  or  resource.
It  is  not  for  the  poor  man  to  repine  at  the  effects
of  laws  and  rules, -by  which  he  himself  is  bene-
fited -every  hour  of  his  existence ;  which  secures
to  him  hi&  earnings,  his  habitation,  his  bread,  Ms
life ;  without  which  he,  no  more  than  the  rich  man,
could  either  eat  his  meal  in  quietness,  or  go  to  bed
in  safety.  Of  the  two,  it  ia  rather  more  the  con-
cern of  the  poor  to  stand  up  for  the  law*,  than  of
the  rich ;  for  it  is  the  law  which  defends  the  weak
against  the  strong,  the  humble  against  the  power-
ful, the  little  against  the  (Treat;  and  weak  and
strong,  humble  and  powerful,  little  and  great,  there
would  be,  even  were  there  no  laws  whatever.  Be-
side, what,  after  all,  is  the  mischief?  The  owner
of\  great  estate  does  not  eat  or  drink  more  than
the  owner  of  a  small  one.  His  fields  do  not  pro-
duce worse  crops,  nor  does  the  produce  maintain
fewer  mouths.  If  estates  were  more  equally  di-
vided, would  greater  numbers  be  fed,  or  clothed,  or
employed  1  Either,  therefore,  large  fortunes  are
not  a  public  evil,  or,  if  the v  be  in  any  degree  an
evil,  it  is  to-  be  borne  with,  for  the  sake  of  those
fixed  and  general  rules-  concerning  property,  in
the  preservation 'and  steadiness  of  which  all  am
interested.

,  Fortunes,  however,  of  any  kind,  from  the  na-
ture of  the  thing,  can  only  tall  to  the  lot  of  a  few.
I  say,  "  from  the  nature  of  the  thing."  The  very
utmost  that  can  be  done  bylaws  and  government,
is  to  enable  every  man,  who  hath  health,  to  pro-
cure a  healthy  subsistence  for  himself  and  a  finally.
Where  this  is  the  case,  things  am  at  their  periso-


REASONS  FOR  CONTENTMENT.


497


tJon.  They  have  reached  their  limit.  Were  the
princes  and  nobility,  the  legislators  andcounsellors
of  the  land,  all  of  them  the  best  and  wisest  men
that  ever  lived,  their  united  virtue  and  wisdom
could  do  no  more  than  this.  They,  if  any  such
there  be,  who  would  teach  you  to  expect  more,
give  you  no  instance  where  more  has  ever  been
attained.

Bat  Providence,  which  foresaw,  which  appoint-
ed, indeed,  the  necessity  to  which  human  affairs
are  subjected,  (and  against  which  it  were  impious
to  complain,)  hath  contrived,  that,  whilst  fortunes
•re-  only  for  a  few,  the  rest  of  mankind  may  be
happy  without  them.  And  this  leads  me  to  con-
aider  the  comparative  advantages  and  comforts
which  belong  to  the  condition  or  those  who  sub-
mit, as  the  great  mass  of  every  people  do  and  must
subsist,  by  personal  labour,  and  the  solid  .reasons
they  have  for  contentment  in  their  stations.  I  do
Hot  now  use  the  terms  poor  and  rich :  because  that
man  is  to  be  accounted  poor,  of  whatever  rank  he
be,  and  suffers  the  pains  of  poverty,  whose  ex-
penses exceed 'his  resources,1  arid  no  man  is,  pro-
perly speaking,  poor  but  he.  But  I,  at  present,
consider  the  advantages  of  those  laborious  condi-
tions of  life  which  compose  the  great  portion  of
every  human  community.

And,  first;  it  is  an  inestimable  blessing  of  such
situations,  'that  they  supply  a  constant  train  of
employment  both  to  body  and  mind.  A  husband-
man, or  a  manufacturer,  or  a  tradesman,  never  goes
to  bed  at  night  without  having  his  business  to  rise
up  to  in  the  morning.  He  would  understand  the
value  of  this  advantage,  did  he  know  that  the
want  of  it  composes- one  of  the  greatest  plagues  of
the  human  soul:  a.  plague  by  which  the  rich,  es-
pecially those  who  inherit  riches,  are  exceedingly
oppressed.  Indeed  it  is  to  get  rid  of  it,  that  is  to
pay,  it  is  to  have  something  to  do,  that  they  are
driven  upon  those  strange  and  unaccountable  ways
of  passing  their  time,  in  which  we  sometimes  see
them,  to  our  surprise,  engaged.  A  poor  man's
condition  supplies  him  with  that  which  no  man
can  do  without,  and  with  which  a  rich  man,  with
all  his  opportunities,  and  all  his  contrivance,  can
hardly  supply  himself;  regular  engagement,  busi-
ness to  look  forward  to,  something  to  be  done  for
•very  day,  some  employment  prepared  for  every
mprniqg.  A  few  of  better  judgment  can  seek  out
lor  themselves  constant  and  useful  occupation.
There  is  not  one  of  you  takes  the  pains  in  his
calling,  which  some  of  the  most  independent  men
in  the  nation  have  taken,  and  are  taking,  to  pro-
mote what  they  deem  to  be  a  point  of  great  con-
cern to  the  interests  of  humanity,  by  which  neither
they  nor  theirs  can  ever  fain  a  shilling,  and-  in
which  should  they  succeed,  those  who  are  to  be
benefited  by  their  service,  will  neither  know  nor
thank  them  for  it  I  only  mention  this  to  show,
in  conjunction  with  what  has  been  observed.above,
that,  of  those,  who  are  at  liberty  to  act  as  they
please,  the  wise  preve,  and  the  foolish  confess,  by
their  conduct,  that  a  life  of  employment  is  the
only  life  worth  leading ;  and  that  the  chief  differ-
ence between  their  manner  of  passing  their  time
and  yours,  is,  that  they  can  choose  the  objects  of
their  activity,  which  you  cannot.  This  privilege
maybe  an  advantage  to  some,  but  for  nine  out  of
ten  it  is  fortunate  that  occupation  is  provided  to
their  hands,  that  they  have  it  not  to  seek,  that  it  is
imposed  upon  them  bv  their  necessities  and  occa-
sions; for  the  consequence  of  liberty  ht  this  re-
3  R


spect  would  be,  that,  lost  in  the  perplexity  of
choosing,  they  would  sink  into- irrecoverable  mee*
lence,  inaction,  and  unconcern;  into  that  vacancy
and  tiresomeness  of  time  and  thought  which  are
inseparable  from  such  a  situation,  A  man's
thoughts  must  be  going.  Whilst  he  is  awake,
the  working  of  his  mind  is  as  constant  ss  the  beat-
ing of  his  pulse.  He  can  no  more  stop  the  one
than  the  other.  Hence  if  our  thoughts  have  no-
thing to  act  upon,  they  act  upon  ourselves.  They
acquire*  a  corrosive  quality.  They  become  in  the
last  degree  irksome  and  tormenting.  Where/ore
that  sort  of  equitable  engagement,  which  takes  up
the  thoughts  sufficiently,  yet  so  as  to  leave  them
capable  of  turning  to  any  thing  more  important;
as  occasions  offeror  require,  is  a  most  invaluable
blessing.  And  if  the  industrious  be  not  sensible
of  the  blessing,  it  is  for  no  other  reason  than  be-
cause they  havs  never  experienced,  or  rather  suf-
fered the  want  of  it.

Again;  some  of  the  necessities  which  poverty
(if  the  condition  of  the  labouring  part  of  mankind
must  be  so  called)  imposes,  are  not  hardships  but
pleasures.  .  Frugality  itself  is  a  pleasure.  It  is
an  exercise  of  attention  and  contrivance,  which,
whenever  it  is  successful,"  produces  satisfaction.
The  very  care  and  forecast  that  are  necessary  to
keep  expenses  and  earnings  upon  a  level,  form,
when  not  embarrassed  by  too  great  difficulties,  an
agreeable  engagement  of  the  thoughts.  This  i*.
lost  amidst  abundance.  There  is  no  pleasure  in
taking  out  of  a  Janre  unmeasured  fund.  They
who  do  that,  and  only  that,  are  the  mere  convey-
ers of  money  from  one  hand  to  another.

A  yet  more  serious  advantage  which  persons  in
inferior  stations  possess,  is  me  ease  with  which
they  provide  for  their  children.  All  the  provision
whicn  a  poor  man's  child  requires,  is- contained  in
two  words,  "industry  and  innocence.'1  With
these  qualities,  though  without  a  shilling  to'  set
him  forwards,  ne  goes  into  the  world  prepared  to
become  an  useful,  virtuous,  and  happy  man.  Nor
will  he  tail  to  meet  .with  a>  maintenance  -adequate
to  the  habits  with  which  he  has  been  brought  up,
and  to  the  expectations  which  he  has  formed ;  a
degree  of  success  sufficient  for  a  person  of  any
condition  whatever.  These  qualities  of  industry
and  innocence,  which,  1  repeat  again,  are  all  that
are  absolutely  necessary,  every  parent  can  give  to
his  children  without  expense,  because  he  can
give  them  by  his  own  authority  and  example;
and  they  are  to  be  communicated,  I  believe,  and
preserved,  in  ne  other  way.  I  call  this  a  serioue
advantage  of -humble  stations ;  because  in  what  we
reckon  superior  ranks  of  life,  there  is  a  real  diffi-
culty in  placing  children  In  situations  which  may
in  any  degree  support  them  in  the  class  and  in
the  habits  m  whicn  they  have  been  brought  up  by
their  parents:  from  which  great  and  oftentimes
distressing  perplexity  the  poor  are  free.  With
health  of  body,  innocence  of  mind,  and  habits  of.
industry,  a  poor  man's  child  has  .nothing  to  be
afraid  ofy  nor  bis  father  or  mother  any  thing  to  be
afraid  6f  for  him.

The  labour  of  the  world  is  carried  en  by  terries^
that  is,  by  one  mari  working  under  another  man's
direction.  I  take  it  for  granted  that  this  is  the
best  way  of  conducting  business,  because  all  na-
tions and  ages  have  adopted  it.  Consequently  *
service  is  the  relation  which,  of  all  others,  affect*
the  greatest  numbers  of  individuals,  and  in  the
most  sensible  manner.  In  whatever  country,
42»


REAS0N8  FOR  CONTENTMENT.


therefore,  this  relation  ii  well  and  equitably  regu-
lated, in  that  country  the  poor  will  be  happy.
Now  how  v  the  natter  managed  with  tie?  Ex-
cept apprenticeships,  the  necessity  of  which  every
one,  at  least  every  father  and  mother,  will  ac-
knowledge, as  the  best,  if  not  the  only  practicable,
way  of  gaining  instruction  and  skill,  and  which
have  their  foundation. in  nature,  because  they
ha«e  their  foundation  in  the  natural  ignorance
and  imbecility  of  youth ;  except  these,  service  in
England,  is,  as  it  ought  to  be\  voluntary  and  by


that  a  continuance  of  this  connexion  is  frequently
the  foundation  of  so  much  mutual  kindness  and
attachment,  that  very  lew  friendships  are  more
cordial,  or  more  sincere ;  that  it  leaves  oftentimes
nothing  in  servitude  except  the  name;  nor  any
distinction  but  what  one  party  is  as  much  pleased
With,  and  sometimes  also  as  proud  of;  as  the  other.
-  What  then  (lor  this  is  the  fair  way  of  calculat-
ing) is  there  in  higher  stations  to  place  against
these  advantages  1  What  does  the  poor  man  see
in  the  life  or  condition  of  the  rich,  that  should
render  him  dissatisfied  with  his  own  1  '

Was  there  as  much  in  sensual  pleasures,  I
mean  in  the  luxuries  of  eating  and  drinking,  and
other  gratifications  of  that  sort,  as  some  men's
imaginations  would  represent  them  to  be,  but
which  no  man's  experience  finds  in  them,  1  con-

nthat  even  in  these  respects,  the  advantage  is
e  side  of  the  poor.  The  rich,  who  addict
themselves  to  indulgence,  lose  their  relish.  Their
desires  are  dead.  Their  sensibilities  are  worn'
and  tired.  Hence  they  lead  a  languid  satiated
existence.  Hardly  any  thing  can  amuse,  or  rouse,
or  gratify  them.  Whereas  the  poor  man,  if  some-
thing  extraordinary  fell  in  his  way,  comes  to  the
•epast  with  appetite ;  is  pleased  and  refreshed :
derives  from  his  usual  course  of  moderation  and
temperance  a  quickness  of  perception  and  delight
which  the  unrestrained  voluptuary  knows  nothing
of.  Habits  of  all  kinds  are  much  the  same.
Whatever  is  habitual,  becomes  smooth  and  indif-
ferent^ and  nothing  more.  The  luxurious  receive
no  greater  pleasures  from  their  dainties,  than  the
peasant  does  from  his  homely  fare. — But  here  is
the  difference :  The  peasant  whenever  he  goes
abroad,  finds  a  feast,  whereas  the  epicure  must  be
sumptuously  entertained  to  escape  disgust.  They
who  spend  every  day  in  diversions,  and  they  who
go  every  day  about  their  usual  business,  pass  their
Ime  much  alike.  Attending  to  what  they  are
about,  wanting  nothing,  regretting  nothing,  they
are  both,  whilst  engaged,  in  a  state  of  ease;  but
thenj  wAateversuspcnda  the  pursuits  of  the  man
of  diversion,  distresses  him,  whereas  to  the  la-
bourer, or  the  man  of  business,  every  pause  is  a
SBcreataori.  And  this  is  a  vast  advantage  which  they
possess  who  are  trained  and  inured  to  a  life  of  oc-
ottpation,  above  the  man  who  sets  up  for  a  Kfe  of
pleasure.  Variety  is  soon  exhausted.  Novelty
Itself  is  no  longer  new.  Amusement*  are  l>ecome
too  ramilar  to  delight,  and  he  is  in  u  situation  in
which  he  can  never  change  but  for  the  worse.

Another  article  which  the  poor  are  apt  to  envy
in  the  rich,  is  their  ea*e.  Now  here  they  mistake
the  matter  totally.  They  call  inaction  ease,
whereas  nothing  is  farther  from  it  Rest  is  ease.
That  is  true  j  but  no  man  can  rest  who  has  not


worked.  Rest  is  the  cessation  of  labour.  It  can-
not therefore  be  enjoyed,  or  even  tasted,  except  by
those  who  have  known  fatigue.  The  rich  see,
and  not  without  envy,  the  refreshment  and  plea-
sure which  rest  affords  to  the  poor,  and  choose  to
wonder  that  they  cannot  find  the  same  enjoyment
in  being  free  from  the  necessity  of  working  at  alL
They  do  not  observe  that  this  enjoyment  must  be
purchased  by  previous  labour,  and  that  he  who
will  not  pay  the  price  cannot  nave  the  gratifica-
tion. Being  without  work  is  one  thing ;  reposing
from  work  is  another.  The  one  is  as  tiresome  ana
insipid  as  the  other  is  sweet  and  soothing.  .  The
one,  in  general,  is  the  fete  of  the  rich  man,  the
other  is  toe  fortune  of  the  poor.  I  have  heard  it
said,  that  if  the  face  of  happiness  can  any  where
be  seen,  it  is  in  the  summer  evening  of  .a  country
village;  where,  after  the  labours  of  the  day,  each
man  at  his  door,  with  his  children,  amongst  his
neighbours,  feels  his  frame  and  his  heart  at  rest
every  thing  about  him  pleased  and  pleasing,  and
a  delight  and  complacency  in  his  sensations  Jar
beyond  what  either  luxury  or  diversion  can  afibrd.
The  rich  want  this;  and  they  want  what  they
must  never  have.

As  to  some  other  things  which  the  poor  are  dis-
posed to  envy  in  the  condition  of  the  rich,  such  as
their  state,  their  appearance,  the  grandeur  of  their
houses,  dress,  eauipage,  and  attendance,  they,  only
envy  the  rich  these  things  because  they  do  not
know  the  rich.  They  have  not  opportunities  of
observing  with  what  neglect  and  insensibility  the
rich  possess  and  regard  these  things  themselves.
If  they  could  see  the  great  man  in  his  retirement
and  in  his  actual  manner  of  life,  they  would  find
him,  if  pleased  at  all,  taking  pleasure  in  some  of
those  simple  enjoyments  which  they  can  command
as  well  as  he.  They  would  find  him  amongst
his  children,  in  his  husbandry,  in  his  garden,  pur-
suing some  rural  diversion,  or  occupied  with  some
trifling  exercise,  which  are  all  gratifications,  as
much  within  the  power  and  reach  of  the  poor
man  as  of  the  rich ;  or  rather  more  so.

To  learn  the  art  of  contentment,  is  only  to
learn  what  happiness  actually  consists  in.  sen-
sual pleasures  add  little  to  its  substance.  Esse,
if  by  that  be  meant  exemption  from  labour,  con-
tributes nothing.  One,  however,  constant  spring
of  satisfaction,  and  almost  infallible  support  ol
cheerfulness  and  spirits,  is  the  exercise  of  domes-
tic aJfections ;  the  presence  of  objects  of  tenderness
and  endearment  in  our  families,  our  kindred,  our
friends.  Now,  have  the  poor  any  thing  to  com-
plain of  here  1  Are  they  not  surrounded  by  their
relatives  as  generally  as  others  1  The  poor  man
has  his  wife  and  "children  about  him;  and  what
ha*s  the  rich  more  1  He  has  the  same  enjoyment
of  their  society,  the  same  solicitude  for  their  wel-
fare, the  sanio  pleasure  in  their  good  qualities,
improvement,  and  success:  their  connexion  with
him,  is  as  strict  and  intimate,  their  attachment  as
strong,  their  gratitude  as  warm.  I  have  no  pro-
pensity to  envy  any  one,  least  of  all  the  rich  and
grcnt ;  but  if  1  were  disposed  to  this  weakness,  the
subject  of  my  envy  would  be,  a  healthy  young
man,  in  full  possession  of  his  strength  and  facul-
ties, going  forth  in  a  morning  to  work  for  bis  wife
and  children,  or  bringing  them  home  his  wages  at
night

But  was  difference  of  rank  or  fortune  of  mora
importance  to  personal  happiness  than  it  is,  it
would  be  ill  purchased  by  any  sudden  or  violent


REASONS  FOR  CONTENTMENT.


499


change  of  condition.  An  alteration  of  circum-
stances, which  break*  up  a  man's  habits  of  life,
deprives  him  of  his  occupation,  removes  him  from
bis  acquaintance,  may  be  called  an  elevation  of
fortune,  but  hardly  ever  brings  with  it  an  addition
of  enjoyment  They  to  whom  accidents  of  this
sort  have  happened,  never  found  them  to  answer
their  expectations.  After  the  first  hurry  of  the
change  is  over,  they  are  surprised  to  feel  in  them-
selves listlessness  and  dejection,  a  consciousness
Of  solitude,  vacancy,  and  restraint,  in  the  place  of
cheerfulness,  -liberty,  and  ease.  They  try  to
make  up  for  what  they  have  lost,  sometimes  by  a
beastly  sottishness,  sometimes  by  a  foolish  dissipa-
tion, sometimes  by  a  stupid  sloth;  all  which  effects
are  only  so  many  confessions,  that  changes  of  this
sort  were  not  made  for  man.  If  any  public  dis-
turbance should  produce,  not  an  eauaiity  (for  that
is  not  the  proper  name  to  give  it,)  out  a  jumble  of
ranks  and  professions  amongst  us,  it  is  not  only
evident  what  the  rich  would  lose,  but  there  is  also
this  further  misfortune,  that  what  the  rich  lost  the
poor  would  not  gain.  I  (God  knows)  could  not
get  my  livelihood  by  labour,  nor  would  the  labourer
find  any  solace  or  enjoyment  in  my  studies.  If  we
were  to  exchange  conditions  to-morrow,  all  the
effect  would  be,  that  we  both  should  be^  more,
miserable,' and  the  work  of  both  be  worse  done.
Without  debating,  therefore,  what  might  be  very
difficult  to  decide,  which- of  our  two  conditions
was  better  to  begin  with,  one  point  is  certain,  that
it  is  best  for  each  to  remain  in  his  own.  The
change,  and  the  only  change,  to  be  desired,  is  that
gradual  and  progressive  improvement  of  our  cir-
cumstances whion  is  the  natural  fruit  of  successful
industry ;  when  each  year  is  something  better  than
the  last;  when  we  are  enabled  to  add  to  our  little
nousehold  one  article  after  another  of  new  comfort
or  convenielicy,  as  our  profits  increase,  oj  our
burden  becomes  less  ^and,  what  is  best  of  all,  when
we  can  afford,  as  our  strength  declines,  to  relax
ear  labour*,  or  divide  our  cares.  Thi*  may  be
looked  forward  to,  and  is  practicable,  by  great
numbers  in  a  state  of  public  order  and  quiet;  it  is
absolutely  impossible  in  any  other.


If.  in  comparing, the  different  conditions  of  so-
cial life,  we  bring  religion  into  the  account,  the
argument  is  stOl  easier.  Religion  smooths  all  in-
equalities, because  it  unfolds  a  prospect  which
nukes  all  earthly  distinctions  nothing.  And  I  do
allow  that  tijere  are  many  cases  of  sickness',  af-
fliction, and  distress,  which  Christianity  alone  can
comfort  But  in  estimating  the  mere  diversities
of  station  and  civil  condition,  I  have  not  thought
it  necessary  to  introduce  religion  into  the  inquiry
at  all ;  because  I  contend,  that  the  man  who  mur-
murs and  repines,  when  he  has  nothing  to  murmur
and  repine  about,  but  the  mere  want  of  independ-
ent property,  is  not  only  irreligious. -but  unreason-
able, in  his  complaint;  and  that  he  would  find,
did  ne  know  the  truth,  andconsidler  his  case  fairly,
that  a  life  of  labour,  jrach,  I  mean,  as  is  led  by  the
labouring  part  of  mankind  in  this  country,  has
advantage*  in  it  which  compensate  all  its  incon-
veniences. .  When  compared  with  the  life  of  the
rich,  it  is  better  in  these  important  respects:  It
supplies  employment,  it  promotes  activity.  1$
keeps  the  body  in  better  health,- the  mind  more
engaged,  and,  of  course,  more  quiet  It  is  more
sensible  of  ease,  more  susceptible  of  pleasure.  It
is  attended  with  greater  alacrity  of  spirits,  a  more
constant  cheerfulness  and  serenity  oTtemper.  It
affords  easier  and  more  certain  methods  of  send-
ing children  into  the  world  in  situations  suited  to
their  habits  and  expectations.  It  is  free  from  many
heavy  anxieties  which  rich  men  feel ;  it  is  fraught
with  many  sources  of  delight  which  they  want
*  If  to  these  reasons  for  contentment,  the  reflect-
ing husbandman  or  artificer  add*  another  very
material  one,  that  changes  of  condition,«which  are
attended  with  a  breaking  up  and  sacrifice  of  our
ancient  course  and  habit  of  living,  never  can  be
productive  of  happiness,  he  will  perceive,  I  trust,
that  to  covet  the  stations  or  fortunes  of  the  rich,
or  so,  however,  to  covet  them,  m  to  wish  to  seize
them  by  force,  or  through  the  medium  of  public,
uproar  and  confusion,  is  not  only  wickedness,  but
folly,  as  mistaken  in  the  end  as  in  the  means,  that
tiisnotonlyioventurtordtoteainaetorm,  tut  to
venter*  Jbr  ruthing.


SERMONS  ON  PUBLIC  OCCASIONS.


SERMON  I.

CAUTION  RECOMMENDED  IN  THE  USE  AND  APPLICATION  OF  SCRIPTURE

LANGUAGE:

A  SERMON,  f REACHED,  JULY  17,  1777,  IN  TEE  CATHEDRAL  CHURCH  OP  CARLISLE,  AT  THE  TIRtTATIOH
OP  THE  RIGHT  REVEREND LORD  BISHOP  OF  CARLISLE.

•»  •


'7b  the  Right  Reverend  Edmund,  Lord  Bishop  of  Carlisle,  thi$  discourse  is  inscribed,  with
timents  of  great  respect  and  gratitude,  by  his  Lordship's  most  dutiful,  and"  most  obliged
and  chaplain,  W.  PALEY.


Even,  as  our  beloved  brother  Paul  also,  according  to  the  wisdom  given  unto  him,  hath  written  unto
you  ;  as  also  in  all  his  epistlesyspeaking  in  them  of  these  things  ;  in  which  are  some  things  hard
to  be  understood,  which  they  that  are  unlearned  and  unstable  vrest,  as  they  do  also-  the  other
Scriptures,  unto  their  own  destruction. — 2  Peter  iii.  15,  16.


It  must  not  be  dissembled  that  there  are  many
real  difficulties  in  the  Christian  Scriptures ;  whilst,
at  the  same  time,  more,  1  believe,  and  greater,
may  justly  be  imputed  to  certain  maxims  of  inter-
pretation, which  have  obtained  authority  without
reason,  and  are  received  without  inquiry.  One  of
these,  as  I  apprehend,  is  the  expecting  to  find,  in  the
present  circumstances  of  Christianity,  a  •  meaning
lor,  or  something  answering  to,  every  appellation
and  expression  which  occurs  in  Scripture;  or,  in
other  words,  the  applying  to  the  personal  condition
of  Christians  at  this  day,  those  titles,  phrases,  pro-
positions, and  arguments,  which  belong  solely  to
the  situation  of  Christianity  at  its  first  institution.

I  am  aware  of  an  objection  which  weighs  much
with  many  serious  tempers,  namely,  that  to  sup-
-  pose  any  part  of  Scripture  to  be  inapplicable  to  us,
M  to  suppose  a  part  of  Scripture  to  be  useless ;
w^hich  seems  to  detract  from  the  perfection  we
attribute  to  these  oracles  of  out  salvation.  To
this  I  can  only  answer,  that  it  would  have  been
one  of  the  strangest  things  in  the  world,  if  the
writings  of  the  New  Testament  had  not,  like  all
other  books,  been  composed  for  the  apprehension,
and  consequently  adapted  to  the  circumstances,  of
the  persons  they  were  addressed  to;  and  that  it
would  have  been  equally  strange,  if  the  great,
and  in  many  respects,  the  inevitable  alterations,
which  have  taken  place  in  those  circumstances,
did  not  vary  the  application  of  Scripture  Ian*
guage.

I  design,  in  the  following  discourse,  to  pro-
pose some  examples  of  this  variation,  from  which
jou  will  judge,  as  I  proceed,  of  the  truth  and  im-
portance of  our  general  observation.

First;  At  the  time  the  Scriptures  were  writ-
ten, none  were  baptized  but  converts,  and  none
500


were  converted  but  from  conviction;  and  convic-
tion produced,  for  the  most  part,  a  coiresnendiiig
reformation  of  life  and  manners.  Hence  naptis*n
was  only  another  name  for  conversion,  and  con-
version was  supposed  to  be  sincere:  in  this  sense
was  our  Saviours  promise, "  he  that  beUevetB,  mod
is  baptized,  shall  be  saved;"*  and  in  the  same  ms
command  to  St.  Paul,  "arise,  and  be  baptised,
and  wash  away  thy  sins  :"t  this  was  that  baptism,
"  for  the  remission  of  sins,"  to  which  St.  Peter  in-
vited the  Jews  upon  the  day  of  Pentecost  ;*  that
"  washing  of  regeneration,"  by  which,  as  St.  Paul
writes  to  Titus,  "he  saved  us."§  Now,  when
we  come  to  speak  of  the  baptism  which  obtains
in  most  Christian  churches  at  present,  where  no
conversion  is  supposed,  or  possible,  it  is  manifest,
that,  if  these  expressions  be  applied  at  all,  they
must  be  applied  with  extreme  qualification  and  re-
serve.

Secondly;  The  community  of  Christians  were
at  first  a  handful  of  men,  connected  amongst
themselves  by  the  strictest  union,  and  divided
from  the  rest  of  the  world  by  a  real  difference  of
principle  and  persuasion,  and,  what  was  more  ob-
servable, by  many  outward  peculiarities  of  worship
and  behaviour.  This  society,  considered  colkcU
ively,  and  as  a  body,  were  set  apart  from  the  rest
of  mankind  for  a  more  gracious  dispensation,  as
well  as  actually  distinguished  by  a  superior  purity
of  life  and  conversation.  In  this  view,  and  in  op-
position to  the  unbelieving  world,  they  were  de-
nominated in  Scripture  by  titles  of  great  i


dignity  and  import;  they  were  "elect,"  " called,1
"  saints  ;"ll  they  were  r'in  Christ  ;"*  f


they


•  Maik  xvi.  18.

1  Acts  h\  38.

f  £om.viii.33;i.6,7.


IAcuxxii.  16.
Titus  iii.  5.
Eom.viii.  1.


SERMONS  ON  PUBLIC  OCCASIONS.


501


"  ft  chosen  generation,  a  royal  priesthood,  a  holy
nation,  a  peculiar  people."*  That  is,  these  terms
were  employed  to  distinguish  the  professors  of
Christianity  from,  the  rest  of  mankind,  in  the.
same  manner  as  the  names  of  Greek  and  Barba-
rian. Jew  ana"  Gentile,  distinguished  the  people
of  Greece*  and  Israel  from  other  nations..  The
application  of  such  phrases  to  the  whole  body  of
Christians  is  become  now  obscure  ;  partly  because
it  jri  not  easy  to  conceive  of  Christians  as  a  body  at
all,  by  reason  of  the  extent  of-  their  name  and
numbers,  and  the  little  visible  union  that  subsists
among  them ;  and  partly,  because  the  heathen
world,  with  whom  they  were  compared,  and  to
which  comparison  these  phrases  relate,  is  now
ceased,  or  is  removed  from  our  observation."  Sup-
posing, therefore,  these  expressions  to  have  a
perpetual  meaning,  and,  etther  forgetting  the
original  use  of  them,  or  finding  that,  at  this  time,
in  a  great  measure  exhausted  and  insignificant,
we  resort  to  a  sense  and  an  application  of  them,
easier,  it  may  be,  to  our  comprehension,  but  ex-
tremely foreign  from  the  design  of  their  authors,
namely,  to  distinguish  individuals  amongst  us,
the  professors  of  Christianity,  from  one  another :
agreeably  to  which  idea,  the  most  flattering  of
these  names,  the  "  elect/'  "called,1'  "saints,"  have,
by  bold  and  unlearned  men,  been  appropriated  to
themselves  and  their  own  party  with  a  presump-
tion and  conceit  injurious  to  the  reputation  of  our
.religion  amongst  "  them  that  are  without,."  and
extremely  disgusting  to  the  sober  part  of  its  pro-
fessors; whereas,  that  such  titles.were  intended
In  a  sense  common  to  all  Christian  converts,  is
well  argued  from  many  places  in  which  they  oc-
cur, in  which'  places  you  may  plainly  substitute  the
terms  convert 'ox  converted^  tor  the  strongest  of
these  phrases,  without  any  alteration  of  the  au-
thor's meaning,  t.  g.  "  dare  any  of  you  go_  to  law
before  the  unjust  and  not  before  the  *amte?"t
~%t  Is  any  man  called  being  circumcised,  let  him
not  become  uncircumcised  :"*  "  The  church  that
ia  at  Babylon  elected  together  with  you,  saluteth
you:"S  "Salute  Andronicus  and  Junia,  who
were  in  Christ  before  me."!l

Thirdly;  In  opposition  to  the  Jews,  who  were
so  much  offended  by  the  preaching  of  the  Gospel
to  the  Gentiles,  St.  Paul  maintains,  with  great  in-
dustry, that  it  was  God  Almighty's  intention
from  the  first,  to  substitute,  at  a  fit  season,  into
the  place  of  the  rejected  Israelites,  a  society  of
men  taken  indifferently  out  of  all  nations  under
heaven,  and  admitted  to  be  the  people  of  God  upon
easier  and  more  comprehensive  terms.  This  is
expressed  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Ephesians,  as  fol-
lows:— "  Having  made  known  unto  us  the  mys-
tery of  his  will,  according  to  his  good  pleasure
which  he  hath  purposed  in  himself;  that,  in  the
dispensation  ot  the  fulness  of  times,  he  might
gather  together  in  one  all  things  in  Christ/'IT
This  scheme  of  collecting  such  a  society  was
what  God  foreknew  before  the  foundation  of  the
world;  was  what  he  did  predestinate :  was  the
eternal  purpose,  which  he. purposed  in  Christ  Je-
ras;  and,  by  consequence,  this  society,  in  their
collective  capacity,  were  the  objects  of  this  fore-
knowledge, predestination,  and  purpose ;  that  is,
In  the  language  of  the  apostles,  they  ware  they


•lPet.ii.ft. tlCor.vi.l. J  1  Cor.  vii.  18.

fl  Pet.  v.  13.  |Rom.xvi.7.

¥  Eph.  L  9, 10;  also  tee  Eon.  iii. «,  0.


/'whom  he  did  foreknow,"  the*  "whom  he  did
predestinate;'**  they  were  "chosen  in  Christ
before  the  foundation  of  the  world  ;"t  they  were
elect  according  to  the  foreknowledge  of  God  the
Father."*  This  doctrine  has  nothing  'in  it
harsh  or  obscure.  *  But  what  have  we  made  of  it  1
The  rejection -of, the  Jews,  and  the  adopting;
another  community  into  their  place,  composed.


whilst  it  was  carrying  on,  an  object  of  great  mag.
nitude  in  the  attention  of  the  inspired  writers  who
understood  and  observed  it  This  event,  which
engaged  so  much  the  thoughts  of  the  apostle,  is
now  only  read  of,  and  hardly  that— the  reality
and  the  importance  of  it  are  little  known  or  at*
tended  to.  Losing  sight,  therefore,  of  the  proper
occasion  of  these  expressions,  yet  willing,  alter
our  fashion,  to  adapt  them  to  ourselves,  ana  find*'
ing  nothing  else  in  our  circumstances  that  suited
with  them,  we  have  learnt  at  length  to  apply
them  to  the  final  destiny  of  individuals  at  the  day
of  judgment ;  and  upon  this  foundation,  has  been
erected  a  doctrine  which  lays  the  axe  at  once  to
the  root  of  all  religion,  that  of  an  absolute  appoint-
ment to  salvation  or  perdition  independent  of  our-
selves or  any  thing  we  can  do;  and  what  is  ex-
traordinary, those,  very  arguments  and  expres-
sions (Rpm.  chap,  ix,  x,  xi.)  which  the  apostle
employed  to  vindicate  the  impartial  mercies  of  God.
against  the  narrow  and  excluding  claims  or
Jewish  prejudice,  have  been  interpreted  to  esta-
blish a  dispensation  the  most  arbitrary  and  partial
that  could  be  devised.

Fourthly ;  The  conversion  of  a  grown  person
from  Heathenism  to- Christianity,  which  is  the
case  of  conversion  commonly  Intended  in  the  Epis-
tles, was  a  change  of  which  we  have  now  no  just
conception :  it  was  a  new  name,  a  new  language,
a  new  society;  a  new  faith,  a  new  hope;  a  new
object  of  worship,  a  new  rule  of  life:  -a  history
was  disclosed  full  of  discovery  and  surprise;  a
prospect  of  futurity  was  unfolded,  \ieyond  imagi-
nation awful  and  august;  the  same  description
applies  in  a  great  part,  though  not  entirely,  to  the
conversion  of  a  Jew.  This,  accompanied  as  it
was  with  the*  pardon  of  every  former  sin,  (Romans
iii.  25,)  was  such  an  era  in  a  man's  life,  so  remark-
able a  period  in  his  recollection,  such  a  revolution
of  every  thing  that  was  most  important  to  him,  as
might  well  admit  of  those  strong  figures  and  sig-
nificant allusions  by  which  it  is  described  in  Scrip-
ture: it  was  a' "regeneration"!  or  a  newbirm;
it  was  to  be  "  born  again  of  God,  and  of  the  Spi-
rit ;"ll  it  was  to  be  "  dead  to  sin,"  and  "  alive  from
the  dead  ;"1T  it  was  to  be  buried  with  Christ  in
baptism,  and  raised  together  with  him  ;"*+  it  was
"  a  new  creature,"tt  and  a  new  creation ;"« it  was
a  translation  from  the  condition  of  "  slaves  to  that
of  sons;"Sf  from  " strangers  and  foreigners,  to  be
fellow-citizens  with  the  saints,  and  of  the  house-
hold of  God."lill  It  is  manifest  that  no  change '
equal  or  similar  to  the  conversion  of  a  Heathen
can  be  experienced  by  us,  or  by  any  one  educated
in  a  Christian  country,  and  to  whom  the  mete,
precepts,  and  hopes  or  Christianity  ?  have  been
from  nis  infancy  familiar:  yet  we  will  retain  the
same  language ;  and  what  has  been  the  conse-
quence ? One  sort  of  men,  observing  nothing  in


•Rom.viii.Sft.

§Tit.  iii.5.

•♦  Col.  it.  lft. ft «  Cor.  v.  17. «  *!*•  iv.  «a\
fJGaL  iv.7.  iEftb,  ii.  lft.  •  ^


m tEph.i.4.  JlPet-i.ft.

|  John  1.  13*1 Iii. 5. 1TRom.vt2.ia.


608


SERMONS  ON  PUBLIC  OCCASIONS.


(he  fives  of  Christians  corresponding  to  the  mag-
nificence, If  1  may  to  say,  of  these  expressions,
hate  been  tempted  to  conclude,  that  the  expres-
eiofu  themselves  had  no  ibandatlon  in  troth  and
nature,  or  in  any  thing  but  the  enthusiasm  of
their  authors.  Others  again,  understand  these
phrases  to  signify  nothing  more,  than  that  gra-
dual amendment  of  life  and  conversation,  which
reason  and  religion  sometimes  produce  in  ptrticu-
■-"■--'"  - "  ■ tit  is  truly


lar  Christians:  of  which
said,  that  it  degrades  too  much  the  proper  force
of  language,  to  apply  expressions  of  such  energy
tad  import  to  an  event  so  ordinary  in  its  own  na-
ture, and  which  is  common  to  Christianity  with
every  other  moral  institution.  Lastly ;  a  third
sort,  in  order  to  satisfy  these  expressions  to  their
full  extent,  have  imagined  to  themselves  certain
perceptible  impulses  of  £he  Holy  Ghost,  by  which,
In  an  instant,  and  in  a  manner,  no  'doubt,  suffi-
ciently extraordinary,  they  are  "  regenerate  and
born  of  the  Spirit  ;v  they  become  "  new  crea-
tures :n  they  are  made  the  "sons  of  God,"  who
were  before  the  "children  of  wrath;"  they  are
"freed  from  sin,"  and  "  from  death;"  they  are
chosen,  that  is,  and  sealed,  without  a  possibility
of  foil,  unto  final  salvation.  Whilst  the  patrons
of  a  more  sober  exposition  have  been  often  chal-


lenged, and  sometimes  confounded,  with  the  qoes-
bon-~lfsuchexpressJoMofScriptiiredonotmean
tins,  what  do  they  mean?  To  which  we  answer,
Nothing:  nothing,  that  is,  to  us;  nothing  to  be
found,  or  sought  for,  In  the  psesent  circumstances
of  Christianity.

More  examples  might  be  produced,  in  which
the  unwary  use  of  Scripture  language  has  been
the  occasion  of  difficulties  and  mistakes — but  I
forbear — the  present  are  aufficient'  to  show,  that
it  behoves  every  one  who  undertakes  \o  explain
the  Scriptures,  before  he  determine  to  whom  or
what  an  expression  is  now-a-days  to  be  applied,
to  consider  diligently  whether  it  admit  of  any
such  application  at  all;  or  whether  it  is  not  rather
to  be  restrained  to  the  precise  circumstances  and
occasion  for  which  it  was  originally  composed.

I  make  no  apology  for  addressing  this  subject
to  this  audience;  because  whatever  relates  to  the
interpretation  of  Scripture,  relates,  as  I  conceive,
to  us;  for  if;  by  any  light  we  may  cast  upon  these
ancient  books*  we  can  enable  and  invite  the  peo-
ple to  read  the  Bible  for  themselves,  we  discharge,
in  my  judgment,  the  first  duty  of  our  (unction;
ever  bearing  in  mind,  that  we  are  the  ministers
iiot  of  our  own  fane  or  fairies,  but  of  the  sincere
Gospel  of  Jesus  Christ


SERMON  IL

ADVICE,  ADDRESSED  TO  THE  YOUNG  CLERGY  OF  THE  DIOCftSE  OF  CARLISLE,

II*  A  SERMON,  PREACHED  AT  A  GENERAL  ORDINATION,  HOLDEN  AT  ROSE  CASTLE,
ON  SUNDAY,  JULY  29, 1781.


ADVERTISEMENT.

ft  is  recommended  to  those  who  are  preparing  for  holy  orders,  within  the  diocese  of,  Carlisle,  to
read  Collier's  Sacred  Interpreter,  and  the  Four  Gospels  with  C^tk'tB^^^SfFfSs^^Qcands^
dates  for  Priest's  orders,  <arefully  to  peruse  Taylor's  Paraphrase  ofdneCf&Bsa*?:  -A  ^^

k OP THK l*


Let  no  man  despise  thy  youth.-r-l  Tim,


The  author  of  this  Epistle,  with  many  better
qualities,  possessed  in  a  great  degree  what -we-  at
this  day  call  a  knowledge  of  the  world.  He
knew,  thaf  although  age  and  honours,  authority
of  station  and  splendour  of  appearance,  usually
command  the  veneration  of  mankind,  unless
counteracted  by  some  degrading  vice,  or  egregious
impropriety  of  behaviour ;  yet,  that  where  these
advantages  are  wanting  where  no  distinction  can
be  claimed  from  rank,  importance  from  power,  or
dignity  from  years;  in  such  circumstances',  and
under  the  inevitable  depression  of  narrow  fortunes,
to  procure  and  preserve  respect  requires  both  care
aha  merit.  The  apostle  also  knew,  and  in-  the
text  taught  his  beloved  convert,  that  to  obtain  the
respect  of  those  amongst  whom  he  exercised  his
ministry,  was  an  object  deserving  the  ambition  of
a  Christian  teacher,  not  indeed  for  his  own  sake,
but  for  theirs,  there  being  little  reason  to  hope  that
any  would  profit  by  his  instruction  who  despised
his  person.

If  St.  -Paul  thought  an  admonition  of  this  sort
worthy  of  a  place  in  his  Epistle  to  Timothy,  it
cannot  surely  be  deemed  either  beside  or  beneath
the  solemnity  of  this  occasion,  to  deliver  a  few
,  practicable  rules  of  life  and  behaviour,  which  may
recommend  you  to  the  esteem  of  the  people,  to
whose  service  and  salvation  you  are  now  about  to
dedicate  your  lives  and  labours.

In-  the  first  place,  the  stations  which  you  are
likely,  for  some  time,  at  least,  bo  occupy  in  the
church,  although  not  capable  of  all  the  means  of
rendering  service  and  challenging  respect,  which
fall  within  the  power  of  your  superiors,  are  free
from  many  prejudices  that  attend  upon  higher
preferments.  Interfering  interests  and  disputed,
rights:  or,  where  there  is  no  place  for  dispute,  the'
very  claim  and  reception  of  legal  dues,  so  long  as
what  is  received  by  the  minister  is  taken  from  the
parishioner,  form  oftentimes  an  almost  insssper-
able  obstruction  to  the  best  endeavours  that  can
be  used  to  conciliate  the  good-will  of  a  neighbour-'


mnvERsiTr:)


hood.  These  difficulties  perplex  not  you:  In
whatever  contest  with  his  parishioners  the  prin-
cipal jo&y  be  engaged,  the  curate  has  neither  dis-
pute nor  demand  to  stand  between  ,him  and  the
affections  of  his  congregation.

Another  and  a  still  more  favourable  drcutn-
stance  in  your  situation  is  this;  being  upon  a  level
with  the  greatest  part. of  your  parishioners,  yoti
gain  an  access  to  their  conversation  and  confi-
dence, which  is  rarely  granted  to*  the  superior
clergy;  without  extraordinary  address  ana  the
most  insinuating  advances  on  their  parts.  'And
this  is  a  valuable  privilege :  for  it  enables  you  to
inform  yourselves  of  the  moral  and  religions  state
of  your'  flocks,  of  their  wants  and  weaknesses,
their  habits  and  opinions,  of  the' vices -which  pre-
vail, and  the  principles  from  which  they  proceed ;
in  a  word,  it  enables  you  to  study  the  distemper
before  you  apply  the  remedy ;  and  not  only  so,
but  to  apply  the  remedy  in  the  most  T»mmoaious
form,  ana  with  the  best  effect ;  by  private  persua-
sion and  reproof ;  by  gentle  and  unsuspected  con-
veyances in  the  mtimacyof  friendship  and  oppor-
tunities of  conversation.  To  this  must  be  added
the  many  occasions,  which  the  living  in  habits  of
society  with  your  parishioners  affords  you  of  re-
conciling dissensions,  healing  animositiesl  admi-
nistering advice  to  the  young  and  inexperienced,
and  consolation  to  age  and  misery.  1  put  you  in
mind  of  this  advantage,  because  the  right  use  of
it  constitutes  one  of  the  most  respectable  employ-
ments not  only  of  our  order,  but  of  human  na*
ture;  arid  leaves  you,  believe  me,  little  to  envy  in
the  condition  of  your  superiors,  of  to?  regret  in
your  own.  It  is  true,  that  this  description  sop-
poses  you  to -Aside  so  constantly,  and  to  continue
so  long  in  the  same  parish,  as  to  have  formed
some  acquaintance  with  the  persons  and  charac-
ters of  your  parishioners ;  and  what  scheme  of
doing  good'  in  your  profession,  or  even  of  doing
your  duty,  cloes  not  suppose  this  ?

But  whilst  1  recommend  a  just  concern  for  our
50? -


601


SERMONS  ON  PUBLIC  OCCASIONS.


reputation,  and  a  proper  desire  of  public  esteem,
I' would  by  no  means  flatter  that  ponton  for  praise
and  popularity,  which  seizes  oftentimes  the  minds
of  young  clergymen,  especially  when  their  first
appearance  in  their  profession  has  been  received
with  more  than  common  approbation.  Unfortu-
nate success !  if  it  incite  them  to  seek  fame  by  af-
fectation and  hypocrisy,  or  lead  "as  vanity  some-
timeadoes,  to  enthusiasm  and  extravagance.  This
is  not  the  taste  or  .character  I  am  holding  out  to
your  imitation.  The  popular  preacher  courts
lame  for  its  own  sake,  or  for  what  he  can  make
of  it;  the  sincerely  pious  minister  of  Christ  mo-
destly invites  esteem,  only  or  principally,  that  it
may  lend  efficacy  to  his  instruction,  and  weight
to  nis  reproofs;  the  one  seeks  to  be  known  and
proclaimed  abroad,  the  other  is  content  with  the
silent  respect  of  his  neighbourhood,  sensible  that
that  is  the  theatre  upon  which  alone  his  good
.name  can  assist  him  in  the  discharge  of  his  duty.

It  may  be  necessary  likewise  to  caution  you
against  some  awkward  endeavours  to  lift  them-
selves into  importance,  which  young  clergymen
not  (infrequently  fall  upon ;  such  as  a  conceited
way  of  speaking,  new  airs  and  gestures,  affected
manners,  a  mimicry  of  the  fashions,  language,
and  diversions,  or  even  of  the  follies  and  vices,  of
higher  life ;  a  hunting  after  the  acquaintance  of
the  great,  a  cold  and  distant  behaviour  towards
their  farmer  equals,  and  a  contemptuous  neglect
of  their  society.  Nothing  was  ever  gained  by
these  arts,  if  they  deserve  the  name  of  arts,  but
derision  and  dislike.  Possibly  they  may  not  of-
fend against  any  rule  of  moral  probity ;  but  if
they  disgust  those  with  whom  you  are  to  live,  and
upon  whom  the  good  you  do  must  be  done,  they
defeat  not  only  Weir  own  end,  but,  in  a  great
measure,  the  very  design  and  use  of  your  vocation.

Having  premised  these  few  observations,  I  pro-
ceed to  describe  the  qualities  which  principally
conduce  to.  the  end  we,  have  at  present  in  view,
the  possession  of  a  fair  and  respected  character.

And  the  first  virtue  (for  so  I  will  call  it)  which
appears  to  me  of  importance  for  this  purpose,  is
frugality.  If  there  be  a  situation  in  the' world
in  which  profusion  is  without  excuse,  it  is  in  that
of  a  young  clergyman  who  has  little  beside  his
profession  to  depend  upon  for  his  support  It  is
tolly — it  is  ruin. — Folly,  for  whether  it  aim  at
luxury  or  show,  it  must  fall  miserably  short  of  its
design.  In  these  competitions  we  are  outdone  by
every  rival.  The  provision  which  clergymen
meet  with  upon  their  entrance  into  the  church,  is
adequate,  in  most  cases,  to  the  wants  and  decen-
cies of  their  situation,  but  to  nothing  more.  To
pretend  to  more,  is  to  set  up  our  poverty,  not  only
as  the  subject  of  constant  observation,  but  as. a
laughing-atock  to  every  observer.  Profusion  is
ruin ;  for  it  ends,  and  soon  too,  in  debt,  in  injus-
tice, and  insolvency.  You  well  know  how  mean-
Jy,  in  the  country  more  especially,  every  man  is
thought  of  who  cannot  pay  his  credit*  in  what
terms  he  is  spoken  of— in  what  light  he  is  viewed
—what  a  deduction  this  is  from  his  good  qualities
—what  an  aggravation  of  his  bad  ones — what  in-
sults he  is  exposed  to  from  his  creditors,  what
contempt  from  alL  Nor  is  this  judgment  far
amiss.  Let  him  not  speak  of  honesty,  who  is
daily  practising  deceit ;  for  every  man  who  is  not
paid  is  deceived.  Let  him  not  talk  of  liberality,
who  puts  it  out  of  his  power  to  perform  one  act  I
of  it. Let  him  not  boast  of  spirit,  of  honour,  of  ]


independence,  who  fears  the  lace  of  his  creditors,
and  who  meets  a  creditor  in  every  street.  There
is  no  meanness  in  frugality:  the  meanness  is  in
those  shifts  and  expedients,  to  which  extrava-
gance is  sure  to  bring  men.  Profusion  is  a  very
equivocal  proof  of  generosity.  The  proper  dis-
tinction is  not  between  him  who  spends  and  him
who  saves;  for  they  may  be  equally  selfish;  but
between  him  who  spends  upon  himself,  and  him
who  spends  upon  others.  When  I  extol  frugality,
it  is  not  to  praise  that  minute  parsimony  which
serves  for  little  but  to  vex  ourselves  and  tease
those  about  us,  but  to  persuade  you  to  economy
upon  a  plan,  and*  that  plan  deliberately  adjusted
to' your  circumstances  and  expectations.  Set  out
with  it,  and  it  is  easy ;  to  retrieve,  out  of  a  small
income,  is  only  not  impossible.  Frugality  in  this
sense,  we  preach  not  only  as  an  article  of  pru-
dence, but  as'  a  lesson  of  virtue.  Of  this  frugality
it  has  been  truly  said,  that  it  is  the  parent  of  li-
berty, of  independence,  of  generosity.

A  second  essential  part  of*  a  clergyman's  cha-
racter, is  sobriety.  In  the  scale  of  human  vices
there  may  be  some  more  criminal  than  drunken-
ness, but  none  so  humiliating.  A  clergyman
cannot,  without  infinite  confusion,  produce  him-
self in  the  pulpit  before  those  who  Have  been
witnesses  to  his  intemperance.  The  folly  and
extravagance,  the  rage  and  ribaldry,  the  boasts
and  quarrels,  the  idiotism  and  brutality  of  that
condition,  will  rise  up  in  their  imaginations  in
full  colours.  To  discourse  of  temperance,  to
touch  in  the  remotest  degree  uppn  the  subject,  is
but  to  revive  his  own  shame.  For  you  will  .soon
have  occasion  to  observe,  that  those  who  are  the
slowest  in  taking  any  part  of  a  sermon  to  them-
selves, are  surprisingly  acute  in  applying  it  to  the
preacher.

Another  vice,  which  there  is  the  same,  together
with  many  additional,  reasons  for  guarding  you
against,  is  dissoluteness.  In  my  judgment,  the
crying  sin  and  calamity  of  this  country  at  present,
is  licentiousness  in  the  intercourse  of  the  sexes.
It  is  a  vice  which  hardly  admits  of  argument  or
dissuasion.  It  can  only  be  encountered  by  the
censures  of  the  good,  and  the  discouragement  it
receives  from  the  most  resnected  orders  of  the
community.  What  then  snail  we  say,  when
they  who  ought  to  cure  the  malady,  propagate  the
contagion?  Upon  this  subject  bear  away  one
observation,  that  when  you  suffer  yourselves  to  be
engaged  in  any  unchaste  connexion,  you  not  only
corrupt  an  individual  by  your  solicitations,  but
debauch  a  whole  neighbourhood  by  the  profligacy
of  your  example.

The  habit  1  will  next  recommend  as  the  foun-
dation of  almost  all  other  good  ones,  is  retirement.
WeYe  I  required  to  comprise  my  advice  to  young
clergymen  in  one  sentence,  it  should  be  in  this,
Learn  to  live  alone.  Half  of  your  faults  originate
from  the  want  of  this  faculty.  It  is  impatience
of  solitude  which  carries  you  continually  from
your  pariahesj  your  home,  and  your  duty ;  makes
you  foremost  in  every  party  of  pleasure  and  place
of  diversion ;  dissipates  your  thoughts,  distracts
your  studies,  leads  you  into  expense,  keeps  you
in  distress,  puts  you  out  of  humour  witn  your
profession,  causes  you  to  place  yourselves  at  the
head  of  some  low  company,  or  to  fasten  your-
selves as  despicable  retainers  to  the  house*  and
society  of  the  rich.  Whatever  may  be  the  case
with  those,  whose  fortunes  and  opportunities)  can


SERMONS  ON  PUBLIC  OCCASIONS.


506


a  constant succession  of  company;  in
situations  like  ours  to  be  able  to  pass  our  tunc
with  aatjsfactidn  alone,,  and  at  home,  is  not  only
a  preservative  of  character,  but  the  very  secret  of
tannines*.  ^  Do  what  we  will,  we  mjist  be  much
ana  often  by  ourselves ;  if  this  be  irksome,  the
main  portions  of  life  will  be  unhappy.  Besides
Which,  we  are  not  the  less  qualified  for  society,
because  we  are  able  to  live'  without  iL  Our  com-
pany will  be  the  more  welcome  for  being .  never
^obtruded  li  i§.with  this/  as  with  many  plea-
sures: he  meets  with  it  the  oftenest,  .and  enjoys
it  the  best,  who  can  most  easily  aupense  with  the
want  of  it.  > „

But  what,  you  say,  shaflrvio  alone?  reading
is  my  proper  occupation  and  my  pleasure,  but
books  are  out  of  my  .reach,  and  beyond  my  pur-
chase. They  who  make  this  complaint  are  such
as  seek  nothing  from  books  but  amusement,  and
"find  amusement  from  none  but  works  of  narrative
cor  imagination.  This  taste,  I  allow,  cannot  be.
supplied  by  any  moderate  expense  or  ordinary
opportunities:  But  apply  Yourselves  to  study;
take  in  hand  any  branch  of  useful  science,  espe-
cially of  tnose  parts  of  it  which  are  subsidiary  to
the  Knowledge  of  religion,  and  a  few  books  will
suffice :  for  instance,  a  commentary  upon,  the*
New  Testament,  read  so  as  to  be  remembered,
will  employ  a  great  deal  of  leisure  very  profita-
bly. There  is  likewise  another  resource  which
you  have  forgot,  I  mean,  the  composition  of  ser-
mons. I  am  lar  from  refusing  you  t^e  benefit
of  other  men's  labours ;  I  only  require  that
they  he  called  in  not, to  natter  laziness,  but  to
assist  industry.  You  find  .yourself  unable  to
furnish  a  sermon  every,  week ;  try,  to  compose
one  every  month :  depend  upon  it  you  will  con-
sult your-own  satisfaction,  as  well  as  the  edifica-
tion of  your  hearers)  ana  that  however  inferior
jour  compositions  may  be  to"  those  of  others  in
some  respects,  they  will  be  better  delivered,  and
better  received ;  tney  will  compensate  for  many
defects  by  a  closer  application  to  the  ways  and
manners,  the  actual  thoughts,  reasoning,  and
language,  the  errors,  doubts,  prejudices,  and
'vices,  the  habits,  characters,  and  propensities  of
your  congregation,  than  can  be  expected  from
borrowed  discourses — at  any  rate,  you  are  passing
v  your  time  virtuously  and  honourably.

With  retirement,  I  connect  reserve ;  by  which
I  mean,  in  the  first  place,  some  degree  of  delicacy
in  the  choice  of  your  company,  and  of  refinement
in  your  'pleasures.  Above  all  things,  keep  out  of
pubac-honses— you  have  no  business  there — your
feeing  seen  to  go  in  and  out  of  them  is  disgraceful
— you*  presence  in  these  places  entitles  every
man  who  meets  you  there,  to  affront  you  by  coarse
jests,  by  indecent  or  opprobrious  topics  of  con-
*eraatkm--»neither  be  seen  at  drunken  feasts,
boisterous,  sports,  late  hours,  or  barbarous  diver-
sions—let  your  amusements,  like  every  thing
about  you,  be  still  and'  quiet  and  unoffending.
Carry  the  same  reserve  into  your  correspondence
with  your  superiors.  Pursue  preferment,  if  any
prospects  of  it  present  themselves,  not  only  by
JBonourable  means,  but  with  moderate  anxiety.
It  is  Hot  essential  to  happiness,  perhaps  not  very
conducive— were  it  of  greater  importance  than  it
is,  no  more  successful  rule  could  be  given  you,
than  to  do  your  duty  quietly  and  contentedly,
and  to  let  things  take  their  course.  You  may
have  been  brought  up  with  different  notions,  but
3  S


be  assured,  that  for  once  that  preferment  is  for*
feited  by  modesty,  it  is  ten  times  lost  by  intrusion
and  importunity.  Every  one  sympathises  with
neglected  merit,  but  who  shall  lament-  oyer  .re-
pulsed impudence  1  ^  ,  »

The  last  expedient  I  shall  mention,  and;  in
conjunction  with  the  others,  a  very  efficacious
one  towards  engaging  respect,  is  seriousness  in
your  deportment,  especially  in  discharging  the
offices  of  your  profession.  Salvation  is  ao.  awful
a  concern,  that  no  human  being,  one  would  think,
could  be  pleased  with  seeing  it,  or  any  thing  be-
longing to  it,'  treated  with  levity.  For  a  moment,
in  a  certain  state'  of  the  spirits,  men  may  divert  -
themselves,  or  affect  to  be  diverted,  by  sporting
with  thejr  most  sacred  interests ;  but_rio  one  in  \
his  heart  derides  religion  long — What  are,  we —
any  of  us  '^-religion  soon  will  be  our  vonly  care'
and.  friend.  Seriousness,  therefore,  in  a  clergy-
man, is  agreeable/- not  only  to  the  serious,  but
to  men  of  aft  tempers  and  descriptions.  'And
seriousness  is  enough;  a  prepossessing  appear-
ance, a  melodious  voice,  a  graceful  delivery,  are
indeed  enviable  accomplishments ;  but  much,  we
apprehend,  may  be  done  without  them.  The
groat  point  is,  to  be1  thought  in  earnest.  Seem
not  then  to  be  brought  to  any  part  of  your  duty
by  constraint,  to  perform  it  with  reluctance,  to  go
through  it  in  haste,  or  to  quit  it  with  symptoms
of  delight  In  reading  the  services  of  the  church,
provided  you  manifest  a  conscientiousness  of  the
meaning  and  importance  of  what  you  are  about,
and  betray  no  contempt  of  your  duty,  or  of  your
congregation,  your  manner  cannot'  be  too  plain
,and  simple.  Your  common  method  of  speaking,
if  it  be  not  too  low,  or  too  rapid,  do  not  alter,  or
only  so  much  as  to  be  heard  distinct^.  I  men*
tion  this,  because  your, elocution  is  more  apt  to
offend  by  straining,  and  stiffness,  than  on  the  side
of  ease  and  familiarity.  The  same  plainness  and
simplicity  which  I  recommend  in  the  delivery,
prefer  also  in  the  style  and  composition  of  your
sermons.  Ornaments,  or  even  accuracy  of  lan-
guage, cost  the  writer  much  trouble,  and  produce
small  advantage  to  the  hearer.  Let  the  character
of  your  sermons  be  truth  and  information,  and  a
decent  particularity.  Propose  one  point  in  one
discourse,  and  stick  to  it;  a  hearer  never  carries
away  more  than-pne  impression — disdain  not  the
old  fashion  of  dividing  your  sermons  into  heads-f-
in 4  he  hands  of  a  master  this  may  be  dispensed
with ;  .in  yours,  a  sermon  which  rejects  these
helps  to-  perspicuity,  will  turn  out  a  bewildered
rhapsody,  without  aim  or  effect,  order  or  conclu-
sion, fn  a  word,  strive  to  -make  your  discourses
useful,  and  they  who  profit  by  your  preaching,
will  soon  learn,  and  long  continue,  to  be  pleased
with  it.

I  have  now  finished  the  enumeration  of  those
qualities  which  are  required  in  the  clerical  cha-
racter, and  wjiich,  wherever  they  meet,  make
even  youth  venerable,  and  poverty  respected;
which  will  secure  esteem  under  every  disadvan-
tage of  fortune,  person,  and  situation,  and  not-
withstanding great  defects  of  abilities  and  attain-
ments. But  I  must  not  stop  here;  a  good  name,
fragrant  and  precious  as  it  is,  is  by  us  only  valued
in  subserviency  to  our  duty,  in  subordination  to
a  higher  reward.  If  we  are  more  tender  of  our
reputation,  if  we  are  more  studious  of  esteem  than
otters,  it  is  from  a  persuasion,  that  by  first  ob-
taining the  respect  of  our  congregation,  and  next


506

byavi


SERMONS  ON  PUBLIC  OCCASIONS.


avaifimj  ometim  of  that  respect,  to  promote
angst  them  peace  and  virtoe,  useful  knowledge
'and  benevolent  disTjoaitions,  we  are  purchasing  to
ourselves  a  leieiskm  and  inheritance  Valuable
above  all  price,  important  beyond  every  other  in-
terest or  success.

(Jo,  then,  into  the  vineyard  of  the  Gospel;  and
may  the  graee  of  God  go  with  voa !  The  rehgion
yoo  preach  it  true.  Dispense  ris  ordinances  with
seriousness,  its  doctrines  With  sincerity — urge  its
precepts,  display  its  hopes,  produce  its  terrors —
h  be  sober,  be  vigilant"—"  have  a  good  report"—
confirm  the  faith  of  others,  testify  and  •  adorn
your  own,  by  the  virtues  of  your  life  and  the  sancti-
ty of  yoiff  reputation— be ipeaceable,  be  courteous;
Condescending  to  men  of  the  lowest  condition —
"  apt  to  teach,  willing  to  communicate ;"  so  far  as
the  immntebte  law  of  troth  and  probity  will  per-


mit,"be  every  thing  tmt0  all  men,  that  je  may
gain  some."

The  world  will  requite  yon  with  its  esteem.
The  awakened  sinner,  the  enlightened  saint,  the
young  whom  yon  have  trained  to  virtue,  the  old
whom  you  have  visited  with  the  consolations  of
Christianity,  shall  pursue  yon  with  prevailing
Uessings  and  effectual  prayers.  You  win  close
your  lives  and  ministry  with  consciences  void  of
offence,  and  roll  of  hope.— To  present  at  the  last
day  even  one  recovered  soul,  reflect  how  grateful
an  offering  it  will  be  "to  Him,  whose  commission
was  to  save  a  world— infinitely,  no  doubt,  but  still
only  in  degree,  .does  our  office  differ  from  Ass—
himself  the  first-born ;  it  was  the  business  of  Ins
life,  the  merit  of  "his  death,  the  counsel  of  fa»
Father's  love,  the  exercise  and  consummation
brethren  1


of  his  own,  "to  bring  many  I


l  unto  gjory."


SERMON III.


A DISTINCTION OF ORDERS IN.  THE CHURCH DEFENDED
UPON PRINCIPLES  OP PUBLIC UTILITY,

IH  A  8SBJCON,  PREACHED  IN  THK  CABTLB-CHAPBl.,  DUBLIH,  AT  THE  CONSECRATION  OF  JOHH  LAW,  D.  D.
LORD  BISHOP  OF  CLOMFEBT  AND  EILMACDUAOH,  SfiPTftMBKA  21,  1783*


And  he  gate  some,  apostles;  and  some,  prophet?;  and  tome,  evangelists;  and  some,  potion  and
teachers  iJor  tkejpfrfecHng^  the  saints,  for  fhe  wet*  of  the  ministry,  for  the  odtfyin/r  of  the


corned  to  establish  consists  in  tin*,  thai  white  the
precepts  of  Christian  morality  and  the  fundamen-
tal articles  of  the  faith,  are  for  the  moat  put,  pre-
cise and  absolute,  are  of  perpetual,  wriversal,  and
unalterable  obligation ;  the  la wb  which  respect  the
discipline^  instroctioh,  and  goverriinarit  of  the
cotnmunity,  are  delivered  in  terms  so  general  and
indefinite  as  to  admit  of  an  application  adapted  to
the  mutable  condition  and  varying  exigencies  of
the  Christian  cho.-ch.  .  "  As  my  fitther  hath  sent
me,  so  send  I  yew."  u  Let  every  thing  be  done
decently  and  in  order."  "  Lay  hands  suddenly  on
no  man."  "Let  him  that  ralethdo  U  with  dili-
gence." "The  things  which  thou  hast  hand  of
me,  the  same  commit  thou  to  fiuthfuj  men,  who
shall  be  able  to  teach  other*  also."  "For  thk
cause  left  r  thee,  tlpt  thou  shouJdest  sat  in  order
the  things  that  are  wanting,  and  ordain  elders  in
every  city."

These  are  all  general  directions,  supposing,  in-
deed, the*  existence  of  a~  regular  iniinstryia  (he
church,  but  describing  no  specific  order  of  pro*
eminence  or  distribution  of  office  and  authority.
If  any  other  instances  can  be-  adduced  more  ens
cumstantial  than  these,  they  wffl  be  found,  like  the
appointment  of  the  seven  deacons,  the  collections
for  thp  saints,  the  laying  by  fn  store  upon  the  first
day  of  the  week,  to  be  rules  of  the  society,  rather
than  laws  of  the  religion — recommendations  and
expedients  fitted  to  the  -  state  of  the  several
churches  by  those  who  then  administered  the .
affaire  of  them,  rather  than  precepts  delivered  with
a  solemn  design*  of  fixing  a  constitution  lor  suc-
ceeding ages.  The  just  ends  of  religious  as  of
civil  union  are  010111811/4110  same ;  but  the  means
by  which  these  ends  may  oe  best  promoted  ami
secured,  will  vary  with  the  vicissitudes  of  time
and  occasion,  will  differ  according  to'  the  local  cir-
cumstances, the  peculiar  situation,  the  improve-
ment, character,  or  even  the  prejudices  and  pas-
sions, of  the  several  communities  upon  whose  con-
duct and  edification  they  are  intended  to  operate.

The  apostolic  directions  which  are  preserved  in
the  writings  of  the  New  Testament,  seam  to  ex-
clude no  ecclesiastical  constitution  which  the  ex-
perience and  more  instrected  judgment  of  future
ages  might  find  ft  expedient  to  *wp& And  this


body  of  Cfcrxrf.— Ephesians  iv.  11, 12.

In  onrreasordng  and  discourses  upon  the  rules
and  nature  of  the -Christian  dispensation,  there  is
no  distinction  which  ought  to  oe  preserved  with
greater  care,  than  that  which  exists  between  the
institution,  as  it  addresses,  the  conscience  and  re-
gulates the  duty  of  particular  Christians,  and  as
it  regards  the  disdpone  and  government  of  the
Christian  church.  It  was  our  Saviour's  design,
and  the  first  object  of  his  ministry,  to  afford  to  a
lost  and  ignorant  world,  such  discoveries  of  their
Creator's  will,  of  their  own  interest,  and  future
destination;  such  assured  principles  of  faith,  and
rules  of  practice-,  such  new  motives,  terms, 'and
means  of  obedience;  as  might  enable  all,  and  en-
gage many,  to  enter  upon  a  course  of  fife,  which,
by  rendering  the  person  who  pursued  it  acceptable
to  God,  would  conduct  him  to  happiness,  in  ano-
ther stage  of  his  existence.

It  was  a  second  intention  of  the  Founder  of
Christianity,  but  subservient  to  the  former,  to  asso-
ciate those  who  consented  to  take  upon  them  the
profession  of  his  faith  and  service,  into  a  separate
community,  for  the  purpose  of  united  worship  and
mutual  edification,  for  the  better  transmission  and
inanifeatation  of  the  firith  that  was  delivered  to
them,  but  principally  to  promote  the  exercise  of
that  fraternal  disposition  which  their  new-relation
to  each  other,  which  the  visible  participation  of
the  same  name  and  hope  and  calling,  was  calcu-
lated to  excite.

From  a  view  of  these  distinct,  parts  of  the  evan-
gelic dispensation,  we  are  led  to  place  a  real  differ-
ence between  the  religion  of  particular  Christians,
and  the  -'polity  of  Christ's  cnurth.  The  one  is
personal  and  mdividual— -acknowledges  no  subjec-
tion to  human  authority-Hs  transacted-  in  the
heart— is  an  account  between  Gotland  our  own
consciences  alone :  the  other,  appertaining  to  so-
ciety, (like  every  thing  which,  relates  to  the  joint
interest  and  requires  the  co-operation  of  many
persons,)  is  visible  and  external— prescribes  rules
of  common-  order,  for  the  observation  of  which,
we  are  responsible  not  only  to  God,  trat  to  the  so-
ciety of  which  we  are  members,  of,  what  is  the
same  thing,  to  those  with  whom  the  pubho  autho-
rity of  the  society  is  deposited.

But  the  difference  which  I  am  principally  eon-


908


SERMONS  ON  PUBLIC  OCCASIONS.


reserve,  IT  we  may  so  call  it,  in  the  legislature  of
the  Christian  church,  was  wisely  suited  to  its  pri-
mitive condition,  compared  with  its  expected  pro-
gress and  extent.  The  circumstance*  of  Chris-
tianity in  the  early  period  of  its  propagation  were
necessarily  wry  unlike  those  which  would  take
place  when  it  became  the' established  religion  of
great  nations.  The  rudiments,  indeed,  of  the  fu*
ture  plait,*  were  involved  within  the  grain  of  mus-
tard-seed, but  still  a  different  treatment  was  re-
quired for  its  sustentatioa  when  the  birds  of  the
air  lodged  amongst  its  branches.  A  small  select
society  under  the  guidance  of  inspired  teachers,
without  temporal  rights  and  without  property,
founded  in  the  midst  of  enemies,  and  living  in
subjection  to  unbelieving  rulers,  divided  from  the
rest  of  the  world  by  many,  singularities  of  conduct
and  persuasion,  and  adverse  to  the  idolatry  which
public  authority  every  where  supported,  differed
so  much  from  the  Christian  church  after  Chris-
tianity prevailed  as  the  religion  of  the  state;
when  <its  economy  became  gradually  interwoven
with*  the  civil  government  of  the  country ;  when,
the  purity  and  propagation  of  its  faith  were  left  to
the  ordinary  expedients  of  human  instruction  and
an  authentic  Scripture;  when  persecution  and  in-
digence were  to  be  succeeded  by  legal  security  and
public  provision — clandestine  and  precarious  op-
portunities'of  hearing  the  word  ana  communica-
ting in  the  .rites  of  Christianity,  by  stationary  pas-
tors and  appropriated  seasons,  as  well  as*  places,
of  religions  worship  and  resort :  I  say,  the  situa-
tion of  the  Christian  community  was  so -different
in  the  truant  and  adult  state  of  Christianity,  that
the  highest  inconvenience  Would  have  followed
from  establishing  a  precise  constitution  which  was
to  be>  obligatory  upon  both :  the  same  disposition
of  aflaire  which  was  most  commodious  and  con-
ducive to  edification  in  the  one,  becoming  probably
impracticable  under  the  circumstances,  or  alto-
gether inadequate. to  the  wants  of  the  ether.

What  farther  recommends  the  forbearance  ob-
servable in  this  part  of  the  Christian  institution,
is  the  consideration,  that  as  Christianity  solicited
admission  into  every  country  yi  the  world,  it  cau-
tiously refrained'  from  interfering  with  the  muni-
cipal regulations  or  civil  condition  of  any.  Negli-
gent of  every  view,  but  what  related  to  the  deli-
verance of  mankind  from  spiritual  perdition,  the
Saviour  of  the  world  advanced  no  pretensions
which,  by  disturbing  the  arrangements  of  Jiuman
polity,  might  present  an  obstacle  to  the  reception
of  his  faith.  We.  may  ascribe,  it  to  this  design,
that  he  left  the  laws  of  nb  church  so  open  and  in-
determinate, that  whilst  the  ends  of  religious  com-
munion were  sufficiently  declared,  the  form  of  the
society  might  be  assimilated  to  the  civjl  constitu-.
tint  of  each  country,  to  which  it  should  always
communicate  strength  and  support  in  return  for
the  protection  it  received.  If  there  be  any  truth  in
these  observations,  .they  lead  to  this  temperate  and
charitable  conclusion,  "  that  Christianity  may  be
professed  under  any  form  of  church  government."

But  though  all  things  are  lawful,  all  things  are
not  expedient.  If  .we  concede  to  other  churches
the  Christian  legality  of  their  constitution,  so  long
as  Christian  worship  and  instruction  are  compe-
tently provided  for,  we  may  be  allowed  to  maintain
the  advantage  of  our  own,  upon  principles  which
all  parties  admowledge-^considerations  of  public
utility.  We  may  be.  allowed  to  contend,  that
whilst  we  imitate,  so  iar  as  a  great  disparity  of


theexsirrple,andwhatwe
apprehend  to  be  the  order,  of  the  apostohc  age,
our  church  and  ministry  are  inferior  to  none  in
the  great  object  of  their  institution,  their  suitable-
ness to  promote  and  uphold  the  profession,  know-
ledge, and  influence,  of  pure  Christianity.  The
separation  of  a  particular  order  of  men  for  the
work  of  the  ministry— the  reserving  to  these  ex-
clusively, the  conduct  of  public  worship  and  the
preaching  of  the  word— the  distribution  of  the
country  into  districts,  and  the  -assigning  of  each
district  to  the  care  and  charge  of  its  proper  pastor
— lastly,  the  appointment  to  the  clergy  ore  main-
tenance independent  of  thecaprice  of  their  congre-
Stion,  are  measures  of  ecclesiastical  policy  which
ve  been  adopted  by  every  national  establishment
of  Christianity  in  the  world.  Concerning  these
points  there  exists  no  controversy.  The  efiief  ar*»
tide  of  regulation  Upon  which  the  judgment  of
some  protestant  churches  dissents  from  ours  is,  that
whilst  they  have  established  a  perfect  parity  among
their  clergy,  we  prefer  a  distinction  of  orders  in
the  church,  not  only  as  jeconuneodjed  by  the  usage
of  the  purest  times,  but  as  better  calculated  to
promote,  what. all  churches  must  desire,  the<credit
and  efficacy  of  the  sacerdotal  office.

The  force  and  truth  of  this  last  consideration  I
win  endeavour  .to  evince.

First,  the  body  of  the  clergy,  in  common  with
every  regular  society!  must  necessarily  contain
some  internal  provision  for  the  government  and
correction  of  its  members.  Where  a  distinction
of  orders .  is  not  acknowledged,  this  government
can  only  be  administered  by  synods  and  assem-
blies, because  the  supposition  o£  equality  forbids
the  delegation  of  authority  to  single  persons.
.Now,  although  it  may  be  requisite  to  consult  and
collect  the-  opinions  of -a  community,  in  the  mo-
mentous deliberations  which  ought  to  precede  the
establishment  of  those  public  laws  by  which  it  is
to  be  .bound ;,  yet  ki  every  society  the  execution
of  these  laws,  the  current  and  ordinary  aftairs  of
its  government,  are  better  managed  by  fewer
hands.  To  commit  personal  questions  to  public
debate,  to  refer  every  case  and  character  which
requires  animadversion,  to  the  suffrages  and  exa-
mination of  a  numerous  assembly,  what  is  it,  bat


to  feed  and  perpetuate  contention,  to  supply  i
rials  for  endless  altercation,  and  opportuxuliea  for
the  indulgence  of  concealed  enmity  and  private
prejudices'?  The  complaint  of  ages  testifies,
with  how  much  inflammation,  and  how  little
equity,  ecclesiastical  conventions  have  conducted
their  proceedings ;  how  apt  intrigue  has  ever  been
to  pervert  inquiry,  and  clamour  to  confound  dis-
cussion. Whatever  may'be  the  other  benefits  of
equality,  peace  is  best  secured  by  subordination.
And  if  this  be  a  consideration  of  moment  in  every
society,  it  is  of  peculiar  importance  to  the  dbrgy.
Preachers  of  peace,  ministers  of  charity  and  of
reconciliatkxn  to  the  world,,  that  constitution  sure-
ly ill  befits  their  office  and  character  which  has  a
tendency  to  engage  them  in  contests  and  dfepifefff
with  one  another.

Secondly,  the  appointment  of  various  orders  in
the  church,  may  be  considered  as  tne  stationing
of  ministers  of  religion  in  the  various  ranks  of
civil  Ufe.  The  distinctions  of  the  clergy  ought,
in  some  measure,  to  correspond  with  the  distinc-
tions of  lay-society,  in  order  to  supply  each  ckss


of  the  people  with  a  clergy

and  description,  with  whom  they  may  five)  and


SERMONS  ON  PUBLIC  OCCASIONS.


ft*


npoh  terms  of  equality;  Thia  reason  i$
not  imaginary  nor  insignificant  The  usefulness
of  a  virtuous  and  Well-informed  clergy  consists
neither  wholly  nor  principally  in  their  public

.  preaching,  or  th$  stated  functions  of  their  order.

'  It  is  from  the  example  and  in  the  society  of  such

-  persons,  thai  the  requisites  which  prepare  the
mind  for  the  reception  of  virtue  and  ^knowledge,
a  taste  for  serious  reflection  and  discourse,  hahtts
of  thought  and-  reasoning,  a  veneration  for  the
laws  and  awful  truths  of  Christianity,  a  disposi-
tion to  inquire,  and  a  solicitude  to  learn,  are  best
gained :  at  least,  the.  decency  of  deportment,  the'
sobriety  of  manners  and  conversation,  the  learn-
ing, the  gravity,  which  usually  accompany  the
clerical' character,  insensibly  diffuse  their  influ-
ence over  every  company  into  which  they  are
admitted.  Is  it  of  no  importance  toprovide  friends
and  companions  of  this  character  tot  the  superior
as  well  as  for  the  middle  orders  of  the  commu-
nity 1  Is  it  flattery  to  say,  that  the  manners  and
society  of  higher  hie  would  suffer  seme  deprava-

'  itkm,  from  the  loss  of  so  many  men.  of  liberal
habits  and  education,  as  at  present,  by  occupying
elevated  stations  in  the  church,  are  entitled  to  be
received  .into  its  number  ?  This  intercourse
would  cease,  if  the  clergy  were  reduced  to  a  level
-with  one;  another,  and,  of  consequence,  with  the
inferior  part  of  the  community.  These  distinc-
tions, whilst  they  prevail,  must  be  complied  with.
How  much  soever  the  moralist  may  despise,  or
the  -divine  overlook,  the  discriminations  of  rank,
which  the  rules  or  prejudices  of  modern' life  have
introduced  into  society ;  when  we  have  the  world
to- instruct  and  to  deal  with,  we  must  take  and
treat  it  as  it  is,  not  as  the  wishes  or  the  specula-
tions of  philosophy  would  represent  it  to  our

.  view.  When  we  describe  the  public  as  peculiarly
interested  in  every  thing  which  affects,  though  but
lemotely,  the  character  of  the  great  and  powerful,
it  is  not  that  the  soul  of  the  rich  man  is  more  pre-
cious than  the  salvation  of  the  poor,  but  because
his  virtues  and  his  vices  have  a  nKnre  considerable
and*  extensive  effect

Thirdly,  they  who  behold  the  privileges  and
emoluments  of  the  superior  clergy  with  the  most
unfriendly  inclination,  profess  nevertheless  to
wish,  that  the  order  itself  should  he  respected;
but  now  k  this  respect  to  be  procured  f  It  is
equally  impossible,  to  invest  every  dergyman
with  the  decorations  of  affluence  and  rank,  and  to
maintain  the  credit  and  reputation  of  an  order
which  is  altogether  destitute  of  these  distinction*.
Individual,  by  the  singularity  of  their  virtue  or
their  talents,  may  surmount  all  disadvantages ;
but  the  order  will  be  contemned.  At  present,
•very  member  of  our  ecclesiastical  establishment
communicates  in  the  dignity  which  is  conferred
upon  a  iew-^eve'ry  clergyman  shares  in  the  re-
epect  which  is  paid  to  hSeuperioni — the  ministry
is  'honoured  in  the  persons  of  prelates..  Nor  is
this  economy  peculiar  to  our  order.  The.profes-
aion*  of  arms  and  of- thekw derive. their  lustre
and  esteem,  not  merely  from  their  utility  (which
is  a  reason  only  to  the  few,)  but  from  the  exalted
place  in  the  scale  of  civil  life,  which  hath  been
wisely  assigned  to  those  who  fill  stations  of  power
and  eminence  in  these  great  departments.  And
if  tins  disposition  of  honours  be  approved  in  other
kinds  of  public  employment,  why  should  not  the
credit  ana  liberality  ox  onus  be  upheld  by  the  same
expedient  7


Fourthly,  rich  and  splendid  sftuatfcMte  in  the ,
church,  have  been' justly  regarded,  as  prizes  held
out  to  invite  persons  of  go^oThopes  and  ingenuous
attainments  to  enter  into  its  service.  'The  value
of  the  prospect  may  be  die  same,  but  the  allure-
ment is  much  greater,  where  opulent  .shares  ase
reserved  to  reward  the  success  of  a  few,  than
where,  by  a  more  equahparthion  of  the  fund,  aU
indeed*  are  competently  provided  tor,  but  no  one
can  raise  even  his  hopes  beyond  a'  penurious  me-  *
diocrity  of  subsistence  and  situation.  It  is  cer-
tainly of  consequence  that  young  men  of  promising
abilities  be  encouraged  to  engage  in  the  ministry
of  the  church  >  otherwise,  our  profession  will  be
composed  of  the  refuse  of  every  other.  Nana
will  be  found  content  to  stake  the  fortune  of  then?
lives  in  this  calling,  but  they  whom  alow  parts, .
personal  .defects,  or  a  depressed  condition  of  birth
and  education,  preclude  from  advancement  in  any
other.  The  vocatidn  in  time  comes'to  be  thought
mean  and  uncreditable— *tudy  langukhes-HHucred
erudition  declines — not  only  the  order  is  disgraced,
but  religion  itself  disparaged  in  such  hands.  Some
of  the  most  judicious  and  moderate  of  the  Presby-
terian clergy  have  been  known  to  lament  thai
defect  in  their  constitution*.  They  see  and  de-
plore the  backwardness  in. youth  of  active  and
well  cultivated  faculties,  to  enter  into  the  church,
and  their  frequent  resolutions  to  quit  it.  Again^
if  a  gradation  of  orders  be  necessary  to  invite  can-
didates into  the  profession,  it  is  .still  more  so  to
excite  diligence  and  emulation,  to  promote  an
attention  to  character  and  public  opinion,  when
they  are  in  it ;  especially  to  guard  against  that
sloth  and  negligence,  into  which  men  are  apt  to
fall,  who  are  arrived  too  soon  at  t)ie  limits  of  thejr
expectations.  We  will  not  say,  that  the  race  is
always  to  the  swift,  or  the  prize  to  the  deserving ;
but.  we  have  never  known  tbat~age  of  the  church
in  which  the  advantage  was  not  on  the,  aide  of
learning  and  decency.  i  -

These  reasons  appeartometobewell  founded,
and  they  have  this  m  their  favour,  that  they  do  not
suppose  too  much ;  they  suppose  not  any  impracti-
cable precision'  in  the  reward  of  merit,  or  any
greater  degree  of  disinterestedness,  circumspection,
and  propnety  in  the  bestowing  of  ecclesiastical
preferment,  than  what  actually  takes  place.  They
are,  however,  much  strengthened;  and  our  eccle-
siastical constitution  defended  with  yet  greater

"  acknow-


i,  when  men  of.  conspicuous  asjd  i
lodged  merit  are  called  to  its  superior  stations:
"  when  it  coeth  wall  with  the*  righteous,  the  city
rejoiceth.  When  pious  labours  and  exemplary
virtue,  when  distinguished  learning,  or  eminent
utility,  when  long  or  arduous  services  are  repaid
with  affluence  and  dignity,  when  a  life  of  severe
and  well-directed  application  to  the  studies  of  ic*
ligion,  when  wasted  spirits  and  declining  health,
are  suffered  to  repose  in  honourable  leisure,  the
good  and  wise,  applaud  a  constitution  which  has
provided  such  things  for  such  men.

Finally,  let  us  reflect  that  these,  after  all,  ase
but  secondary  objects.  Christ  came  not  tchfound
an  empire  upon  earth,  or  to  invest  his  church  with
temporal  immunities.  He  came  Cf  to  seek  and  to
save  that  which  was  lost;"  to  purify  to  himself
from  amidst  the  pollutions  of  a  corrupt  world,  "  a
peculiar  people,  zealous  o£-geod  works."  As  far
as  our  establishment  conduces  to  forward  and
fecilitate  these  ends,  so  far  we  are  sure  it  falls  in
with  his  design,  and  is  sanctified  by  his  authority.
43*


m


And  whfet  they  who  aie
i»«l  envioy  their  a

of  Ueir  etaliene.  a  jad>

endee*een  to  on  the  dnmrnfaw  of  virtue

ofChitrtiae/iryowg  the  haute  end  afieeti

nmnkmd,  whtfat  "by  pa«m  by  know

fay  the  aide  of  hejpmg.bjtk  piety  of

eTMBfh,  they  hboar  to  inform  the

•ad  improve  the  monk  of  tNpoopl

to  their  chuge,  they  man  to  thennhw,  and  to


SERMONS  ON  PUBLIC.  OCCASIONS.

netedynhitago-
•ad  the  ioflnenot


maneney,  wbwucb  ana  eoppud what  is  infi-
nitely more,  they  "eawj  then  own  eook;w  they

wheaJemChrkehaJlietaTnegmmtothewarid
■ad  to  hie  chonch,  at  once  the  mdoua  rawanfer
of  the  toik,  and  patience,  and  fidelity  of  hieaer-
▼anto,and  the  atnctafangw  of  ihnajw  power  and
wfjiactou  amy.


SERMON  IV.

THE  TOE  AND  PROPRIETY  OF  UOCA!L  AND  OCCASIONAL  PREACHING*

A  CHARGE,

nfiJUTESRSD  TO  Tfis  CUEBOX  OF  THE  DIOCESE  OF.  CARLISLE,  fN  TBS  TB1B  1790.


Rsyerend  Brethren,— The  late  Archbishop
Seckerrwhose  memory  is  entitled  to  public  respect,
•j  on  many  accounts,  00  especially  for  the  judg-
ment with  which  he  described,  and  the  affecting
.  seriousness  with  which  he  recommended  the  du-
ties  qC  his  profession',  in  one  of  hw  charge*  ■  to  the
clergy  of  ma  diocese,*  exhorts  them  "to  make
their  sermons  local.*'  I  have  always  considered
this  advice  as  founded  in  a  knowledge  of  human
life,  but  as  requiring,  in  its  application,  a  more
than  ordinary  exercise  of  Christian  prudence^
Whilst  I, repeal  therefore  the  rale  itself,  with
great  veneration  for  the  authority  by  which  H  was
delivered,  I  think  it  no  unfit  employment  of  the
present  opportunity,  to  enlarge  so.  far  upon  its
qse  and  meaning,  as  to  point  out  some  of  the  in-
stances in  which  it  may  be  adopted,  with  the  pro-
bability of  making  salutary  impressions  upon  die
Bunds  of  our  hearers.

s  .But,  before  I  proceed.  I  would' warn  you,  and
that  with  all  the  solemnity  that  can  belong  to  any
admonition  of  mine,  against  rendering  your  dis-
courses, so  local,  as  to  be  pointed  and  levelled  at
particular  persons  in  your  congregation.  This
■  species  of  address  may  produce  m  the  party  for
whom  it  is  intended,  confusion  perhaps  and  shame-
but  not  with  their  proper  fruits  of  penitence  and
humility.  Instead  of  which,  these  sensations  will
be  accompanied  with  hitterresentment  against  the
preacher,  and  a  kind  of  obstinate  and  determined
imposition  to  his  reproof.  He  will  impute  your
otnaousnesB  to  personal  enmity,  to  party  spirit,  to
the  pleasure  or  triumphing  over  an  adversary
without  interruption  or  reply,  to  insult  assuming
the  form  of  advice,  or  to  any  motive  rather  than  a
conscientious. solicitude  for  the  amendment  and
salvation  of  year  flock.  And  as  tip  person  him-
self seldom  profits  by  admonitions  conveyed  in  this
way,  so  are  they  equally  useless,  or  perhaps  nox-
ious, to  the  rest  of  the  assembly;  for  the  moment
the  congregation  discover  to  whom  the  chastise-
ment is  directed,  from  that  moment  they  cease  to
apply  any  part  of  it  to  themselves,  They  are  not
edified,  they  are  not  affected ;  on  the*  contrary,  they
axe  diverted,  by  descriptions  of  which  they  seethe
design,  and  by  invectives  of  which  they  think  they
'comprehend  the,  aim.,  Some,  who  would  foal
strongly  the^mpropiiety  of  gross  and  evident  per-
sonam^ may  yrtTbx>pe  to  hit  their  mark  by  covert


•  *  Archbishop  of  Ganterbary*»  Third  Ghana
Clenov-Abp.  Setter's  Wares,  voL  iv.


to  his


and  obfique  allasiona.  Now  of  -this  schema,  even-
when  conducted  with.  Ike  greatest  skill,  it  mav  be
observed,  thatthe  aUustons  must  eitberjte  perceived,
ox-not  Iftheybenot.pereerved.tbeymilof  the
effect  intended  by  them ;  if  they^  be,  they  are  open,
to  the  objections  which. lis  against  mor*  explicit
and  undissembled  attacks.  •Whenever  we  are
conseieus,  in  the  composition  of  our  discourses,  of
a  view  to  particular  characters  in  our  conffrega-
tion  or  parish,  we  ought  to  take  for  granted  that
our  view  will  be  understood.  .Those  applications
therefore,  which,  if  they  were  direct,  would  pro-
duce more  bad  emotions  than  good  ones,  it  is  Mi-
ter to  discard  entirely  from  our  sermons^  that  iito
say,  ills  better  to  lay  aside  the  design  altogether,
than  to  atfemptto  disguise  it  by  a  management
which  is  generally  detected,  and  which,  if  not  seen
defeats  rts^purpose  by  its  obscurity.  The
—  of  individuals  let  usjeaerve  for  oppor-


persuasion-  and  effect,  and  the  virtue  to  seize  and
improve  every  proper  occasion  of  doing  it :  but  in
the  pulpit,  let  private  characters  be  no  otherwise
adverted  to,  than  as  they  fidl  in  with  the  delinea-
tions of  sins  and  .duties,  which  our  discourse*  must
necessarily  contain,  <and  which,  whilst  they  juroid
personalities,  can  never  be  too  close  or  cuenrnsran-
tiai  For  the  same  reason  that  i  tUnk  personal
allusions  reprehensible,  I  should  condemn  any.
even  the  remotest,  reference  to  party  or  political
transactions  and  dlroutes.  Theseareat  all  times
unfit  subjects  not  only  of  discussion  in  the  pulpit,
but  of  bints  andeunmses^  The  Christian  preacher
has  no  other  province  than  that  of  religion  and
morality.  He  is  seldom  led  out  ef  his  way  by
honourable  motives,  and,  I  think,  never  with  a
beneficial  effect,  /

Having  premised  (his  nrceiary  caution,  1
return  to  the  rule  itself.  By  "Jocal"  sermons  I
would  understand,  what  the  levewd'prelate  who
used  the  expression  seems  principal!  v  to  -have
meant  by  H,  sermons  adapted  to  theparocular  state
of  thought  and  opinion  which  we  perceive  to  pre-
vail in  our  congregation.  A  careful  attention  to
tins  cfanmstance  v  of  the  utmost  unportance,  be-
cause, as  it.  varies,  the  same  sermon  may  do  a
great  deal  of  good,  none  at  ail.  or  much  harm.  86
that  it  is  not  the  truth  of  what  we  are  about  to
oner  which  alone  we  ought  to  consider,  but  whe-
ther the  argumentltsetf lie  likely  to  correct  ox  to
511


519


SERMONS  ON  JPUBLIC  OCCASIONS.


promote  the  turn  and  bias  of  opinion  to  which  we
already  perceive  too  strong  a  tendency  and  inch-

*  nation.  Without  this  rircumspection,  we  may  be
found  to  have  Imitated  the  folly  of  the  .architect
who  placed  his  buttress  on  the  wrong,  aide.  The
more  the  column  pressed,  the  mora  firm  was  its
construction ;  and  the  deeper  its  foundation,  the
moror  certainly  it.  hastened  the  ruin  of  the  fabric.
I  do  not  mean  that  we  should}  upon  any  emer-
gency, advance  what  is -not  true ;  .but  that,  out  of
many  truths,  we  should  select  those,  the  consider-
ation of  which  seems  best  suited  to  rectify  the  dis-
positions of  thought,  that  were  previously  declin-
ing into  error  or  extravagancy.  For  tins  model
of  preaching  we  may  allege  the  highest  of  all
possible  authorities,  the  example  of  our  blessed
Saviour  himself.  He  always  had  in  view  the  pos-
ture of  mind  of  the  persons  whom  he  addressed.
He  did  not  entertain  the  Pharisees  with  invectives
•gainst  the  open  impiety  of  their  Sad<Jucean  rivals;
nor,  on.  the  other  hand;  did  he  sooth  the  Saddu-
ceo's  ear  with  descriptions  of  Pharisaical  pomp
and  folly.  In  the  presence  of  the  Pharisee  he
preached  against  hypocrisy:  to  the  Sadducees-  he
proved  the  resurrection  of  the  dead.  In  like  man-
ner, of  that  known. enmity  which  subsisted  be-
tween the  Jews  and  Samaritans,  this  Jfcuthful
Teacher  took  no  undue  advantage,  to  make  friends
or  proselytes  of  either.  Upon  the  Jews  he  incul-
cated a  more  comprehensive  benevolence:  with
the  Samaritan  he  defended  the  orthodoxy  of  the
Jewish  creed.

But  I  apprehend  that  I  shall  render  my  advice
more  intelligible,  by  exemplifying  it  in  two  or
three  instances,  drawn  from  what  appears  -to  be
the  predominant  disposition  and  religious  charac-
ter of  this  country,  and  of  the  present  times.

In  many  former  ages  of  religion,  the  strong
propensity  of  men's  minds  was  to  overvalue  posi-
tive duties;  which  temper,  when  carried  to  excess,
not  only  multiplied  unauthorized  rites  and  observ- ;
ances,  not  only  laid  an  unwarrantable  stress  upon
those  which  were  prescribed ;  but,  what  was  worst
of  al|,  fed  men  to.  expect,  that,  by  a  punctual  at-
tention to  the  ordinances  of  religion,  they  could
compound  for  a  relaxation  of  its  weighty  and  dif-
'  ficuft  duties  of  personal  purity  and  relative  justice.

•  This  was  the  depraved  state  of  religion  amongst
the  Jewsvwhen  our  Saviour  appeared;  and  it  was
the  degeneracy, -against  which  some  of  the  most
forcible  of  "Ms  admonitions,  and  the  severest  of  his
reproofs,  were  -directed. Yet, notwithstanding

-  that  Christ's,  own  preaching,  as  well  as  the  plan
-and  spirit  of  his  religion,  were  as  adverse  as  pos-
sible to  the  exalting  or  overvaluing  of  positive  in-
atitutionsj'  the  error  which  had  corrupted  the  old
.dispensation,  revived  under  the  new  4  and  revived
with  double  force,  insomuch  as  to  transform  "Gh^-
fianity  into  a  service  more  prolix  and  burdensome
than  the  Jewish,  and  to  ascribe  an  efficacy  to  cer-
tain religious  performances,  which,  in  a  great
measure,  *upeneded  the  obligations  of  substantial
virtue.  That  age,  however,  with  us,  is  long  since
past  I  fear  there  is  room  -to  apprehend  that  we
are  falling  into  mistakes  of  a  contrary  kind.  Sad-
ducees are  more  common  amongst  us  than  Phari-
sees. We  seem  disposed,  not  oply  to  cast  off  the
decent  offices,  which  the  .temperate  piety  of  our
church  hath  enjoined,  as  aids  of  devotion,  calls  to
repentance,  or  instruments  of  improvement,  but
to  contemn  and  neglect,  under  the  name  of  forms
•nd  ceremonke,  even  those  rites,  which,  forasmuch


as  they  were  ordained  by  the  divine  Founder  of
our  religion,  or  "by  his  inspired  messengers,  and
ordained  with  a  view  of  their  continuing  in  force
through  future  generations,  are  entitled  to  be  ac-
counted parts  of  Christianity  itself In  this


tion  ofYeJigion,  and  of  men's  thoughts  with  re-
spect of  it,  he  makes  a  bad  choice  of  his  subject,
who  discourses  upon. the  futility  of  rites  and  ordi-
nances, upon  their  insignificancy  when  taken  by
themselves,  or  even  who  insists  too  frequently,
and  in  terms  too  strong,  upon  their  inferiority  to
moral  precepts.  We  are  rather  called  upon  to
sustain  the  authority  of  those  institutions  which
proceed  from  Christ  or  his  apostles,  and  the  rea-
sonableness and  credit  of  those  which  claim  no
higher  original  than  puhtid  appointment.  We
are  called  upon  to  contend  with  respect  to  the
first,  jthat  they  cannot  be  omitted  with  safety  any
more  than  other  duties;  that  the  will  of  God  once
ascertained,  is  the  immediate  foundation  of  every
-duty;  that,  when  this  will  is  known,  it  makes
little  difference  to  .us  what  is  the  subject  of  it,
still  less  by  what  denomination  the  precept  is  can-
ed, under  what  class  or  division  the  duty  is  ar-
ranged. If  it  be  commanded,  and  we  have*  suf-
ficient reason  to  believe  that  It  is  so,  it  matters
nothing  whether  the  obligation  be  moral  or  natu-
ral, or  positive  or  instituted.  He  who  places  before
him  the  will  of  God  as  the  rule  of  his  life,  will  not
refine,  or  eyen  dwell  much,  upon  these  distinc-
tions. The  ordinances  of  Christianity,  it  is  true,
are  aU<of  them  significant  Their  meaning  ana
even  their  'use,  is  not  obscure.  But  were  it
otherwise;  was  the  design  of  any  positive  institu-
tion inexplicable ;  did-  it  appear  to  nave  been  pro-
posed only  as  an  exercise  of.  obedience* ;  -it  was  not
for  us  to  hesitate  in  our  compliance.  Even  to  in-
quire, with  too  much  curiosity  and  impatience,
into  the  cause  and  reason  of  a  religious  command,
is  no  evidence  of  an  humble  and  submissive  dispo-
sition ;  of  a  disposition,  I  mean,  humble  under
the  Deity's  government  of  his  creation,  and  sub-
missive to  his  will  however  signified.

It  may  be  seasonable  also  to  maintain,  what
I  am  convinced  is  true,  that  the  principle  rf
general  utility,  which  upholds  moral  obhgation
itself,  may,  in  various  instances,  be  apphexl  to
evince  the  duty  of  attending  uponpositive  institu-
tions; in  other  words,  that  the  difference  between
natural  and  positive  duties  is  often  more  in  the
name  .than  in  the  thing.  The  precepts  of  natural
justice  ate  therefore  only  binding  upon  the  con-
science, because  the  observation  of  them  is  neces-
sary or  conducive. to  the  prosperity  and  happiness
of  social  life.  If  there  be,  as  there  certainly  are,
religious  institutions  which  contribute  greatly  to
form  and  support  impressions  unon  the  nunc?,  that
render  men  better  members  of  civilized  communi-
ty;  if  these  institutions  can  only  be  preserved  in
their  reputation  and  influence  by  the  general  res-
pect which  is  paid  to  them;  there  is  the  same
reason  to  each  of  us  for  bearing  pur  putt  in  these
observances,  that  there- is  for  discharging  the  most
acknowledged  duties  of  natural  religion.  When
I  say,  "  the  reason  is  the  same,"  I  mean  that  it  is
the  same  in  kind*  The  degree  of  strength  and
cogency  which  this  reason  possesses  In  any  par-
ticular case,  must  always  depend  upon  the  value
and  importance  of  the  particular  duty;  which  ad-
mits of  great  variety.  But  moral  and  positive
duties  do  not  in  this  respect  differ  more  than
moral  duties  differ  from  one  another. So  that


SERMONS  ON  PUBLIC  OCCASIONS.


613


when  men  accustom  themselves  to  look  uponroei-
live  duties  as  universally  and  necessarily  interior
to  moral  ones,  as-  of  a  subordinate  species,  as
(faced  upon  a  different  foundation,  or  deduced
from  a  different  original ;  and  consequently  to  re-
gard them  as  unworthy  of  being  made  a  part  of
tneif  plan  of  life,  or  of  entering,  into  their  sense  of
obligation,  they  appear  to  be  egregiously  misled
by  names.  It  is  our  business,  not  to  aid,  but  to
correct,  the  deception.  Still, nevertheless,  is  it  as
true  as  ever  it  was*  that  "except  we  exceed  the
righteousness  of  the  flcriJbes  and  Pharisees,  we
cannot  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven ;"  that
"the  sabbath  was  made  tor  man,  and  not  man
for  the  sabbath :"  that  "  the  weightier  matter*  of
the  law  are  faith;  justice,  and  merer/'  but  to  in-
sist strenuously,  and,  as  some  do,  almost  ex-
clusively, upon  these  points  at  present,  tends  to
diminish  the  respect  for  religious  ordinances,
which  is  already  too  little;  and  whilst  it  guards
against  dangers  that  have  ceased  to  exist,  aug-
ments those  which  are  really  formidable.

Again : .  Upon  the  first  reformation  from  Pope-
XT,  a  method  very  much -prevailed  in  the  seceding
churches,  of  resolving  the  whole  of  religion  into
fiuthj  good  works,  as  they  were  called,  or  the
practice  of  virtue,  holding  not  only  a  secondary
but  even  distant  place  in  value  and  esteem,  being
-represented,  indeed,  as  possessing  no  share  or  e?
iicacy  in  the  attainment  of  human  salvation.  This
doctrine  we  have  seen  revived  in  our  own  times,
and  carried  to  still  greater  lengths..  And  it  is  a
theory,  or  rather  perhaps  a  language,  which  re-
quired, whilst  it -lasted,  very  serious  animadver-
awn  j  not  only,  because  it  disposed  men  to  rest  in
an  unproductive  faith,  without  endeavours  to
render  themselves  useful  by  exertion  and  activity ;
not  only  because  it  was  naturally  capable  of  being
converted  to  the  encouragement  of  licentiousness;
but  because  it  misrepresented  Christianity  as
a  moral  institution,  by  making  it  place  little  stress
upon  the  distinction  of  virtue  and  vice,  and  by
making  it  require  the  practice  of  external  duties,
if  £  require  them  at  all,  only  as  casual,  neglected,
and  almost  unthought  of  consequences,  of  that
faith  which  it  extolled,  instead  of  directing  men's
attention  to  them,  as  to  those  things  which  alone
compose  an  unquestionable  and  effective  obedience
to  the  divine  will.  So  long  as  this  turn  of  mind
prevailed,  we  could  not  oe  too  industrious  in
bringing  together  and  exhibiting  to  our  hearers
those  many  and  positive  declarations'  of  Scripture,
which  enforce,  and  insist  upon,  practical  religion ;
which  divide  mankind  into  those  who  do  good,
and  those  who  do  evil ;  which  hold  out  to  the  one,
favour  and  happiness,  to  the  other,  repulse  and
condemnation.  The  danger,  however,  from  this
quarter,  k  nearly  overpast  We  are,  on  the  con-
trary, setting  up  a  kind  of  philosophical  morality,
detached  from  religion,  ana  independent  of  its  in-
fluence, which  may  be  cultivated,  it  is  said,  as
wefl  without  Christianity  as  with  it ;  and  which,
if  cultivated,  renders  religion  and  religious  institu-
tions superfluous. "  A  mode  of  thought  so  contrary
to  truth,  and  so  derogatory  from  the  value  of  reve-
lation, cannot  escape  the  vigilance  of  a  Christian
ministry.  We  are  entitled  to  ask  upon  what
fi^da&m  (his  morality  rests.  If  it  refer  to  the
divine' will,  (and.  without  that,  where  will  it  find
its  sanctions,  or  now  support  its  authority  1)  there
cannot  be  a  conduct  of  the  understanding  more
irrational,  than  to  appeal  to  those  intimations  of
3T


the  Deity's  character  which  the  light  and  order  of
nature  afford,  as  to  the  rule  and  measure  of  our
duty,  yet  to  disregard,  and  affect  to  overlook,  the
declarations  of  his  pleasure  which  Christianity,
communicates.  It  is  impossible  to  distinguish  be-
tween the  authority  of  natural  and  revealed  reli-
gion. We  are  bound  to  receive  the  precepts  of
revelation  for  the  same  reason  that  we  comply
with  the  dictates  of  nature.  He  who  despises  a
command  which- proceeds  from  his  Maker,  no
matter  by  what  means,  01  through  what  medium,
instead  of  advancing,  as  he  pretend*  to  do,  the  do-
minion of  reason,  and  the  authority  of  natural  re-
ligion, disobeys  tne  first  injunction  of  both.  Al-
though it  be  true  what  the  apostle  affirms— that,
"  when  the  Gentiles,  which  have  not  the  law.  do
by  nature  the  things  contained  in  the  law,  they
are  a  law  unto  themselves  5"  that  is,  they  will  bo
accepted  together  with  those  who  are  instructed
in  the  law  and  obey  it :  yet  is  this  truth  not  appli-
cable to  such,  as,  having  a  law,  contemn  it,  and,
with  the  means  of  access  to  the  word  of  God,
keep  themselves  at  a  voluntary  distance  from  it
This  temper,  whilst  it  continued,  makes  it  neces-
sary for  us  to  assert  the  superiority  of  a  religious
principle  above  every  other  oy  winch  human  con-
duct can  be  regulated :  more  especially  above  that
fashionable  system,  which  recommends  virtue  only
as  a  true  and  refined  policy,  which  policy  in  effect
is,  and  in  the  end  -commonly  proves  itself  to  be,
nothing  else  than  a  more  exquisite  cunning,  which
by  a  specious  behaviour  in  the  easy  and  visible
concerns  of  life,  collects  a  fund  of  reputation,  in
order  either  to  cherish  more  securely  concealed
vices,  or  to  reserve  itself  for  some  great  stroke  of
selfishness,  perfidy,  and  desertion,  in  a  pressing
conjuncture  of  fortunes.  Nor  less  justly  may  we
superinduce  the  guidance  of  Christianity  to  the
direction  of  sentiment;  which  depends  so  much
upon  constitution,  upon  early  impressions,  upon
habit  and  imitation,  that  unless  it  be  compared
with,  and  adjusted  by,  some  safer  rule,  it  can  in
no  wise  be  trusted.  Least- of  all  ought  we  to
yield  the  authority  of  religion  to  the  law  of  honour,
a  law  (if  it  deserve  that  name',)  which,  beside  its
continual  mutability,  is  at  best  but  a  system  of
manners  suited  to  tne  intercourse  and  accommo-
dation of  higher  life;  and  which  consequently
neglects  every  duty,  and  permits  every  vice,  that
has  no  relation  to  these  purposes.  Amongst  the
rules-which  contend  with  religion-for  the  govern*
ment  of  life,  the  law  of  the  land  also  has  not  a  few,
who  think  it  very  sufficient  to  act  up  to  its  direc-
tion, and  to  keep  within  the  limits  which  it  pre-
scribes: and  this  sort  of  character  is  common  in
our  congregations.  We  are  not  to  omit,  therefore,
to  apprise  those  who  make  the  statutes  of  the
realm  the  standard  of  their  duty,  that  they  pro-
pose to  themselves  a  measure  of  conduct  totally
inadequate  to  the  purpose.  The  boundaries  which
nature  has  assigned  to  human  authority  and  con-
trol, the  partial  ends  to  which  every  legislator  is
obliged  to  confine  his  views,  prevent  human-  laws,
even  were  they,  what  they  never  are,  as  perfect
as  they  might  be  made,  from  becoming  compe-
tent rules  or  life  to  any  one  who  advances  Ins
hopes  to  the  attainment  of  God  Almighty's  favour.
In  contradistinction,  then,  to  -these  several  sys-
tems which  divide  a  great  portion  of  mankind
amongst  them,  we  preach  "faith  which  worketh
by  love,"  that  principle  of  action  and  restraint
which  is  found  in  a  Christian  alone. It  possesses


51t


8ERM0N8  OK  PTTBliC  OCCASION*


qualities  to  which  none  of  them  can  make  preten-
sions. It  operates  where  they  fail;  is  present
upon  all  occasions,  firm. upon  the  greatest;  pure
as  under  the  inspection  of  a  vigilant  omniscience;
Innocent  where  guilt  could  not  be  discovered ;
lust,  exact,  and  upright,  without  a  witness  to
its  proceedings;  uniform  amidst  the' caprices  of
fashion,  unchanged  by  the  vicissitudes  of  popular
opinion ;  often  applauded,  not  seldom  misunder-
stood, it  holds  on  its  straight  and  equal  course,
through  "  good  report  and  evil  report,"  through
encouragement  and  neglect,  approbation  and  dis-
grace, if  the  philosopher  or  the  politician  can
point  out  to  us  any  influence  but  that  of  Christi-
anity which  has  these  properties,  X  had  almost
said  which  does  not  want  them  all,  we  will
listen  with  reverence  to  his  instruction.  But  un-
til this  be'  done,  we  may  be  permitted  to  resist
every  plan  which  would  place  virtue  upon  any
other  foundation,  or  seek  final  happiness  through
any  other  medium,  than  faith  in  Jesus  'Christ.
At  least  whilst  an  inclination  to  these  rival  sys-
tems remains;  no  good  end,  I  am  apt  to  think,  is
attained  by  decrying  faith  under  any  form,  by
stating  the  competition  between  faith  and  good'
works,  or  by  pointing  out,  with  too  much  anxiety,
even  the  abases  and  extra  vaganoes  into  which  the
doctrine  of  salvation  by  faith:  alone  has  sometimes
been  carried.  The  truth  is,  that,  in  the  two  sub-
jects which  I  have  considered,  we  are  in  such
haste  to  fly  from  enthusiasm  and  superstition,  that
we  are  approaching  towards  an  insensibility  to  all
religious  influence.  I  certainly  do  not  mean,  to
advise  you  to  endeavour  to  bring  men  back  to  'en-
thusiasm and  superstition,  but  to  retard,  if  you
can,  their  progress  towards  an  opposite  and  a
'Worse  extreme ;  and  both  in  these,  and  in  all  other
instances,  to  regulate  the  choice  of  your  subjects,
by  the  particular  bias  and  tendency  of  opinion
which  yo\i  perceive  already  to  prevail  amongst
your  hearers,  and  by  a  consideration,  not  of  the
truth  only  of  what  you  deliver,  which,  however,
must  alwayB  be  an  indispensable  condition,  but  of
its  effects,  and  those  not  the  effects  which  it  would
produce  upon  sound,  enlightened,  and  impartial
judgments,  but  what  are  likely  to  take  place  in
the  weak  and  pre-occupied  understandings  with
•which  we  have  to  do.

1  Having  thus  considered  the  rule  as  it  applies  to
the~argumcnt  of  our  discourses,  in  which  its  prin-
cipal importance  consists,  I  proceed  to  illustrate
its  use  as  it  relates  to  another  'object — the  means
*of  exciting  attention.  The  transition  from  local
to  occasional  sermons  is  so  easy,  and  the  reason
for  both  is  so  much  the  same,  that  what  I  have
further  to  add  will  include  the  one  as  well  as  the
other.  And  though  nothing  more  be  proposed  in
the  few  directions  which  I  am  about  to  offer,  than
to  move  and  awaken  the  attention  of  our  audience,
yet  is  this  a  purpose  of  no  inconsiderable  magni-
tude. We  have  great  reason  .to  complain  of  ust-
lessness  in  our  congregations.  Whether  this  be
their  fault  or  oars,  the  fault  of  neither  or  of  both,
it  is  much  to  be  desired  that  it  could  by  any  means
be  removed.  Our  sermons  are  in  general  more
informing,  as  well  as  more  correct  and  chastised
beth  in  matter  and  composition,  than  those  of  any
denomination  of  dissenting  teachers.  I  .wish  it
were  in  our  power  to  render  them  as  impressive
as  some  of  theirs  seem  to  be.  Now  I  think  we
may  observe  that  we  are  heaid  with  somewhat
more  than  ordinary  advertency,  whenever  our  dis-


courses' are  recomrnended  by  airy  ortiaminl  pio*
priety .  The  more,  therefore,  of  these  propristxes)
we  contrive  to  weave  into  our  preaching,  the  bet-
ter. One  which  is  very  obvious,  and*  vtiuch  should
never  be  neglected,  is  thai  of  making  our  sermons
as  suitable  as  we  can  to  the  service  of  the  day.
On  the  principal  fasts  and  festivals  of  the  church,
the  subjects  which  they  are  designed  to  commemo-
rate, ought  invariably  to  be  made  the  subjects  of
our  discourses.  Indeed,  the  best  sermon,  if  it  do
not  treat  of  the  argument  which  the  congregation
come  prepared  to  hear,  is  received  with  coldness,
and  with  a  sense  of  disappointment  This  respect
to  the  order  of  public  worship  almost  every  one
pays.  But  the  adaptation,  1  apprehend,  may  he
carried  much  farther-  Whenever  anything  like
a  unity  of  subject  is  pursued  throughout  the  col-
lect, the  epistle,  and  gospel  of  the  day,  that  subject
is  with  great  advantage  revived  in  the  pulpit.  It
is  perhaps  to  be  wished  that  this  unity  had  been
more  consulted  in  the  compilation  of  this  part  of
the  liturgy  than  it  has  been.'  When  from  the
want  of  it  a  subject  is  not  distinctly  presented  to
us;  there  may,  however,  be  some  portion  of  the
service  more  striking  than  the  rest,  some  instruct-
ive parable,  some  interesting  narration,  some  con-
cise but  forcible  precept,  some  pregnant  sentence,
which  may  be  recalled  to  the  hearer's  attention
with  peculiar  effect.  '  I  think  it  no  contemptible
advantage  if  we  even  draw  our  text  from  the  epis-
tle or  gospel,  or  the  psalms  or  lessons.  Our  con-
gregation will  be  more  likely  to  retain  what  they
near  from  us,  when  it,  in  any  manner,  falls  in  with
what  they  have  been  reading. in  their  prayer-
books,  or  when  they  are  afterwards  reminded  of  it
by  reading  the  psalms  and  lessons  at  home.  But
there  is  another  species  of  accommodation  of  more
importance,  and  mat  is  the  choice  of  such  disqui-
sitions, as  may  either  meet  the  difficulties  or  assist
the  reflections,  which  are  suggested  by  the  por-
tions of  Scripture  that  are  delivered  from  the  read-
ing-desk. Thus,  whilst  the  wars  of  Joshua  and
the  Judges  arc  related  in  the  course  of  the  lessons
which  occupy  some  of  the  first  Sundays  after
Trinity,  it  will  be  very  seasonable  to  explain  the
reasons  upon  which  that  dispensation  was  founded,
the  moral  and  beneficial  purposes  which  are  de-
clared to  have  been  designee!,  and  which  were
probably  accomplished,  by  its  execution ;  because
such  an  explanation  will  obviate  the  doubts  con-
cerning either  the  divine  goodness  or  the  credibi-
lity of  the  narrative  which  may  arise  in  the  mind
of  a  hearer,  who  is  not  instructed  to  regard  the
transaction  as  a  method  of  inflicting  an  exemplary,
justj  and  necessary  punishment.  In  like  manner,
whilst  the  history  of  the  delivery  of  the  law  from
mount  Sinai,  or  rather  the  recapitulation  of  that
history  by  Moses,  in  the  book  of  Deuteronomy,  is
carried  on  in  the  Sunday  lessons  which  are  read
between  Easter  arid  Whitsunday,  we  shall  be
well  engaged  in  discourses  upon  the  command-
ments which  stand  at  the  head  of  that  institution,
in  showing  from  the  history  their  high  original
and  authority,  and  in  explaining  their -reasonable-
ness, application,  and  extent.  Whilst  the  history
of  Joseph  is  successively  presented  to  the  congre-
gation during  the  Sundays  in  Lent,  we  shall  be
very  negligent  of  the  opportunity,  if  we  do  net
take  occasion  to  point  put  to  our  hearers,  those
observations  upon  the  benevolent  but  secret  direc-
tion, the  wise  though  circuitous  measures,  of  Pro-
vidence, of  which  this  beautiful  passage  of  Scrip-


6ERM0NS  ON  PUBLIC  OCCASIONS:


61ft


tore  supplies  a  train 'of  apposite  examples.'  There*
are,  I  doubt  not,  other  series  of  subjects  dictated
by  the  service  as  edifying  as  these;'  but  these  I
propose  as  illustrations  of  the  rule. -

Next  to  the  service  of  the  church,  the  season
of  the  year  may  be  made  to  suggest  useful  and
appropriate  topics  of  meditation.  The  beginning
of  a  new  year  has  belonging  to  it  a  train  of  very
solemn  reflections.  In  the  devotional  pieces  of  the
late  Dr.  Johnson,  this  occasion  was  never  passed
by.  We  may  learn  from  these  writings  the  pro-
per use.  to  be  made  of  it;  and  by  the  example  of
that  excellent  person,  how  much  a  pious  mind  is
wont  to  be  affected  by  thfe  memorial  df  the  lapse
of  life.  There  are  also  certain  proprieties  which
correspond  with  the.  different  parts  of  the  year.
For  example,  the  wisdom  of  God  in  the  work  of
the  creation  is  a  theme  which  ought  to  be  reserved
for  the  return,  of  the  spring,  when  nature  renews,
SB  it  were,  her  activity;  when  every  animal  is
cheerful  and  busy,  and  seems  to  feel  the  influence
of  its  Maker's  kindness;  when  our  senses  and
spirits,  the  objects  and  enjoyments  that  surround
us,  accord  and  harmonize  with  those  sentiments
of  delight  and  gratitude,  which  this  subject,  above
all  others,  is  calculated  to  inspire.  There  is  no
devotion  so  genuine  as  that  which  .flows  from
these  meditations,  because  it  is  unforced  and  self-
excited.  There  is  no  frame  of  mind  more  desira-
ble, and,  consequently,  no  preaching  more  useful,
than  that  which  leads  the  thought  to  this  exercise.
It  is  laying  a  foundation -for  Christianity  itself,
if  it  be  not  to  sow  the  seed,  it  is  at  least  to  pre-
pare the  soiL  The  evidence  of  revelation  arrives
with  much  greater  ease  at  an  understanding,  which
10  already  possessed  by  the  persuasion,  that  an
tmeeen  intelligence  framed  and  conducts  the  uni-
verse; and  which  is  accustomed  to  refer  the  order
and  operations  of  nature  to  the  agency  of  a  su-
preme will.  The  influence  also  of  religion  is  al-
most always  in  proportion  to  the  degree  and
strength  of  this  conviction.  It  is,  moreover,  a
species  of  instruction  of  which  our  hearers  are
more  capable  than  we  may  at  first  sight  suppose.
It  is  not  necessary  to  be  a  philosopher,  or  to  be
■killed  in  the  names  and  distinctions  of  natural
history,  in  order  to  perceive  marks  of 'contrivance
and  design  in  the  creation.  It  is  only  to  turn  our
observation  to  them.  Now,  beside  that  this  re-
quires neither  more  ability  nor  leisure  than  every
man  can  command,  there  are  many  things  in  the
life  of  a  country  parishioner  which  will  dispose
bis  thoughts  to  the  employment  In  Ms  fields,
amidst  his  flocks,  in  the  progress  of  vegetation,
the  structure,  faculties,  and  manners,  of  domestic
animals,  he  has  constant  occasion  to  remark  proofs
of  intention  and  of  consummate  wisdom.  The
niinister  of  a  country  parish  is  never,  therefore,
better  engaged,  than  when  he  is  assisting  this  turn
of  contemplation.  Nor  will  he  ever  do  it  with  so
much  effect,  as  when  the  appearance  and  face  of  ex-
ternal nature  conspire  with  the  sentiments  which
he  wishes  to  excite.

Again :  if  we  would  enlarge  upon  the  various
bounty  of  Providence,  in  furnishing  a  regular  sup-
ply for  animal,  and  especially  for  human  subsist-
ence, not  by  one,  but  by  numerous  and  diversified
species  of  food  and  doming,  we  shall  be  best  heard
in  the  time  and  amidst  the  occupations  ofharvest,
when  our  hearers  are  reaping  the  effects  of  those
contrivances  for  their  support,  and  of  that  care  for
their  preservation,  which  their  Father  which  is  in


heaven  hath  exercised  For  them.  If  the  year  ha*
been  favourable,  we  rejoice  with  them  in  the  plea*
ry  which  fills  their  granaries,  covers  their  tables,
and  feeds  their  families.  If  otherwise,  or  less  so,
we  have  still  to  remark,  how  through  all  the  hue*
bondman's  disappointments,  through,  the  dangers
and  inclemencies  of  precarious  seasons,  a  compe-
tent proportion  of  the  fruits  of  the  earth  is  con-
ducted to  its  destined  purpose. ,  We  may  observe)
also  to  the  repining  farmer,  that  the  value,  if  net
the.  existence,  of  his  own  occupation,  depends
upon  the  very  uncertainty  of  which  he  complains;
It  is  found  to  be  almost  universally  true,  -that  the
partition  of  the  profits  between  the  owner  and  the
occupier  of  the  soil,  is  in  favour  of  the  fetter,  in
proportion  to  the  risk  which  he  incurs,  by  the  dis-
advantage of  the  climate.  This  is  a  very  just  re*
flection,  and  particularly  intelligible  to-  a  rural
audience.  We  may  add,  when  the  occasion,  re-
quires it,  that  scarcity  itself  hath  its  use.  By  act.
ing  as  a  stimulus  to  new  exertions  and  to  farther
improvements,  it  often  produces,  through  a  tem-
porary distress,  a  permanent  benefit.

Lastly;  sudden,  violent,  or  untimely  deaths, -or
death  accompanied  by  any  circumstances  of  sur-
prise or  singularity,  usually  leave  an  impression
upon  a  whole  neighbourhood.  A  Christian  teach-
er is  wanting  in  attention  to  opportunities  who
does  not  avail  himself  of  this  impression;  The
uncertainty  of  life  requires  no  proof.  But  the
power  and  influence  which  this  consideration  shall
obtain  over  the  decisions  of  the  mind,  will  depend
greatly  upon  the  circumstances  under  which  it  'is
presented  to  the  imagination.  Discourses  upon
the  subject  come  with  tenfold  force,  when  they
are  directed  to  a  heart  already  touched  by  some*
near,  recent,  and  affecting  example  of  human  mor-
tality. 1  do  not  lament  that  funeral  sermons  am
discontinued  amongst  us.  They  generally  con-
tained so  much  df  unseasonable  and  oftentimes
undeserved  panegyric,  that  the  hearers  came  away
from  them,  rather  with  remarks  in  their  mouths
upon  what  was  said  of  the  deceased,  than  with
any  internal  reflections  upon  the  solemnity  which
they  had  left,  or  how  nearly  it  related  to  their  own
condition.  But  by  decent  allusions  in  the  stated
course  of  our  preaching  to  events  of  this  sort,  or
by,  what,  is  better,  such  a  welMimed  choice  of  our
subject,  as  may  lead  our  audience  to  make  the  al-
lusion lor  themselves,  it  is  possible,  I  think,  to  re-
tain much  of  the  good  effect  of  funeral  discourses,
without  their  adulation,  and  without  exciting  vain
curiosity.

If  other  occurrences  have  arisen  within  our
neighbourhood,  which  serve  to  exemplify  the  pro-
gress and  fete  of  vice,  the  solid  advantages  and
ultimate  success  of  virtue,  the  providential  disco-
very of  guilt  or  protection  of  innocence,  the  folly
of  avarice,  the  disappointments  of  ambition,  the
vanity  of  worldly  schemes,  the  felladousness  of
human  foresight;  in  a  word,  which  may  remind
us,  "  what  shadows  we  are,  and  what  shadows  we
pursue,"  and  thereby  induce  us  to  collect  our
views  and  endeavours  to  one  point,  the  attainment
of  final  salvation ;  such  occurrences  may  be  made
to  introduce  topics  of  serious  and  useful  medita-
tion. 1  have  heard  popular  preachers  amongst  the
methodists  avail  themselves  of  these  occasions
with  very  powerful  effect.  It  must  be  acknow-
ledged that  they  frequently  transgress  the  limits
of  decorum  and  propriety,  and  that  these  trans-
gressions wound  the  modesty  of  a  cultivated  ear.


516


SERMONS  ON  PUBLIC  OCCASIONS.


BotfhameChoditielfiinottobebUiiiecL  Under
the  correction  of*  minder  judgment  H  might  be
rendered  very  beneficial.  Perhaps,  as  hath  been
already  intimated,  the  safest  war  is,  not  to  refer
to  then  incident!  by  any  direct  allusion,  but  mere-
ly to  diacoiirae  at  the  time  upon  subjects  which'
are  allied  to,  and  connected  with  them.

The  sum  of  what  I  have  been  recommending
amounts  to  this:  that  we  consider  diligently  the
probable  effects  of  oar  discourses,  unon  the  parti-
cular characters  and  dispositions  of  those  who  are
to  hear  them;  but  -that  we  apply  this  considera-
tion solely  to  the  choice  of  truths,  by  no  means  to
the  admission  of  falsehood  or  insincerity  :*  Se-
condly, that  we  endeavour  to  profit  by  circum-
stances, that  is,  to  assist,  not  the  reasoning,  but


•This  distinction  Axes  the  limits  of  exoteric  doctrine,
as  fcr  as  aay  thing  sailed  by  that  name  is  allowable  to
a  Christian  teacher.


the  enVasy  of  our  disxiioursei.  by  ini
skilful  use  of  the  service  of  the  church;  the  •
of  the  year,  and  of  all  such  occurrences  and  atna-
tions  as  are  capable  of  receiving  a  religious  ram.
and  such  as,  being  yet  recent  in  the  memory  of
our  hearers,  may  dispose  their  minds  for  the  ad-
missioB  ana  influence  of  salutary  reflections.-

My  Reverend  Brethren,  I  am  sensible  that  the
discourse  with  which  I  have  now  detained  Ton,  is
not  of  that  kind  which  is  usually  delivered  ^t  a
Chancellor's  visitation.  But  since  (by  the  favour
of  that  excellent  prelate,  who  bf  me  must  long  be
remembered  with  gratitude  ana  affection)  I  hold
another  public  station  in  the  diocese,  I  embrace
the  only  opportunity  afforded  me  of  submitting  to
you  that  species  of  counsel  and  exhortation,  which,
with  more  propriety  perhaps,  you  would  have  re-
ceived from  me  in  the  character  of  your  archdea-
con, if  the  functions  of  that  office  had  n
entire.


SERMON  V.

I  DANGERS  INCIDENTAL  TO  THE  CLERICAL  CHARACTER;  STATED,

*  * •'

IK  A  SBHMON  PREACHED  BEFORB  THE  UN  ITEM  ITT  OP  CAMBRIDGE,  AT  GREAT  ST.  MABtVcHUBCB,  OX
flUNlTAT,  JULT^,  BEING  COMMENCEMENT  SUNDAY.


To  Lowther  Yatee,  D.  V.  Vice  ChanceOor\  and  the  Head*  of  College*  in  the  University  of
Cambridge,  a$  a  testimony  to  many  of  them,  of  the  affection  with  which  the  Author  retaine  hi*
academical  friendehipe;  and  to  all,  of  the  respect  with  which  he  regard*  their  nation*:  the
following  discount  i*  inscribed  by  their  faithful  servant,  W.  PALEY.


Lett  that,  by  any  means,  when  I  have  preached  to  others,  I  myself  should  be  a  castaway.—
1  Corinthians  ix.— Part  of  the  87th  verse.


These  words  discover  the  anxiety,  not  to  say
the  fears,  of  the  writer,  concerning  the  event  of
Ins  personal  salvation;  and,  when  interpreted  by
the  words  which  precede  them,,  strictly  connect
that  event  with  the  purityof  his  persona]  character.

It  is  extremely  material  to  remember  who  it  was
that  felt  this  deep  solicitude  for  the  fate  of  his
spiritual  interests,  and  the  persuasion  that  his
Acceptance  (in  so  far  as  it  is  procured  by  human
endeavours)  would  depend  upon  the  care  and
exactness  with  which  he  regulated  his  own  pas-
sions, and  his  own  conduct ;  because,  if  a  man
ever  existed,  who,  in  the  zeal  and  labour  with
which  he  served  the  cause  of  religion,  in  the  ar-
dour or  the  efficacy  of  his  preaching,  in  his  suf-
Jerings.  or  his  success,  might  hope  for  some  excuse
to  indulgence,  some  licence  for  gratifications  which
were  forbidden  to  others,  it  was  the  author  of  the
text  which  has  been  now  read  to  you.  Yet  the
apostle  appears  to  have  known,  and  by  his  know-
ledge teaches  us,  that  no  exertion  of  industry,  no
display  of  talents,  no  public  merit,  however  great,
or  however  good  and  sacred  be  the  cause  in  which
It  w  acquired,  will  compensate  for  the  neglect  of
personal  self-government.

This,  in  my  opinion,'  is  an  important  lesson  to
all :  to  none,  certainly,  can  it  be  more  applicable,
than  it  is  in  every  age  to  the  teachers  of  religion ;
for  a  little  observation  of  the  world  must  nave
informed  as,  that  the  human  mind  is  prone,  almost
beyond  resistance,  to  sink  the  weakness  or  the
irregularities  of  private  character  in  the  view  of
public  services ;  that  this  propensity  is  the  strongest
in  a  man's  own  case;  that  it  prevails  more  power-
roily  in  religion  than  in  other  subjects,  inasmuch
as  the  teachers  of  religion  consider  themselves
(and  rightly  do  so)  as  miniahwpig  to  the  higher
interests  orhuman  existence.


SUM  farther,  if  there  be  causes,  as  I  believe
there  are,  whien  raise  extraordinary  difficulties  in
the  way  of  those  who  are  engaged  in  the  offices
of  religion;  circumstances  even  of  disadvantage  in
the  profession  and  character,  as  far  as  relates  to
the  conservation  of  their  own  virtue :  it  behoves
them  to  adopt  the  apostle's  caution  with  more  than
common  care,  because  it  is  only  to  prepare  them-
selves for  dangers  to  which  they  are  more  than
commonly  exposed.

Nor  is  there  good  reason  for  conceafinff,  either
from  ourselves  or  others,  anv  unfavourable  dispo-
sitions which  the  nature  of  our  employment  or
situation  may  tend  to  generate  r  for,  be  they  what
they  will,  they  only  prove,  that  it  happens  to' us
according  to  the  condition  of  human  life,  with
many  benefits  to  receive  some  inconveniences;
with  many  helps  to  experience  some  trials :  that,
with  many  peculiar  motives  to -virtue,  and  means
of  improvement  in  it,  some  obstacles  are  pre*
sented  to  our  progress,  which"  it  may  require  a
distinct  and  positive  effort  of  the  mind  to"  sur-
mount

I  apprehend  that  I  am  stating  a  cause  of  no
inconsiderable  importance,  when  amongst  these
impediments  I  mention,  in  the  first  place,  the
insensibility  to  religious  impression,  which  a  con-
stant conversation  with  religious  subjects  ana,
still  more,  a  constant  intermixture  with  religious
offices,  is  wont  to  induce.  Such  is  the  frame  of
the  human  constitution,  (and  calculated  also  for
the  wisest  purposes,)  that  whilst  all  active  habits]
are  facilitated  and  strengthened  by  repetition,
impressions  under  which  we  are  passive,  are
weakened  and  diminished.'  Upon  the  first  of
these  properties  depends,  in  a  great  measure/the
exercise  of  the  arts  of  fife:  upon  the  second,  the
capacity  which  the  mind  possesses  of  adapting


618


SERMONS  ON  PUBLIC  OCCASIONS.


itself  to  ahnost  every  situation.  This  quality  is
perceived  in  numerous,  and  for  the  most  part
beneficial  examples.  Scenes  of  terror,  spectacles
of  pain,  objects  of  loathing  and  disgust;  bo  far  lose
their  effect  with  their  novelty,  as  to  permit  pro-
fessions to  be  carried  on,  and  condition*  of  lite  to
be  endured,  which  otherwise,  although  necessary,
would  be  insupportable.  It  is  a  quality,  however,
which  acts,  as  other  parts  of  our  frame  do,  by  an
operation  which  is  general ;  hence  it  acts  also  in
instances  in  which  its  influence  is  to  be  corrected ;
And,  amongst  these,  in  religion.  Every  attentive
Christian  will  have  observed  how  much  more
powerfully  he  is  affected  by  any  form  of  worship
which  is  uncommon,  than  with  the  familiar  re-
turns of  his  own  religious  offices.  He  will  be
sensible  of  the  difference  when  he  approaches,  a
lew  times  in  the  year,  *.he  sacrament  or  the  Lord's
Supper  j  if  he  snouM  b~  present  ot  the  vis'rfatiou
Of  the  sick;  or  even,  if  that  were  unusual  to  him,
«t  the  sight  of  a  family  assembled  in  prayer.  He
will  perceive  it  also  upon  entering  the  doors  of  a
dissenting  congregation;  a  circumstance  which
has  misled  many,  by  causing  them  to  ascribe  to
some  advantage  in  the  conduct  of  public  worship,
what,  in  truth,  is  only  the  effect  of  new  impres-
sions. Now,  by  bow  much  a  lay  frequenter  of
religious  worship  finds  himself  less  warmed  and
stimulated  by  ordinary,  than  by  extraordinary
acts  of  devotion,  by  so  much,  it  may  be  expected,
that  a  clergyman,  habitually  conversant  with  the
offices  of  religion,  will  be  less  moved  and  stimu-
lated than  he  is.  What  then  is  to  be  done  1  It
is  by  an  effort  of  reflection;  by  a  positive  exertion
Of  the  mind ;  by  knowing  this  tendency,  and  by
setting  ourselves  expressly  to  resist  it;  that  we
an  to  repair  the  decays  of  spontaneous  piety.
We  are  no  more  to  surrender  ourselves  to  the
mechanism  of  our  frame,  than  to  the  impulse  of
our  passions.  We  are  to  assist  our  sensitive  by
our  /rational  nature.  We  are  to  supply  this  infir-
mity (for  so  it  may  be  called,  although,  like  many
other  properties  which  bear  the  name  of  vices  in
our  constitution,  it  be,  in  (ruth,  a  beneficial  prin-
ciple acting  according  to  a  general  law)— we  are
to  supply  it  by  a  deeper  sense  of  the  obligations
under  which  we  lie;  by  a  more  frequent  and  a
mote  distinct  recollection  of  the  reasons  upon
Which  that  obligation  is  founded.  We  are  not  to
wonder  at  the  pains  which  this  mayecet  us ;  still
leaf  are  we  to  imitate  the  despondency  of  some
serious  Christians,  who,  in  the  impaired  sensibi-
lity that  habit  hath  induced,  bewail  the  coldness .
of  a  deserted  soul.

,  Hitherto  our  observation  will  not  be  questioned;
but  I  think  that  this  principle  goes  farther  than
is  generally  known  or  acknowledged.  I  think
that  it  extends  to  the  influence  which  argument
itself  possesses  upon  our  understanding;  or,  at
least,  to  the  influence  which  it  possesses  in  deter-
mining our  will.  I  will  not  say,  that,  in  a  subject
strictly  intellectual,  >and  in  science  properly  so
called,  a  demonstration  is  the  less  convincing  for
being  old :  but  I  am  not  sure  that  this  is  not,  in
some  measure,  true  of  moral  evidence  and  proba-
ble proofs,  in  practical  subjects,  however,  where
two  things  are  to  be  done,  the  understanding  to
be  convinced,  and  the  will  to  be  persuaded,  I  be-
lieve that  the  force  of  every  argument  is  diminished
by  triteness  and  familiarity.  The  intrinsic  value
of  the  argument  must  be  the  same  j  the  impres-
sion may.be  very  different


But  we  have  a  disadvantage  to  contend  with

additional  to  this.  The  consequence  of  repetition
will  be  felt  more  sensibly  by  us,  who  are  in  the
habit  of  directing  our  arguments  to  others :  for  it
always  requires  a  second,  a  separate,  and  an
unusual  effort  of  the  mind,  to  bring  back  the  con-
clusion upon  ourselves.  In  constructing,  in  ex-
pressing, in  delivering  our  arguments ;  in  aJft  the
thoughts  and  study  which  we  employ  upon  them ;
what  we  are  apt  to  hold  continually  in  our  view,
is  the  effect  which  they  may  produce  upon  those
who  hear  or  read  them.  The  further  ana  best  use
of  our  meditations,  their  influence  upon  our  own
hearts  and  consciences,  is  lost  in  the  presence  of
the  other.  In  philosophy  itself,  it  is  not  always
the  same  thing,  to  study  a  subject,  in  order  to
understand,  and  in  order  only  to  teach  it.  In
morals  and  religion,  the  powers  of  persuasion
are  cultivated  by  those  whose  employment  is  pub-
lic instruction;  but  their  wishes  are  fulfilled,  and
their  care  exhausted,  in  promoting  the  success  of
their  endeavours  upon  others.  The  .secret  duty
of  turning  truly  and  in  earnest  their  attention
upon  themselves,  is  suspended,  not  to  say  forgot-
ten, amidst  the  labours,  the  engagements,  the
popularity,  of  their  public  ministry;  and  in  the
best  disposed  minds,  is  interrupted,  by  the  anxiety,
or  even  by  the  satisfaction,  with  which  their  pub-
lic services  are  performed.

These  are  dangers  adhering  to  the  very  nature
of  our  mofession ;  but  the  evfi  is  often  also  aug-
mented by  our  imprudence.  In  our  wishes  to
convince,  we  are  extremely  apt  to  overstate  our
arguments.  '  We  think  no  confidence  with  which
we  speak  of  them  can  be  too  great,  when  our
intention  is  to  urge  them  upon  our  hearers.  This
fceal,  not  seldom,  Ibclicve,  defeats  its  own  purpose,
even  with  those  whom  we  address ;  but  k  always
destroys  the  efficacy  of  the  argument  upon  oar-
selves.  We  are  conscious  of  the  exaggeration,
whether  our  hearers  perceive  it  or  not ;  and  this
consciousness  corrupts  to  us  the  whole  influence
of  the  conclusion ;  robs  it  even  of  its  just  value.
Demonstration  admits  of  no  degrees :  but  real  lift
knows  nothing  of  demonstration.  It  converses
only  with  moral  evidence  and  moral  reasoning.
In  these  the  scale  of  probability  is  extensive;  and
every  argument  hath  its  place  in  it  It  may  not
be  quite  the  same  thing  to  overstate  a  true  reason,
and  to  advance  a  false  one :  but  since  two  ques-
tions present  themselves  to  the  judgment,  usually
joined  together  oy  their  nature  and  importance,
viz.  on  which  side  probability  lies,  and  how  much
it  preponderates ;  to  transgress  the  rules  of  fair
reasoning  in  either  question,  in  either,  to  go  be-
yond our  own  perception  of  the  subject,  is  a  simi-
lar, if  not  an  equal  fault.  In  both  cases  it  is  a
want  of  candour,  which  approaches  to  a  want  of
veracity.  But  that  in  which  its  worst  effect  is
seen ;  that,  at  least,  which  it  belongs  to  this  dis-
course to  notice ;  is  in  its  so  undermining  the
solidity  of  our  proofs,  that  our  own  understand-
ings refuse  to  rest  upon  them ;  in  vitiating  the
integrity  of  our  own  judgments ;  in  rendering
our  minds]  as,  weH  incapable  of  estimating  the  pro*
per  strength  of  moral  and  religious  arguments,  as
unreasonably  suspicious  of  their  truth,  and  dull
and  insensible  to  their  impression.

If  dangers. to  our  character  accompany  the  ex-
ercise of  our  public  ministry,  they  no  Jess  attend
upon  the  nature  of  our  professional  studies.  It
has  been  said,  that  Uterary  trifling  upon  the  Scrip-


SERMONS  ON  PUBLIC  OCCASIONS.


519


fares  has  a  tendency,  above  all  other  employments,
to  harden  the  heart.  .  If  by  tins  -maxim  it  be  de-
signed to  reprove  the  exercise,  to  check  the  free-
dom, or  to  question  the  utility,  of  critical  re-
searches, when  employed  upon  the  sacred  volume*,
it  is  not  by  me  to  be  defended.  If  it-mean  simply
to  guard  against  an  existing-  danger,  to  state  a
Usual  and  natural  consequence,  the  maxim  wants
neithertruth  nor  use.  It  is  founded  m  this  obser-
vation :  "when  any"  one,  by  the  command-  of  learn-
ing and  talents,  has  been  fortunate-enough  to  clear
up  an  obscurity,  or  to  settle  a  doubt,  in  the  inter-
pretation of  Scripture ;  pleased  (andj  ustly  pleased)
with  the  result  of  his  endeavours,  his  thoughts  are
wont  to  indulge  this  complacency,  and  there  to
etdp ;  or  when  another,  by  a  patient  application
of  inferior  faculties,  has  made,  as  he  thinks,  some
progress  in  theological  studies ;  or  even  has  with
much  attention  engaged  in  them ;  he  is  apt  to  rest
and  stay  hi  what  he  deems  a  religious  and  merito-
rious service.  The  critic  and  the  commentator  do'
not  always  proceed  with  the  reflection,  that  if
these  things  be  true,  if  this  book  do  indeed  con-
vey to  us  the  will  of  God.  then  is  it  no  longer  to
be  studied  and  criticised  alone,  but,  what  is  a  very,
different  work,  to  be  obeyed,  and  to  be  acted  upon.
At  least,  this  ulterior  operation  of  the  mind,  en-
feebled perhaps  by  former  exertions  of  quite  ano-
ther nature,  does  not  always  retain  sufficient  force
and  vigour  to  bend  the  obstinacy  of  the  will.  To
describe  the  evil  is  to  point  out'  the  remedy;
.which  must  consist  in  holding  steadfastly  within
Our  view  this  momentous  consideration,  that,  how-
ever laboriously,  or  however  successfully,  we  may
have  cultivated  religious  studies ;  how  much  so*
ever  we  may  have  added  to  -our  learning  or  our
feme,  we  have  hitherto  done  little  for  our  salvation ;
that  a  more  arduous,'  to  us  perhaps' a  new,  and,  it
may  be,  a  painful  work,  which  the  public  eye  sees
not,  which  no  public  favour  will  reward,  yet  re-
mains to  be  attempted;  that  of  instituting  an  exa-
mination of  our  hearts  and  of  our  conduct,  i)f  alter-
ing the  secret  course  of  our  behaviour,  of  reducing,
with  whatever  violence  to  our  habits;  loss  of  our
pleasures,  or  interruption  of  our  pursuits,  its  de-
viations to  a  conformity  with  those  rules  of  life
which  are  delivered  in  the  volume  that  lies  open
before  us;  and  which,  if  it  be  of  importance
enough  to  deserve  our  study,  ought,  for  reasons
Infinitely'superior,  to  command  our  obedience.

Another  disadvantage  incidental  to  the  charac-
ter of  which  we  are  now  exposing  the  dangers,  is
the  moral  debility  that  arises  from  the  want  of  be-
ing trained  in  the  virtues  of  active  life.  This
complaint  belongs,  not  to  the  clergy  as  such,  be-
cause their  pastoral  office  affords  as  many  calls,
and*  as  many  opportunities,  for  beneficent  exer-
tions, as  are  usually  found  in  private  stations;
but  it  belongs  to  that  secluded,  contemplative  life,
which  men  of  learning  often  make  choice  of,  or
into  which  they  are  thrown  by  the  accident  of
their  fortunes.  A  great  part  of  mankind  owe
their  principles  to  their  practice ;  that  is,  to  that
wonderful  accession  of  strength  and  energy  which
good  dispositions  receive  from  good  actions.  It  is
difficult  to  sustain  virtue  by  meditation  alone ;  but
let  our  conclusions  only  have-  influence  enough
once  to  determine  us  upon  a  course  of  virtue,  and
that  influence  will  acquire  such  augmentation  of
force  from  every  instance  of  virtuous  endeavour,
as,  ere  long,  to  produce  iri  us  constancy  and  resolu-
tion, a  formed  and  a  fixed  character. Of  this  great


arid  progressive  assistance  U>  their  principles,  men  '
who  are  withdrawn  from. the  business  and  the  in-
tercourse of  civil  life  find  themselves  in  some  mea-
sure deprived.  Virtue  in  them  is  left,  more  than
in  others,  to  the  dictates  of  reason ;  to  a  sense  of
duty  less  aided  by  the  power  of.  habit.  I  will  not
deny  that  this  difference  renders  their  virtue  more
pure,  more  actual,  and  nearer  to  its -principle ; -but
it  renders  it  less  easy  to  be  attained  or  preserved.

Having  proposed  these  circumstances,  as  diffi-
culties of  which  I  think  it  useful  that  our  order
should  be  apprised ;  and  as  growing  out  of  the
functions  of  the  profession,  its  studies,  or  the  situa-
tions in  which  it  places  us ;  I  proceed,  with  the
same  view,  to  notice  a  turn  and  habit  of  thinking,
which  is,  Of  late,  become  very  general  amongst  the
higher  classes'  of  the  community. amongst  all  who
occupy  stations  of  authority,  ana  in  common  with
these  two  descriptions  of  men,  amongst  the  ckrgy.
That  which  I  am  about  to  animadvert  upon,  is,
in  its  place,  and  to  a  certain  degree,  undoubtedly
a  fair  and  right  consideration ;  out,  in  the  extent
to  which  it  prevails,  has  a  tendency  to  discharge
from  the  hearts  of  mankind  all  religious  principle
whatever.  What  I  mean,  is  tjie  performing  of
our  religious  offices  for  the  sake  of  setting  am  ex*
dmple  to  others ;  and  the  allowing  of  this  motive
so  to  take  possession  of  the  mind,  as  to  substitute
itself  into  the  place  of  the  proper  ground  arid  rea-
son of  the  duty.  I  must  be  permitted  to  contend,
that,  whenever  this  is  the  case,  it  becomes  not  only
a  cold  and  extraneous,  but  a  raise  and  unreasona-
ble, principle  of  action.  A  conduct  propagated
through  the  different  ranks  of  society  merely  by
this  motive,  is  a  chain  without  a  support,  a  fabric
without  a  foundation:  The  parts,  indeed,  depend
upon  one  another,  but  there  is  nothing  to  bear  up
the  whole.  There  must  be  some  reason  for  every
duty  beside  example,  or  there  can  be  no  sufficient
reason  for  it  at  aO.  It  is  a  perversion,  therefore,
of  the  regular  order  of  our  ideas,  to  suffer  a  con-
sideration, which,  whatever  be  its  importance,  is
only  secondary  and  consequential  to  another,  to
shut  out  that  other  from  the  thoughts.  The  ef-
fect of  this  in  the  offices  of  religion,  is  utterly  to
destroy  their  religious  quality ;  to  rob  them  of  that
which  gives  to  them  their  life,  their  spirituality,
their  nature.  They  who  would  set  an  example  to
others  of  acts  of  worship  and  devotion,  in  truth
perform  none  themselves.  Idle  or  proud  specta-
tors of  the  scene,  they  vouchsafe  their  presence  in
our  assemblies,  for  the  edification,  it  seems,  and
benefit  of  others,  but  as  if  they  had  no  sins  of
their  own  to  deplore,  no  mercies  to  acknowledge,
no  pardon  to  entreat.  .  * , "~

Shall  the  consideration,  then,  of  example  be
prohibited  and  discarded  from  the  thought*]  By
no  means :  but-let  it  attend  upon,  not  supersede,
the  proper  motive  of  the  action.  Let  us  learn  to
know  and  feel  the  reason,  the  value,  and  the  obli-
gation of  the  duty,  as  it  concerns' ourselves;  ancl
in  proportion  as  we  are  affected  by  the  force  or
these  considerations,  we  shall  desire,  and  desiring
endeavour,  ta  extend  their  influence  to  others.
This  wish,  flowing  from  an  original  sense  of  each
duty,  preserves  to  the  duty  its  proper  principle.
11  lit  your  light  so  shine  before  men,  that  they
may  see  your  good  works,  and  glorify  your  Father
which  is  in  Heaven."  The  glory  of  your  hea*
vetily  father  is  still,  you  observe,  the  termination
of  the  precept.  The  love  of  God ;  that  zeal  for  his
honour  and  service,  which  love,  which  gratitude,


690


SERMONS  ON  PUBLIC  OCCASIONa


Which  raety  inspires,  is  still  to  be  the  operating
motive  of  your  conduct  Because  we  find  it  con-
venient to  ourselves,  that  those  about  as  should  be
lafigious:  or  because  it  is  useful  to  the  state,  that
religion  should  be  upheld  in  the  country :  to  join,
from  these  motives,  in  the  public  ordinances  of  the
church,  for  the  sake  of  maintaining  their  credit
by  our  presence  and  example,  however  advisable
it  may  be  as  a  branch  of  secular  prudence,  is  not
either  to  fulfil  our  Lord's  precept,  or  to  perform
any  religious  service.  Religion  can  spring  only
from  its  own  principle.  Believing  our  salvation
to  be  involved  in  the  fiuthful  Uncharge  of  our  reU-
gftous  as  weH  as  moral  duties,  or  rather  that  they
are  the  same;  experiencing  the  warmth,  the  con-
solation, Che  virtuous  energy,  which  every  act  of
true  devotion  communicates  to  the  heart,  and  how
much  these  effects  are  heightened  by  consent  and
sympathy;  with  the  benevolence  with  which  we
love  our  neighbour,  loving  also  and  seeking  ms  im-
mortal welfare;  when,  prompted  by  these  sent*-
i,  we  unite  with  him  in  acts  of  social  homage


to  our  Maker,  then  hath  every  principle  its  weight ,
then,  at  length,  is  our  worship  what  it  ought  to  be ;
exemplary,  yet  our  own;  not  the  less  personal  for
being  pubha  We  bring  our  hearts  to  the  service,
and  not  a  constrained  attendance  upon  the  place,
with  oftentimes  an  ill  concealed  indifference  to
what  is  there  passing.

If  what  we  have  stated  concerning  example  be
true;  if  the  consideration  of  it  be  liable  to  be  over-
stretched or  misapplied ;  no  persons  can  be  more
in  danger  of  Ming  into  the  mistake  than  they
who  are  taughUo  regard  themselves  as  placed  in
their  stations  for  the  purpose  of  becoming  the  ex-
ampfcs  as  well  as  instructors  of  their  flocks.  It  is
necessary  that  they  should  be  admonished  to  re-
vert continually  to  the  fundamental  cause  of  all
obligation  and  of  all  duty ;  particularly  to  remem-
ber, that,  in  their  religious  offices,  they  have  not
only  to  pronounce,  to  excite,  to  conduct  the  devo-
tion of  their  congregations,  out  to  pay  to  God  the
adoration  which  themselves  owe  to  him:  in  a
Word,  amidst  their  care  of  others,  to  save  their  own
souls  by  their  own  religion.

These,  I  think,  are  some  of  the  causes,  which,
in  the  conduct  of  their  lives,  call  for  a  peculiar  at-
tention^ from  the  clergy,  and  from  men,  of  learn-
ing ;  and  which  render  the  apostle's  example,  and
the  icHsoa  which  it  teaches,  peculiarly  applicable
to  their  circumstances.  It  remains  only  to  remind
them  of  a  consideration  which  ought  to  coun-
teract^ these  disadvantages,  by  producing  a  care
.  and  solicitude,  sufficient  to  meet  every  danger,
and  every  difficulty;  to  remind  them,  I  aay,  for
they  cannot  need  to  be  informed,  of  our  Lord's
~  ^ i  declaration,  that  con tnmaciouB  knowledge,


which  doth  not


and  neglected  talents,  knowtetew

lead  to  obedience,  and  talents  which
speculations,  will  be  found,  in  the  day  of  final  ac-
count, amongst  the  objects  of  his  severest  dis-
pleasure. Would  to  God,  that  men  of  learning
always  understood  how  deeply  they  are  concerned
in  this  warning!  It  is  impossible  to  add  another  rea-
son which  can  be  equal  or  second  to  bur  Lord's  ad-
monition :  but  we  may  suggest  a, motive  of  very
distant  indeed,  but  of  no  mean  importance,  and  to
which  they  certainly  will  not  refuse  i to  due  regard,
the  honour  and  estimation  of  learning  itself  Ir-
regular morals  in  men  of  distinguished  attain-
ments, render  them,  not  despised.  7for  talents  and
learning  never  can  be  despicable,)  but  subjects  of
*n»iimiiM  remark,  perhaps  o&afiected  pity,  to  the
enemies  of  intellectual  liberty,  of  science  and  lite-
rature; and,  at  the  same  time,  of  sincere  though
silent  regret  to  those  who  are  desirous  of  support-
ing the  esteem  which  ought  to  await  the  success-
ful pursuit  of  ingenuous  studies.  We  entreat  such
men  to  reflect,  that  their  conduct  will  be  made  the
reply  of  idleness  to  industry,  the  revenge  of  dul-
ness  and  ignorance  upon  parts  and  learning;  to
consider,  how  many  will  seek,  and  think  they  find,
in  their  example,  an  apology  for  sloth,  and  for  in-
difference to  all  liberal  improvement ;  what  a
theme,  lastly,  they  supply  to  those,  who,  to  the
discouragement  of  every  mental  exertion,  preach
up  the  vanity  of  human  knowledge,  and  the  dan-
ger or  the  mischief  of  superior  attainments.

But  if  the  reputation  of  learning  be  concerned
in  the  conduct  of  those  who  devote  themselves  to
its  pursuit,  the  sacred  interests  cf  morality  are  not
less  so. .  It  is  for  us  to  take  care  that  we  justify
not  the  boasts,  or  the  sneers,  of  infidelity;  that
we  do  not  authorise  the  worst  of  all  scepticism,
that  which  would  subvert  the  distinctions  of  moral
good  and  evu\  by  insinuating  concerning  them,
that  their  only  support  is  prejudice,  their  only  ori-
gin in  the  artifice  of  the  wise,  and  the  credulity  of
the  multitude;  and  that  these  things  are  but* too
clearly  confessed  by  the  lives  of  men  of  learning
and  inquiry.  This  calumny  let  us  contradict;
let  us  refute.  Let  us  show,  that  virtue  and  Chris-
tianity cast  their  deepest  foundations  in  know-
ledge ;  that,  however  they  may  ask  the  aid  of  prin-
ciples which,  in  a  great  degree,  govern  human  life,
(and  which  must  necessarily,  therefore,  be  either
powerful  allies,  or  irresistible  adversaries,  of  edu-
cation, of  habit,  of  example,  of  public  authority,
of  public  institutions,)  they  rest,  nevertheless,  upon
the  firm  basis  of  rational  argument  Let  us  testify
to  the  world  our  sense  of  this  great  truth,  by  the
only  evidence  which  the  world  will  believe,  the
influence  of  our  conclusions  upon  oar  own  con-
duct


SERMON  VI.

,  ,  ON  OUR  DUTY'TOOOD  AttD  MAN.

■ * '  " *  **  •  ■ '.  A

A  ABRMON,.  f  REACHED  AT  THE  ASSUMES,  AT  DURHAM,  JULY  29, 1795;  AND' PUBLISHED  AT  THE
*.  - REUUEST  -OF  THE  LORD  BISHOP,  THE  HONOURABLE  THE  JUDOES  OP  ASSIZE,

AND  THE  QRAND  JURT.  v '


TV  the  Honourable  and  Right Reverend  Shute,  by  Divine  Providence,  Lord  Bishop  ofthirham,
the  fallowing  Discourse,  as  a  small  but  sincere  expression  of gratitude,  for  a  great,  unsolicited^and
unexpected  favour,  is  inscribed,  by  his  faithful  and  most  obliged  servant)  W.  PALE  Y.  ',


For  none  of  us  lieeth  to  himself. — Rom.  xiv.  7.


The  use  of  many  of  the  precepts  and  maxims
of  Scripture,  is  not  so  much  to^prescribe  actions,
as  to  generate  some  certain  torn  and  habit  of
thinking :  and  they  are  then  only  applied  as-they
ought  to  be,  when  they  famish'  us  with  a  view  of,
and.  such  a  way  of  considering,  the  subject  no
which-*  they  relate,  as  may  rectify  and  meliorate
our  dispositions ;  for  from  dispositions,  so  rectified
and  meliorated,  particular  good  actions,  and  parti-
cular good  .rales  of  acting,  flow  of  their  own  ac-
cord. This  is  true  of  the  great  Christian  maxims,
of  bring  our  neighbours  as  ourselves ;  of  doing  to
others  as  we  would  that  others  should  do  to  us';
and  (as  will  appear.  I  hope,  in  the  sequel  of  this
discourse)  of  tnat  or  the  text  These  maxims  be-
ing well  impressed,  the  detail  of  conduct  may  be
left  to  itself  The  subtleties  of  casuistry.  I  had
almost  said  the  science,  may  he  spared.  By  pre-
senting to  the  mind  one  fixed  consideration,  such
a  temper  is  at  length  formed  within  us,  that  our
first  impressions  and  first  Amputees  an  sure  almost
of  being  ori  toe  side  of  virtue ;  and  that  We  feel
likewise  an  almost  irresistible  inclination  to  be  go-
verned by  them.  Whetb  this  disposition  is  per-
fected, the  influence  of  religion,  as  a  moral  insti-
tution, is  sufficiently  established. .

Itis  not  in  this  way,  but  in  another,  that  human
laws,  especially  the  laws  of  free  countries,  proceed
to  attain  their  objects.  Forasmuch  as  their  ulti-
mate sanctions  are  to  be  dispensed  by  fallible  men,
instead  of  an  unerring  and  omniscient  Judge,  the
safety,  as  well  as  the  liberty,  of  the  subject,  re-
quires, that  discretion  sheuki  be  bound  <Jown  by
precise  'rules  both  of  acting,  and  ofjodging  of  ac-
tions.— Hence  lawgiver!  have  been  obliged  to
multiply  directions  and  prohibitions  without  num-
ber: and  this  necessity,  for  such  i  acknowledge  it
to  be,  hath  drawn  them  into  a  prolixity,  whiqh
encumbers  the- law  as  a  science  to  those  who  stu-
dy or  administer  it;  and  sometimes  perplexes  it,
as  a  rale  of  conduct,  to  those  who  have  nothing
to  do  with  it,  but  te  obey  k. Yet  still  they  find


'  themselves  unable  to  make  laws  as  fast  as  occa>
sions  demand  them:  they  find  themselves jperpe?
tually  called  upon  to  pursue,  by  fresh  paths,  the
,  inventive  versatility  of  human  fraud,  or  to  provide
for  new  and  unforeseen  varieties'  of  situation.
Now  should  religion,  which  professes  to  guide
the  whole'  train  and  range  of  a  man's  conduct,  in-
terior as  well  as  external,  domestic  as  well  as  civil;
and  which,  consequently,  extends  the  operations
of  Jts  rules  to  many  things  which  the  laws  leave
indifferent  and  uncontrolled;  should  religion,  I
Bay,  once  set  about  to  imitate  the  precision  of  hu-
man laws;  the  volume  of  its  precepts  would  soon
be  rendered  useless  by  its  bulk,  and  unintelligible
by  its  intricacy.  '  The  religion  of  Mahomet,  as
might  be'  expected  from  the  religion  of  a  military
prophet,  constituted  itself  into  the  law  of  tho
states  into  which  it  was.  received.  Assuming  the
functions  of  legislators  and  magistrates,  in  con-
junction with  the  ^character  of  interpreters  pf  the
Koran,  and  depositaries  of  the  supplemental  laws
of  the  religion,  the  successors  of,  the  .4*abia&
have,  under  the  name  of  traditionary  rules,  com-
piled a  code  for  the  direction  of  their  follower*  j&
almost  every  part  of  their  conduct.  .  The  seveoty-
five  thousand  precepts,  of  that  code*  serve  only  to
show  the  futility  of  the  attempt ;  to  prove  by  ex-
periment that,  religion  can  only  act  upon  human
life  by  general  precepts,  addressed  ana  applied  to
the  ^disposition ;  that  there  is  no  ground  for-  the
objection  that  has  sometimes  beenjnade  to-Caris-
tianity,  that  it  4s  defective,  as  a  moral  institution,
for  the  want  of  more  explicit,  more  oir^nimstanual,
and  more  accurate  directions;  and  that  when  wo
place  by  the  side  of  each  other  human  and  divine,
laws,  without  understanding  the  distinction  Jn
the  two  methods  by  which  they  seek  to  attain
their,  purpose,  and  the  reason  of  that  distinction,
we1  form  a  comparison  between  them,  which  is
likely  to  be  injurious  to  both.  We  may  find  fault

*  See  Hamilton's  translation  of  tin  Hedaya  of  Guide. .

* U*  521


099


SERMONS  ON  PUBLIC  OCCASIONS.


with  th«  Scriptures,  lor  not  giving  oft  the
■ion  of  civil  laws;  and  we  may  blame  the
Sot  not  being  content  with  the  conciseness  and
■implicit/  of  Scriptoie;  and  our  censure  in  both
cases  be  unfounded  and  undeserved

'The  observation  of  the  text  is  exactly  of  the
nature  I  have  been  alluding  to.  It  supplies  a  prin-
ciple. *  It  furnishes,  us  with  a  view  of  our  duty,
and  of  the  relations  in  -which  we  are  placed,
which,  if  attended,  to,  (and  no  instruction  can  be
of  use  without  that,)  Will  produce  in  our  minds
iust  determinations,  and,  what  are  of  more  value,
because  more  wanted,  efficacious  motives.

"  None  of  us  liveth  to  himself."  We  ought  to
regard  our  Iives^  (including  under  that  name  our
faculties,  our  opportunities,  our  advantages  of
every  kind,)  not  as  mere  instruments  of  personal
gratification,  but  as  due  to  the  service  of  God;
and  as  given  us  to  be  employed  in  promoting  the
purpose- of  his  wiU  in  the  happiness  of  our  feUow-
creatures.  I  am  not  able  to  imagine  a  turn  of
thought  wtueh  is  better  than  this.  It  encounters
the  antagonist,  the  check,  the  destroyer  of  all  vir-
tue, selfishness.  It  is  intelligible  to  all;  to  all  dif-
ferent degrees  applicable.  It  incessantly  prompts
to -exertion,  to  activity,  to  beneficence.

In  order  to  recommend  it,  and  in  order  to  ren- '
der  it  as  useful  as  it  is  capable  of  being  made',  H
may  be  proper  to  point  out,  how  the  force  and
truth  of  the  apostle's  assertion  bears  upon  the  dif-
ferent classes  of  civil  society.  And  in  this  view,
the  description  of  men  which  first,  undoubtedly,
oners  itself  to  our  notice,  is  that  of  men  of  public
characters:  who  possess  offices  of  importance,
power,  influence,  and  authority.  If  the  rule  ana
principle  which  I  am  exhibiting  to  your  observa-
tion, can  be  said  to  be  made  for  one -class  of  man-
land  more  than  another,  it  is  for  them.  7  Vy,
certainly,  M  live  not  to  themselves."  The  design,
the  tenure,  the  condition  of  their  offices ;  the  pub-
lic expectation,  the  public  claim;  consign  their
lives  and  labours,  their  cares,  and  thoughts,  and
talents,  to  the  public  happiness,  whereinsoever  It
b  connected  with  the  duties  of  their  stations,  or
can  be  advanced  by  the  fidelity  of  their  services.
There  may  be  occasions  and  emergencies  when
menram  called  upon  to-  take  part  in  the  public
service,  out  of-the  line>of  their  professions,  or  the
ordinary  limits  of  their  vocation.  Rut  these  emer-
gencies occur;  I.  think*,  seldom.  The  necessity
should  be  manifest,  before  we  yield  to  it  A  too
great  readiness  Ho  start  out  of  our  separate  pre-
cincts of  duty,  in  ortter  to  rush  into  provinces
.  which  belong  to  others,  is  a  dangerous  excess  of
seal.  In  general  the  public  interest  is  best  upheld,
the  public  quiet  always,  best  preserved,  by  each
one  attending  closely  to  the  proper  and  distinct
-duties  of  tuVstation.  In  seasons  of  peal  or  conr
sternation,  this'  attention  ought  to  be  doubled.
Danger*  _are  not  best  opposed  by  tumultuous  or
disorderly  exertions;  but  by  a  sedate,  firm,  and
calm  resistance,  especially  by  that  regular  and  si-
lent strength,  which  is  the  collected  result  of  each
man's  vigilance  and  industry  in  his  separate  sta-
tion. For  public  men, 'therefore,  to  be  active  in
the  stations  assigned  to  them,  is  demanded  by
their  country  in  the  hour  of  her  fear  or  danger.
If  ever  there  was  a  time,  when  they  that  rule
"should  rule  with  diligence  f  when  supineness,

"  ence,  and  remissness  an  office,  when  a  ti-

r  at  love  of  ease,  winch  might  in  other  eir-
be  tolerated,  ought  to  be  proscribed


and  excluded,  it  is  the  present  If  ever  there  wan
a  time  to  make  the  public  feel  the  benefit  of  pub-
lic institutions,  it  is  this.

But  I  shall  add  nothing  more  concerning  Cha>
obligation  which  the  text,  and  the  lesson  it  con-
veys, imposes  upon  public  men,  because  I  think
that  the  principle  is  too  apt  to  be  considered  as
appertaining  to  them  alone.  It  will  therefore  be
more  useful  to  show,  Jiow  what  are  called  private
stations  are  affected  by  the  same  principle.  I  say,
what  are  called  private  stations;  for  such  they
are,  only  as  contnutistinguished  from  public  trusts
publicly  and  formally  confide^.  In  themselves,
and  accurately  estimated,  there  are  few  such ;  I
mean,  that  there  are  few  so  destined  to  the  private
emolument  of  the  possessor,  as  that  they  are  in-
nocently occupied  by  him,  when  they  are  occu-
pied with  no  other  attention  but  to  his  own  enjoy-
ment. Civil  government  is  constituted  for  the
happiness  of  toe  governed,  and  not  for  the  gratifi-
cation bf  those  who  'administer  it  Not  only  so,
but  the  gradations  of  rank  in  society  are  support-
ed, not  for  the  advantage  or  pleasure  of  those  who
possess  the  highest  places  in  it,  but  for  the  com-
mon good ;  for  the  security,  the'  repose,  the  pro-
tection, the* encouragement,  of" all.  They  maybe
very  satisfactorily  defended  upon  this  principle;
but  then  this  principle  casts  upon  them  duties.
In  particular,  it  teaches  every  man  who  possesses
a  fortune,  to  regard  himself  as  in  some  measure
occupying  a  public  station ;  as  obliged  to  make  it
a  channel  of  beneficence,  an  instrument  of  good
to  others,  and  not  merely  a  supply  to,  himself  of
the  materials  of  luxury-,  ostentation,  or  avarice,
There  is  a  share  of  power  and  influence  necessa-
rily attendant  upon  property;  upon  the  right  or
the  wrong  use  of  which,  the  exertion  or  the  neg-
lect, depends  no  little  part  of  the  virtue  or  vice,
the  happiness  or  misery,  of  the  community.  It  is
in  the  choice  of  every  man  of  rank  and  property
to  become  the  benefactor  or  the  scourge,  ttxe  guar-
dian or  the  tyrant,  .the  example  or  the  corrupter,
of  the  virtue  of  his  servants,  his  tenants,  bis  neigh-
bourhood ;  to  be  the  author  to  them  of  peace  or
contention,  of  sobriety  or  dissoluteness,  of  comfort
or  distress.-  This  power,  whencesdever  it  pro-
ceeds, whether  expressly  conferred  or  silently  ac-
quired, f  for  I  see  no  difference  in  the  two  cases,)
brings  along  with  it  obligation  and  responsibility.
It  is  to  be  •lamented  when  this  consideration  m
not  known,  or  not  attended  to.  Two  causes  ap-
pear to. me  to  obstruct,  to  men  of  this  description,
the  view  of  their  moral  situation.  One  is,  thai
they  do  not  perceive  any  call  upon  them  at  all ;
the  other,  that,  if  there  be  one,  they  do  not  see  ta
what  they  are  called.  To  the  first  point*  I  would
answer  in  -the  words  of  .an  excellent  moralist,*
"  The  delivery  of  the  talent  is  the  call ;"  k  k  the
call  of  Providence,  the  call  of  Heaven.  The  sup-
ply of  the  means,  is  the  requisition  of  the  duty.
Whenwe.find  ourselves  in. possession  of  faculties
and  opportunities,  whether  arising  from  the  en-
dowments and  qualities  of  our  minds,,  or  from  the
advantages  of  fortune  and  -station,  we  need  ask
for.no  further  evidence  of  tho  intention  of  the  do-
nor: we*  ought  to  see  in  that  intention  a  demand
upon  us  for  the  use  and  application  of  what  has
been  given. This  is  a  principle  of  natural  as


•  The  late  Abraham  Tusker,  *>q.  anther  of  The  Lie*
of  Nature,  and  of  Toe  Light  of  Nature  and  BeveUtM*
purseed,  by  Edward  Search,  Esq.


SERMONS  ON  PUBLIC  OCCASIONS.


683


Well  at  revealed  retigion:  and  it  is  universal
Theft  as  to  the  second  inauiry,  the  species  of  be-
nevolence, the  kind  of  duty  to'  which  we  are
bound,  k  is  pointed  out  to  us  by  the  same  indica-
tion.  To  whatever  office  of  benevolence  our  fa-
culties' are  best  fitted,  our  talents,  turned;  what-
ever our  opportunities,  our  occasions,  our  .fortune,
our  profession,  pur  rank  or  station,  or  whatever
our  local  circumstances,  which  are  capable  of  no
enumeration,  put  in  our  power  to  perform  with
the  most  advantage  and  effect,  that  is  the  office
for  usj  that  it  is,  which,  upon  our  principle,  we
are  designed,  and,  being  designed,  are  obliged  to
discharge.  I  think  tint  the  Judgment  of  man-
kind* does  not  often  fail  them  in  the  choice  of  the
objects  or  species  of  their  benevolence :-  but  what
tads  (hem  is  the  sense  of  the  obligation,  the  con-
sciousness of  the  connexion  between  duty  and
power,  and  springing  from  this  consciousness,  a»
disposition  to  seek  opportunities,  or  to  embrace
those  that  occur,  of  rendering  themselves  useful
to  their  generation.'

Another  cause,  which  keeps  out  of  the  sight  of
those  who  are  concerned  in  them,  the  duties  thai
belong  'to  superior  stations,  is  a  language-  from'
*  thek  infancy  familiar  to  them,  namely,  that  they
are  placed  above  work.  I  have  always  considered
tins  as  a  most  unfortunate  phraseology.  And,  as
habitual  modes  of  speech  have  no  small  effect  upon
public  sentiment,  it  has  a  direct  tendency- to  make
one  portion  of  mankind  envious,  and  the  other
■die.  The  truth  is,  every  man  has  his  work.  The
kind  of  work  varies,  arid  that  is  all  the  difference
4here  is.  A  gnat  deal  of  labour  exists  beside'  that
of  the  hands ;  many  species  of  industry  beside  bo-
dily operation,  equally  necessary,  requiring  equal
assiduity,  more  attention,  more  anxiety.  It  is  not
true,  therefore,  that  men.  of  elevated  stations  are
exempted  from  work ;  it  is  only  true,  that  there  is
assigned  to"  them  work  of  a  different  kind:  whe-
ther more  easy,  or  more  pleasant*  may  be  ques-
tioned; but  certainly  not  less  wanted,  not  less
essential  to  the  common  good.  Were  this maxim
once  property  received  as  a  principle  of  conduct^  it
would  put  men  of  fortune  and  rank  upon  in-
quiring what  were  the  opportunities  of  doing
good,  (for  some,  they  may  depend  upon  it,  there
are,)  which  in  a  more  especial  manner  belonged
to  their  situation  or  condition  j  and  were  wis
principle  carried  into  any  thing  like  its  full  effect,
or  oven  were  this  way  of  thinking  sufficiently  in-
culcated, it  would  completely  remove  the  invidi-
oosness  of  elevated  stations.  Mankind  would  see
in  them  this  alternative :  If  such  men  discharged
the  duties  winch  were  attached  to  the  advantages
they  enjoyed,  they  deserved  these  advantages :  if
they  did  not,  they  were,  morally  speaking,  in  the
situation  of  a  poor  man  who  neglected  his  business
and  his  calling ;  and  in  no  better.  And  the  pro-
per reflection  in  both  cases  is  the  same :  the  indi-
vidual is  in  a  high  degree  culpable,  yet  the  busi-
ness and  the  calling  beneficial  and  expedient.

The  habit  and?  the  disposition  which  we  wish
to  recommend,  namely,  mat  of  casting  about  for
opportunities  of  doing  good,  readily  seizing  those
Which  accidentally  present  themselves,  and  faith-
fully using  those  which  naturally  and  regularly
belong  to  our  situations,  appear  to  oe  sometimes
checked  "by  a  notion,  verynatural  to  active  spirits,
and  to  nattered  talents.  They  win  not  be  content
to  do  little  things.  They  wiH  either  attempt
txrighty  matters,  or  do  nothing. The  small  enact


which  the  private  endeavours  of  an  individual  can
produce  upon  the  mass  of  social  good,  is  so  lost
and  so  unperceived,  in  the  comparison,  that  it
neither  deserves,  they  thinly  nor  rewards,  the  at-
tention which  it  requires. '  The  answer  is,  that
the  comparison,  which  t£us  discourages  theta^
ought  never  to  be  made.  The- good  which  (heir
efforts  can  produce,  maybe  too  minute  to  bear
any  sensible  proportion  to  the  Sum  of  public  hap-
piness, yet  mqy  be  their  share{  may  be  enough  for
them.  The  proper -question  is  not,  Whether  the
«ood  we  aim  at  be  great  or  little ;* Stall  leas,  wjhe-
ther  it  be  great  or  little  in  comparison  with  t^e
-whole ;  but  whether  it  be  the  most  which  it  is  m
our  power  to  perform.  .,  A  .single  action  may  be,
as  it  were,  nothing  fo  the  aggregate  of  moral  good ;
so  also  may  be  the  agent,  it  may  still,  therefore,
be  the  proportion  whicb  is  required  of  him:  •  In
-all  things  nature  works'  by  numbers.  Her  greatest
effects  are  achieved  by  the  joint  .operation  of  mul-
titudes of  (separately  considered)  insignificant  in-
dividuals. It  is  enough  for  each  that  it  executes
its  office.  It  is  not  its  concern,  because  it-  does
not  depend 'upon  its  will,  what*  place  that  office
holds  in,  or  wnat  proportion  it  bears' to,  the  gene-
ral result.  Let  our  only  comparison .  therefore  be,
between  our  opportunities  and  the  use  which  we
make  of  them.  .When  we  would  extend  our
views,  or  stretch-out^ our  band,  to  distant  an'ff
general  good,  we  are  commonly  lost  and  sunk  in
the  magnitude  -of  the  subject.  Particular  good,
and  the .  particular  good  which  lies  within,  our
reach,  is  all  we  are  concerned  to  attempt,  or  to  in-
quire about.  Not  the  smallest  effort  will  be  for-
gotten: not  a  particle  of  our  virtue- will  fail  to' the
ground.  Whether  successful  or  not,  our  endea-
vours will  be  recorded ;  will  be'estimated,  not  ac-
cording to  the  proportion  which  they  bear  to  the
universal  interest,  but  according  to  the  relation
which  they  hold  to  our  means  and  opportunities;
according  to  the  disinterestedness,  the  sincerity,
with  which  we  undertook,  the  pains  and  perseve-
rance with  which  we  carried  them  on.  It  may  he
true,  and  I  think  it  is  pie  doctrine  of  Scripture,
that  the  right  use  of  great  faculties  or  gnat  oppor-
tunities wUl  be  more  highly  rewarded,  than  the
right  use  of  inferior  faculties  and  less  opportuni-
ties. He  that  with  ten  talents  had  made  ten  ta-
lents more,  was  placed  over  ten  cities.  The  neg-
lected talent  was  also  given  to  him.  He  who
with  five  talents- had  made  five  more,  though  pro-
nounced to  be  a  good  and  faithful  servant,  was
placed  only  over  five  cities.*  This  distinction
might,  without  any  great  harshness  to  out  moral
feelings,  be  resolved  into  the  will  of  the  Supreme
Benefactor :  but  we  can  see,  perhaps,  enough  of
the  subject  to  jperceive  that  it  was  just.  The  merit
may  reasonably  be  supposed  to  have  been  more  in
one  case  than  the  other.  The  danger,  the  activity,
the  care,  the  solicitude,  were  greater.  Still  both
received  rewards,  abundant  beyond  measure  when
compared  with  the  services,  equitable  and  propor-
tioned when  compared  with  one  another.

That  our  obligation  if  commensurate,  with  our
opportunity1,  and  that  the  possession  of  the  oppor-
tunity is  sufficient,  without  any  further  or  more
formal  command,,  to  create  the  obligation,  is  a
principle  of  morality  and  ofScripture ;  and  is  alike
true  in  all  countries.  But  that  power  and  property
so  far  go  together,  as  to  constitute  private  fortunes


■MatUxxv.90,  *wj.


501


SERMONS  ON  PUBLIC  OCCASIONS.


ioto  public  stations,  m  to  cast  upon  large  portions
of  the  community  occasions  which  render  the  pre-
ceding principles  move  constantly  applicable,  is
the  effect  of  civil  instftotions,  and  is  found  in  no
country  more  than  in  ours;  if  in  any  so  much.
With  as  a  great  part  .of  the  public  business  of  the
country  is  transacted  by  the  country  itself:  and
upon  the  prudent  and  faithful  management  of  h\
depends,  in  a.  very  considerabte  degree,  the  inte-
rior ^posterity  of  the  nation,  and  the  satisfaction
of  great  bodies  of  the  people'.  Not  only  offices  of
magistracy,  which  affect  and  pervade  every  dis-
trict, are  delegated  to  the'principal  inhabitants  of
the  neighbourhood,  but  /there  is  erected  in  every
eounty  a  high  andS>enerable  tribunal,  to  which
owners  of  permanent  property,  down  almost  to
their  lowest  classes,  are  indiscriminately  called;
and  called  to  take  part,  not  in  the-  forms  and  cere-
monies of  the  meeting,  but  in  the  most  efficient
and  important  of  its  functions.  The  wisdom  of
man  hath  not  devised  a  happier  institution  than
thajt  of  Juries,  or  one  founded  in  tf  juster  know-
ledge of  human  life,  or  of  the  human  capacity.  In
jurisprudence,  as  in  every  science,  the  points  ulti-
mately rest  upon  common  sense.  But  to  reduce
a  question  to  these  points,  and  to  propose  them
accurately,  requires  not  only  an  understanding
superior  to  that  which  it  necessary  to  decide  upon
them  when  proposed,  but  oftentimes  also  a  tech-
nical and  peculiar  erudition.  Agreeably  to  this
distinction,  which  runs  perhaps  through  all  sci-
ences, what  is  preliminary  and  preparatory  is  left
to  the  legal  jprotessaon;  jpnat  is  final,  to  the  plain
understanding  of  plain  men.  But  since  it  is  ne-
cessary that  the  juugment  of  such  men  should  be
Informed ;  and  sines  it  is  of  the  utmost  importance
that  advice  which  mils  with  so  much  weight,
should  be  drawn  from  the  purest  sources;  judges
are  sent  down  to  us,  who  have  spent  their  fives  in
the  study  and  »'VitT«*rfrimri  of  the  laws  of  their


country,  and  who  come  amongst  us,  stiaiyia  to
our  contentions,  if  we  have  any,  our  parties,  and
our  prejudices ;  strangers  to  every  thing  except
the  evidence  which  they  hear.  The  effect  cor-
responds with  the^  wisdom  of  the  design.  Juries
may  err,  and  frequently  do  so; -but  there  is  no
system  of  error  incorporated  with  their  constitu-
tion. Corruption,  tenor,  influence  axe  excluded  by-
it  ;  and  prejudice,  in  a  great  degree,*  though  not
entirely.  Tins  danger,  which  consists  injuries
viewing  one  class  of  men,  or  one  chaw  of  rights,
in  a  more  oriess  favourable  light  C


the  only  one  to  be  feared,  and  to  be  guarded
against It  is  a  disposition,  which,  whenever  it

in  the  minus1  of  jurors,  ought  to  be  re-

by  their  probity;  their  consciences,  (he
of  their  duty,  the  remembrance  of  their


And  this  institution  is  not  more  salutary,  than
it  is  grateful  and  honourable  to  those  popular  feel-
ings of  which  all  good  governments  are  tender.
Hear  the  language  of  the  law.  In  the  moat  mo-
mentous interests,  in  the  last  peril  indeed  of  hu-
man life,  the  accused  appeals  to  God  and  Ins
country,  "which  country  you  are."  What  pomp
of  titles,  what  display  or  honours,  can  equal  the
real  dignity  which  these  few  words-  confer  ■
those  to  whom  they  are  addressed  1  They  i
by  terms  4he  most  solemn  and  significant,  how
highly  the  law  deems  of  the  functions  and  character
of  a  jury ;  they  show  also,  with  what  care  of  the
safety  of  <fe  subject  it  is,  that  the  same  law  has
provided  for  every  one  a  recourse  to  the  fair  and
mdfferent  arbitration  of  his  n^  This  is

substantial  equality;  real  freedom:  eouafity  of
protection;  freedom  from  injustice.  May  it  ne-
ver be  invaded,  never  abased  1  May  it  be  per-
petual! And  k  will  be  so,  if  the  affix**  of  the
country  continue  to  be  preserved  to  k,  by  the  in-
tegrity of  those  who  are  charged  with  ita<


SERMONS  ON  SEVERAL  SUBJECTS.


ADVERTISEMENT.


The  Author  of these  Sermons,  by  a  codicil  to  his  will,  declares  as  follows : — "  \fmy  life  had  been
continued,  it  was  my  intention  to  have  printed  at  Sunderland  a  Volume  of  Sermons — about  500
sopies;  to  be  distributed  gratis  .in  the  parish  ;  and.  I  had  proceeded  so  Jar  in  the  design  as  to  have
transcribed  several  Sermons  for -that  purpose,  which  are  in  a  parcel,  by  themselves.  There  is  alsoJa
parcel  from  which  I  intended  to  make  other  transcripts;  but  the  business  is  in  an  imperfect -un-
finished state  ;  the  arrangement  is  not  settled  further  than  that  I  thought  the  Sermon  on  Serious-
ness in  Religion  should  come  first,  and  then  the  doctrinal  Sermons :  tpere  are  also  many  repetition*
in  them,  ana  some  that  might  be  omitted  or  consolidated  with  others"  The  codicil  then  goes  on  to
direct,  that,  after^such  disposition  should  have, been  made  respecting  the  Manuscripts  as  might  be
deemed  necessary,  they  should  be  printed  by  the  Rev.  Mr.  Stephenson,  at  the  expense  of  the  testa-
tor's executors,  ondrdistributed  in  the  neighbourhood,  Jtrst  to  those  who  frequented'  churchuthen  to
farmers' families  in  the  country,  then  to  such  as  had  a  person  in  the  family  who~  could  read,  end
were  likely  to  read  them:  and,  finally ,  it  is  added,  "  I  would  not  have  the  said  Sermons  -published
/or  sale." ."'. .  . ' *  • •

Jn  compliance  with  this  direction,  the  following  Sermons  were  selected,  printed^  and  distributed
by  the? Rev.  Mr.  Stephenson,  in  and  about  the  parish  of  Bishop  Wearmouth,  in,  the  year  1806.
>  These  -Discourses  were  not  originally  composed  for  publication,  but  were  written  for,  and,  as  ap-
pears^by  the  Manuscripts,  had  most  of  them  been  preached  at  the  parish  Churches  of  which,  in  dif-
ferent parts  of  the  Author's  l\fe,  he  had  the  care.  It  was  undoubtedly  the  Author's  intention  that
they  should  not  be  published,  but  the  circulation  of  such  a  number  as  he  had  directed  by  his  will  to
be  distributed,  tendered  it  impossible  to  adhere  to  that  intention  ;  and  it  was  found  necessary  to
'publish  them,  as  the  only  means  qf  preventing  a  surreptitious  sale,


SERMON  I.-\
SERIOUSNESS  IN  RELIGION  INDISPENSABLE  ABOVE  ALL  OTHER  DISPOSITIONS.


— ^—ite  ye  therefore' sober,  and  watch  unto  prayer. — 1  pet.  iv.  7


TtiB  first  requisite  in  religion  is  seriousness.
.No. impression  can  be  made  without  it.  An  or-
derly life,  so  far  as  others  are  able  to  observe  us,
Is  now  and  then  produced  by  prudential  motives,
or  by  dint  of  habit;  but  without  seriousness,
there  can  be  no  religious  principle  at  the  bottom,  •
no  course  .of  conduct  flowing  from  "religious
motives:  in  a  word,  there  can  be  no  religion.  This
cannot  exist' without  seriousness  upon  the  sub-
ject. Perhaps  a  teacher  of  religion  has  more  dif-
ficulty in  producing  seriousness  amongst  his  hear-
ers, man  in  any  other  part  of  his  office.  Until
he  succeed,  in  this,  he  loses  his  labour :  and  when
once,  from  any  cause  whatever,  a  spirit  of  levity
has  taken  hold  of  a  mind,  it  is  next  to  impossible
to  plant  serious  considerations  in  that  mind.  It
if  seldom  to  be  done,  except  by  some  great  shock
or  alarm,  sufficient  to  make  a  radical  change  in
the  disposition:  and  which  is  God's  own  way  «f
bringing  about  the  business.


One  might  have  expected  that  events  so  awful
arid,  tremendous,  as  death  and  judgment:  that  a
question  so.  deeply  interesting,  as  Whether  we
shall  go  to  heaven  or  to  hell,  could  in  no  possible
case,  and  in  no  constitution  of  mind  whatever,
fail  of  exciting  the  most  serious  apprehension  and
concern.  '  But  this  is  not  so-.  In  a  thoughtless,  a
careless,  a  sensual  world,  many  are  always  round
who  can  resist,  and  who  do  resist,  the  force  and
importance  of  all  these  reflections,  that,  is  to  say,
they 'suffer  nothing  of  the  kind  to  enter  into  their
thoughts.  There  are  grown  men  and  women,
nay,  even  middle  aged  persons,  who  have  not
thought  seriously  about  religion  an  hour,  nor  a
quarter  of  an  hour,  in  the  whole  course*  of  their
lives.  This  great  object  of  human  solicitude  a£
fects  not  them  in  any  manner  whatever.

It  cannot  be  without  its  use  to  inquire  into
the  causes  of  a  levity  of  temper,  which  so  effec-
tually obstructs  the  admission  of  every  religious


105


SERMONS  ON  SEVERAL  OCCASIONS.


influence,  tnd  which  I  should  almost  call  unna-
UmL

Now  there  is  a  numerous  class  of  mankind,
who- are  wrought  upon  by  nothing  but  what  ap-
plies immediately  to  their  senses ;  by  what  they
see,  or  by  what  they  feci;  by  pleasures  or  pains,
or  by  the  near  prospect  of 'pleasures  and  pejus .
which  they  actually  experience  or  actually  ohserve.
But  it  is  the  characteristic  of  religion  toehold  out
to  our  consideration  consequences  which  we  do
not  perceive  at  the  time.  That  is  its  very  office
and  province.  .  Therefore  if  men  will  restrict  and'
confine  all  their  regards  and  all  their  cares  to
things  which  they  perceive  with  their  outward
senses ;  ifthey  wilt  yield  up  their  understandings
to  their  seases,  both  in  what  these  senses  are -fit-
ted to  apprehend,  and  in  what  they  are  not  fitted
to  apprehend,  it  is  utterly  impossible  for  religion
•to  settle  in  their  hearts,  or  for  them  to  entertain
any  serious  concern  about  the  matter.  But  surely
this  conduct  is  completely  irrational,  and  can  lead
to  nothing  but  ruin.  It  proceeds  upon  the  suppo-
sition, that  there  is  nothing  above  us,  about  us,  or
future,  by  which  we  can  be  affected,  buMhe  things
which  we  see  with  our  eyes  or  feel  by  our  touch.
All  which  is  untrue.  "  The  invisible  things  of
God  from  the  creation  of  the  world  are  dearly
seen,  being  understood  by  the  things  that  are  seen ;
even  his  eternal  Power  and  Godhead;"  which
means,  that  the  order,  contrivance,  and  design,  dis-
played in  the  creation,  prove  with  certainty,  that
there  is  more  in  nature  than  what  we  really  see;
and  that  amongst  the  invisible- things  of  (he
nniverset  there  is  a  Being,  the  author  and  original
of  all  this  contrivance  and  design,  and,  by  conse-
quence, a  being  of  stupendous  power,  and  of  wis-
dom and  knowledge  incomparably  exalted,  above  *
any  wisdom  or  knowledge  which  we  see  in  man ;
and  that  he  stands  in  the  same  relation  to  us  as
the  maker  does  to  the  thing  made.  The  things
which  are  seen  are  not  made  of  the  things  which
do  appear.  This  is  plain :  and  this  argument  Is
independent  of  Scripture  and  Revelation.  What
further  moral  or  religious  consequences  properly^
follow  from  it,  is  another  question ;  but  the  propo-
sition itself  shows,  that  they  who  cannot,  and
they  who  will  not,  raise  their  minds  above  the
mere  information  of  their  senses,  are  in  a  state
of  gross  error  as  to  the  real  truth  of  things,  and
an  also  in  a  state  to  which  the  (acuities  of  man
ought  not  to  be  degraded.  A  person  of  this  sort
may,  with  respect  to  religion,  remain  a  child  all
his  life.  A  cnild  naturally  has  no  concern  but'
about  the  things  which  directly  meet  its  senses ;
and  the  person  we  describeis  in  the  same  condition.

Again:  there  is  a  race  of  giddy  thoughtless
men  and  women,  of  young  men  and  young  women
more  especially,  who  look  no  further  than  the
next  day,  the  <next  week,  the  next  month ;  seldom
or  ever  so  far  as  the 'heit -year.  Present  pleasure
is  every  thing  with  them.— The  sports  of  the  day,
the  amusements  of  the  evening,  entertainments
and  diversions,  occupy  all  their  concern ;  and  so
long  as  these  can  be  supplied  in  succession,  so
long  as  they  can  go  from  one  diversion  to  another,
their  minds  remain  in  a  State  of  perfect  indiffer-
ence to  every  thing  except  their  pleasures.  New
what  chance  has  religion  with  such  dispositions  as
these  1 '  Yet  these  dispositions,  begun  in  early  life,
and  favoured  by  ciracunstances,  that  is,' by  afflu-
ence and  heaUth,  cleave  to  a  man's  character  much  I
beyond  the  period  of  life  in  which  they  might  |


seem  to  be,  excuaabfo.  Excusable  did  I  my?  f
ought  rather  to  have  said  that  they  are  contrary
to  reason  and  duty,  in  every  condition  and  at
every  period  of  life.  -  Even  in  youth  they  are  buik
upon  falsehood  and  folly.  Young  persons  as  well
as  old,  find  that  things  do  actually  come  to  pass.
Evils  and  mischiefs,  Which  they  regarded  as  dW-
tant,  as  out  of  their  view,  as-  beyond  the  line  snd
reach  of -their  preparations  or  their  concern,  come,
they  find,  to  be  actually  felt  They  find  that  no-
thing is  done  by  slighting  them  beforehand ;  for,
however  neglected  or  despised,  perhaps  ridiculed
and  derided,  they  come  not  only  to  be  things  pre-
sent, but  the  very  things,  ana  the  only  things,
about  which  their  anxiett  is  employed;  become
serious  things  indeed,  as  being  the  things  which
now  make  them  wretched  and  miserable.  There-
fore a  man  must  iearn  to  be  affected  by  events
which  appear  to  lie  at  some  distance,  before  he
will  be  seriously  affected  by  religion.

Again:  the  general  course  of  education  is  much
against  religious  seriousness;  even  without  those
who  conduct  education,  foreseeing  or  -intending
any  auch  effect.  Many  of  us  are  brought  up
with  this  world  set  before  us,  and  nothing  else.
Whatever  promotes this  world  s  prosperity  is

S raised ;  whatever  hurts  and  obstructs  and  prrju-
ices  this  world's  prosperity  is  blamed :  and  there
ail  praise  and  censure  end.  We  see  mankind
about  us  in  motion  and  action,  but  aU  these  mo-
tions snd  actions  directed  to  worldly  objects.  We
hear  their  conversation,  but  it  js  all  the  same  way.
And  this  is  what  wq*see  and  near  from,  the  first.
The  views  which  are  continually  placed  before
our  eyes,  regard  this  life  alone  and  its  interests.
Cap  it  then  be  wondered  at  that  an  early  worldry-
mindedness  iff  bred  in  our  hearts,  so  strong  as
to  shut  out  heavenly-mindedness  entirely  %  In
the  contest  which  is  always  carrying  on  between
this  world  and  the  next,  it  is  no  difficult  thing  to
see  what  advantage  this  world  has.  One-  of  the
greatest  of  these  advantages  is,  that  it  i


the  mind :  it  gets  the  first  hold  and  the  first  pos-
session. Childhood  and  youth,  left  to  themselves,
are  necessarily  guided  by  sense ;  and  sense  is  all
on  the  side  of  this  world.  Meditation  brings  na
to  look  towards  a  future  life;  but  then  medita-
tion comes  afterwards :  it  only  comes  when  the
mind  is  already  filled  and  engaged  and  occupied,
nay,  often  crowded  and  surcharged  with  worldly
ideas.  It  b  not  only,  therefore;  fair  and  right,
but  it  is  absolutely  necessary,  to  give  to  religion
aH  the  advantage  we  can  give  irby  dint  of  educa-
tion ;  for  all  that  can  be  done  is  too  little  to  set  re-
ligion upon  an  equality  with  its  rival;  which  rival
is  the  worfd.  A  creature  which  is  to  pass  a  small
portion  of  its  existence  in  one  stale,  and  that  state
to  be  preparatory  to  another,  ought,  no  doubt,  to
have  its  attention  constantly  fixed  upon  Us  ulteri-
or and  permanent  destination.  And  this  would
be  so,  if  the  question  between  them  came  fairly
before  the  mind.  We  should  listen  to  the  Scrip-
tures, we  should  embrace  religion,  we  should
enter  into  every  thing  which  had  relation  to  the
subject,  with  a  concern  and.  impression^,  even  far
more  than  the  pursuits  of  this  world,  eager  and
ardent  as  they  are.  excite.  But  the  question  be-
tween religion  and  the  world  does  not  come  fairly
before  us.  What  surrounds  us  is  this  world;
what  addresses  our  senses  ancLour  passions  is  this
world ;  what  is  at  hand,  what  is  in  contact  with  us,
what  acts  upon  us,  what  we  act  upon,  is  this  arorid.


SERMONS  ON  SEVERAL  SUBJECTS.


W


Reasony  faith,  and  hope,  are,the  only  principles
to  Which  religion  applies,  or  possibly  carTspply :
and  -it  is  reason,  faith,  and  nope,  striving  with
sense,  striving  with  temptation,  striving  for  things
absent  against  things  which  are  present.  That
xe%kxi,inererore,  may  not  be  quite-  excluded  and
overborne,  may  not  quite  sink  under  these  power-
ful causes,  every  support  ought  to  be  given  to
it,  which  can  be  given  by  education,  by  instruc-
tion, and,  above  aU,  by  the  example  of  those,  to
whom  young  persons  look  up,  acting  with  a  view
to  a  future  life  themselves.  -

Again :  it  is  the  Mature  of  worldly  business  <of
all  kinds,  especially  of  much  hurry  or  over-em-
ployment, or  over-anxiety  in-  business,  to  shut  out
and  keep  out  religion  from  the  mind:  The  ques-
tion is,  Whether  the  state  of  mind  which  this  cause
produced,  ought  to  be  called  a  want  of  seriousness
in  religion.  It  becomes  coldness  and  indiffer-
ence towards  religion?,  but  js  it  properly  a  want
of  seriousness  upon  the  subject  1  I  think  it  is;
and  in  this  way.  We  are  never  serious  upon  any
natter  which  we  regard*  as  trifling.  .  This  is  im-
possible: And  we  are  kd  to  regard  a  thing -as
trifling,  which  engages  no  portion  of  our  habitual
thoughts,  in  comparison. with  what  other  things
do.

But  Anther:  .the  world,  even  in  its  innocent
pursuits  and  pleasures,  has  a  tendency  unfavour-
able to  the  religious  sentiment.  But  were  these
all  it  had  to  contend  with,  the  strong  application
which  religion  makes  to  the  thoughts  whenever
we  think  of  it  at  all,  the  strong  interest  which  it
present*  to  us,  might  enable  it  to  overcome  and
prevail  in  the  contest  •  But  there  is  another  ad-
versary to  oppose,  much  more  formidable;  and
that  is  sensuality;  an  addiction  to  sensual  plea-
sures. It  is  the  flesh  which  lusteth  against  the
Spirit;  that  is  the  war  which  is  waged  within  us.
So  it  is,  no  matter  what  may  be  the  cause,  that
sensual  indulgences,  over  and  above  their  proper
criminality,  as  sins,  as  offences  against  God's
commands,  have  a  specific  effect  upon  the  heart
of  man  in  destroying  the  religious  principle  with-
in him;  or  still  more  surely  in  preventing  the
Jbnhation-df  that  principle.  -  It  either  induces  an
open  promaeness  of  conversation  and  behaviour,
-which  scorns  and  contemns  religion ;  a  kind  of
y,  which  rejects  and  sets  at  nought  the
'ng;  or  it  brings  upon  the. heart  an
to  the  subject,  a  fixed  dislike  and  re-
luctance to  enter  upon  its  concerns' in  anyway
'whatever.  That  a  resolved  sinner  should  set
himself  agaihst^a  religion  which. tolerates  no  sin,
is  not  to  be  wondered  at.  He  is  against  religion,
because  religion  is  against  the  course  of  life  upon
which  he  has  entered,  and  whioh  he  does  not  feel
Irimself  wiping  to  give  up.  But  this  is  not  the
Whole,  nor  is  5  the  bottom  of  the  matter.  The
effect  we  allude  to  is  not  so  reasoning  of  argu-
mentative as  this.  It  is  a  specific  effect  upon  the
mind.  The  heart  is  rendered  unsusceptible  of  re-.
Kgioas  impressions,  incapable  of  a  serious  regard
to  religion.  And  this  effect  helongs  to  sins  of
sensuality  more  than  to  other  sins,  k  is  a  conse-
quence which  almost  universally  follows  from


quena
tjiem.


We  measure  the  importance  of  things,  not  by
what,  or  according  to  what  they  an  in  truth,  but
try  and  according  to  the  space  and  room  which
they  occupy  in  our  minds.  Now  our  business,
'  ,  our  schemes,  our  pursuits,  our  gains,


our  losses,  our  fortunes,  possessing  so  much  of
our  minds,  whether  we  regard  the  hours  we  ex-
pend in  ineditatingrupon  them,  or  the  earnestness
with  which  we  think  about  them;  and  religioji
possessing  do  little  share  of  our  thought  either  in
time  or  earnestness;  the  consequence  is,  tjiat
woijdly  interest  comes  to  be  the  serious  thing  with
us,  religion  comparatively  the  trifle.  Men  of  bu-
siness are  .naturally  serious;  but  all  their  serious-
ness is  absorbed  by  their  husiness.  In  religion
they  are  no  more*  serious  than  the  most  giddy
characters  are ;  than  those  characters  are,  which,
betray  levity  in  all  things. ' -

Again-:  the.  want  of  due  seriousness  in  religion,
is  almost  sure  to  be  the  consequence  of  the  -ab^
sence  or  disuse  of  religious  ordinances^  and  exer-
cises. I  use  tWo  terms;  absence  and  disuse.
Some  have  never  attended  upon  any  religious  or-
dinance, or  practised  any  religious  exercises,  since
the' time  they  were  bom;  some  very  few  times  in
their  lives.  With  these*  it  is  the  absence  of  reli-
gious ordinances  and  exercises.  There  are  others,
(and  many  we  mar  of  this  description,)  who
whilst  under  the  guidance  of  their  parents,  nave
frequented  religious  ordinances,  and  been-trained
up  to  religious  exercises,  but  who,  when  tyey
came,  into  more  public  life,  and  to  be  their  own.
masters,  and  to  mix  in  the  pleasures  of  the
world,  or  engage  themselves  in  its  business  and
pursuits,  have  forsaken  these  duties,  in  whole  or
in  a  great  degree.  With  these  it  is  the  disuse.of
religious  ordinances  and  exercises.  But  I  must
also  explain  wtyat  I  mean  by  religion*  ordinance*.
and  exercise*  By  religious  ordinances,  I  mean
the  being  instructed  in  our  catechism  in  our
youth ;  attending  upon- public  worship  at  church}
the  keeping  holy  the  Lord's  day  regularly  ana
most  particularly,  together  with  a  few  other  day*
in  the  year,  by  which  some  very  principal  events
and  passages  of  the  Christian  history  are  comme*
morated",  and,  at  its  proper  season,  the  more  so-
lemn office  of  receiving  the  Lord's  Supper.  These
are  so  many  rites  and  ordinances  of  Christianity ;
concerning  all  which  it  may  be  .said,  that  with  the
greatest  part  of  mankind,  especially  of  that  class
of  mankind  which  must,  or  does,  give  much  of  its
time  and  care  to  worldly  concerns,  they  are  little
less  than  absolutely  necessary;  if  we  judge  it  to
be  necessary  to  maintain  and  uphold  any  senti-
ment, any  impression,  any  seriousness  about  reli-
gion in  the  mind  at  all.  They  are  necessary  to>
preserve  in  the  thoughts  a  place  for  the  subject;*,
they  are  necessary-  that  the  train  of  our  thoughts
may  not  even  be  closed, up  against  it  .Were  all
days  of  the  week  alike,  and  employed  alike;  was
there  no  difference  or  distinction  between  Sunday
and  work-day ;  was  there  not-*  church  in  the  na-
tion :  were  we  never,  from  one  year's  end  to  ano-
ther, called  together  to  participate  in  public  wor-
ship ;  were  there  no  set  forms  of  public  worship  i
no  particular  persons  appointed  to  minister  and
officiate,  indeed  no  assemblies  for  public  worship
at  all;  no  joint  prayers ;  no  preaching; 'still  reli-
gion, in  itself,  in  its  reality  and  importance,  in  its
end  and  event,  would  be  the  same  thing  as  what
it  is:  we  should  still  have  to  account  for  our  con-
duct; there  would  still  be  heaven  and  hell;  salva-
tion and  perdition;  there  would  still  be  the  laws
of  God,  both  natural  and  revealed ;  all  the  obliga-
tion which  the  authority  of  a  Creator  can  impose
upon  a>  creatine;  all  the  gratitude  which  is^  due
from  a  rational  being  to  the  Author  and  Giver  of  '


508


SERMONS  ON  SEVERAL  SUBJECTS.


•very  blessing  which  he  enjoys;  lastly,  there
would  still  be  the  redemption  of  the  world  by  Je-
ms Christ  AH  these  things  would,  with  or  with-
tut  religions  ordinances,  be  equally  real,-  and  exist-
ing, and  valid :  hut  men  would  not  think  equally
about  them.  Many  would  entirely  and.  totally
neglect  them.  Some  there  would  always  be  of  a
more  devout,  or  serious, -or  contemplative'  disposi-
tion, -who  would  retain  a  lively  sense  of  these
things  under  all  circumstances  and  all  disadvan-
tages, who  would  never  lose  their  veneration  for
them,  never  forget  them.  But  from  others,  from
the  carejeas,  the  busy,  the  followers  of  pleasure,
"the  pursuers  of  wealth  or  advancement,  these
things  would  slip  away  from  the  thoughts  entirely.

Together  with  religious  ordinance*  we  men-
Amtareligious  exercise*.  By  the  term  religious
exercises,  I  in  .particular  mean  private  prayer-;
whether  it  be  at  set  times,  as  in  the  morning  and
evening  of  each  day ;  or  whether  it  be  called  forth
by  occasions,  as  when  we  are  to  form  some  mo-
mentous decision,  or  enter  upon  some  great  under-
taking; or  when  we  are  under  some  pressings
difficulty  or  deep  distress,  some  excruciating  bo-
dily pain  or  heavy  affliction;  or,  on  the  other
hand,  and  no  less  properly,  when  we  have  lately
Been  receiving  some  signal  -benefit,  experiencing
some  signal  mercy;  such  as ' preservation  from
danger,  relief  from  difficulty  or  distress,  abatement
of  pain,  -recovery  from  sickness :  for  by  prayer,
let  ft  be  observed,  we  mean  devotion  in  general ;
and  thanksgiving- is-  devotion  as  much  as  prayer
itself.  I  mean  private  prayer,  as  here  described ;
aitW  also  mean,  what  is  perhaps  the  most  natu-
ral form  of  private  prayer,  short  ejaoulatory  ex-
temporaneous addresses  to  God,  as  often  as  either
the  reflections  which  rise  up  in  our  minds,  let
them  come  from  what  ouarter  they  may,  or  the
objects  and  incidents  winch  seize  our  sttention,
prompt  us  to  utter  them ;  which  in  a  religiously,
disposed  mind,  will  be  the  case,  I  may  say,  every
hour,  and  which  ejaculation  may  be  offered  up  to
God  in  any  posture,  in  any  place,  or  in  any  situa-
tion. Amongst  retigieus  exercises,  I  also'recken
manly  prayer,  which  unites  many  of  the  uses
both  of  public  worship  and  private  prayer.  The
reading  of  religious  books  is  likewise  to  be  ac-
counted a  religious  exercise;  Religious  medita-
tion still  more  sty:  and  more  so  for  this  reason,
that  it  implies  and  Includes  that  most  important
duty,  setf-elamination;  for  I  hold  it  to  be  next  to
mipoerible  for  a  man  to  meditate  upon  religion,
without  meditating  at  the  same  time  upon  his
own  present  condition  with  respect  to  the  tremen-
dous alternative  which  is  to  take  place  upon  him
*fter  his  death.

These  are  what  we  understand  by  religious  ex-
erciser^ and  they 'are  all  so  far  of  the  same  nature
witji  religious  ordinances,  that  they  are  aids  and
helps  of  religion  itself;  and  I  think  that  religious
serufusness  cannot  be  maintained  in  the  soul
without  them.

But  again:  a  cause  which  has  a  strong  tenden-
cy to  destroy  religious  seriousness,  and  which  al-
mosUinfallibly  prevents  its  formation  and  growth
in  young  minds,  is  levity  in  conversation  upon  re-
Hgieus  subjects,  or  upon  subjects  connected  with
religion.  Whether  we  regard  the  practice  with
respect  to  those  who  use  it,  or  to  those  who  hear
it,  it  is  highly  to  be  blamed,  and  is  productive  of
great  miscmeC  In  those  who  use  it,  it  amounts
►  a  proof  that  4hey  are  destitute. of  reli-


gious seriousness.  The  principle  itself  is  destroy-
-ed  in  them,  or  was  never  formed  in  them.  Upon
those  who  hear,  its  effect  is  this :  If  they  have
concern  about  religion,  and  the  disposition  towards
religion  which  they  ought  to  have,  and  which  we
signify  bv  this  word  Skriousnessi  they  will' be  in-
wardly shocked  and  offended  by  the  levity  with
which  they  bear  it  treated.  They  will,  as  it  were,
resent  such  treatment  of  a  subject,  which  by  them
has  always  been  thought. upon  with  awe,  and
dread,  and  veneration/  But  the  pain  with  which
they  were  at  first  allected,  goes  off  by  hearing  fre-
quently the  same  sort  of  language;  and  then  they
will  be  almost  sure,  if  they  examine  the  state  of
their  minds  as.  to  religion,  to  feel  a  change,  in
themselves  for  the  worse.  This,  is  the  dancer  to
which  those  are  exposed,  who  had  before  imbibed
serious  impressions.  Those  who  had  not,  will  be
prevented,  by  such  sort  of  conversation,,  from  ever
imbibing'  them  at  all ;  so  that  its  influence  is  in  all
cases  pernicious.

,  The  turn  which  this  levity  usually  takes,  is  in
Jests  and  raillery  upon-  the  opinions,  or  the  pecu-
liarities, or  the  persons  of  men  of  particular-  sects,
or  who  bear  particular  names ;  especially  if  they
happen  to  be  more  serious  than  ourselves.  And
of  late  this  loose,  and  I  can'  hardly  help  calling  it
profane  humour,  has  been-directea  chiefly  against
the  followers  of  metbodism..  But  against  whom-
soever it  happens  to  be  pointed,  it  has  all  the  bad
effects  both  Upon  the  speaker  and  the  hearer  which
we  have  noticed :  and  as  in  other  instances,  so  in
this,  give  me  leave  to  say  that  ft  is  very  mucjh
misplaced,  -  In  the  first  place,  were  the  doctrines
and  sentyncntsrf  those  who  bear  this  name  ever
so  foolish  and  extravagant,  (I  do  not  say  that  they
are  either,)  this  proposition  I  shall  always  main-
tain to  be  true,  viz.  that  the  wildest  opinion  that
ever  was  entertained  in  matters  of  religion,  is  more
rational  than  unconcern  about  them  matters.
Upon  this  subject  nothing  is  so  absurd  as  indiffer-
ence ;  no  folly  so  contemptible  as  thoughtlessness
and  levity.  In  the  next  place,  do  methodists  deserve
this  treatment  1  Be  their  particular  doctrines  what
they  may,  the  professors  of  these  doctrines  appear
to  be  in  earnest  about  them ;  and  a  man  who  b  in
earnest  in  religion  cannot  be  a  bad  man,  still  less
a  fit  subject  for  derision.  I  am  no  methodist  my-
self. In  their  leading  doctrines  I  differ  from  them,
But  I  contend  that  sincere  men  are  not^  for  these,
or  indeed,  any,  doctrines,  to  he  jnade  laughing
stocks  to  others.  1  do  not  bring  in  the  case,  of
methodists  in  this  part  of  my  ducouree,  for  the
purpose  of  vindicating  their  tenets,  hut  for  the
purpose  of  observing  (and  I  wish  that  the  obser-
vation may  weigh  with  all  my  readers)  that  the
custom  of  treating  their  characters  and  persons,
their  preaching  or  their  preachers,  their  meetings
or  .worship,  with'  scorn,  has  the  pernicious  conse-
quence of  destroying  our  own,  seriousness,  toge-
ther with  the  seriousness  of  those  who  hearer  join
in  such  sort  of  conversation ;  especially  if  they  be
young  persons :  and  I  am  persuaded  that  much
mischief"  is  actually  done  in  this  very  way/

A  phrase  much  used  upon  these  occasions,  and
frequent  in  the  mouth  of  those  who  speak  of  such
as  in  religious  matters  are  more  serious  than  them-
selves, is,, "that  they  are  righteous  over-ranch-"
These,  it  is  true,  are  scripture- words ;  and  it  is  that
circumstance  which  has  given  currency  to  the  ex-
pression.: but  in  the  way  and  sense  in  which  they
are  used,  I  am  convinced  that  they  aieejDowdiiujrr


SERMONS  X)N  SEVERAL  SUBJECTS.


fiV


misapplied  The  text  occurs  once  in  the  Bible,
and  only  once.  It.  is  in  the  book  of  Ecclesjastes,
7th  chap,  and  16th  verse.  It  is  not  very  easy  to
determine  what  is  meant  by  it  in  the  place  in
which  it  is  found.  It  is  a  very  obscure  passage.  It
seems  to  me  most  probable,  that  itjrelates  to  an
external  affectation  of  righteousness7not  prompt-
ed by  internal  principle :  or  rather  to  the  assuming
fhe  character  of  righteousness,  merely  to  vaunt  or
show  our  superiority  over  others ;  to  conceited  ncss
in  religion :  in  like  manner  as  the  caution  delivered
in  the  same  verse,  "  be  not  .over-wise,"  respects  the
ostentation  of  wisdom,  and  not  the  attainment  it-
self. ,  So  long  as  we  mean  by  righteousness,  a  sin-
cere and  anxious  desire  to  seek  out  the  will  of  God,
and  to  perform  it,  it  is  impossible  to  be  righteous
over-much.  There  is  no  such  thing  in  nature :
nor  was  it,  nor  could  it  be,  the  intention  of  any
passage  in  the  Bible,  to  say  that  there  is,  or  to
authorise  us  in  casting  over-righteousness  as  a
reproach^r  a  censure  upon  any  one.

In  like  manner  it  has  been  objected,  that  so
much  regard,  ory  as  the  objectors  would  call  it,
over-regard  for  religion,  is  inconsistent  with  the
interest  and)  welfare  of  our  families,  and  with  suc-
cess and  prosperity  in  our  worldly  affairs.  I  be-
lieve that  there*  is  very  little  ground  for  this  Objec-
tion in  fact,  and  even  as  the  world  goes :  in  reason
and  principle  there  is  none.  A  good  Christian
divides  his  time  between  the  duties  of  religion,
the  cans  of  business,  and  those  quiet  relaxations
wflrich  may  he  innocently  allowed  to  his  circum-
stances ana  condition)  and  which  will  be  chiefly
in  hjs  family  or  amongst  a  few  friends.  In  this
plan  of  life- there  is  no  confusion  or  interference
of  its  parts ;  and  unless  a  man  be  given  to  sloth
and  laziness^  which  are  what  religion  condemns,
he  will  find  tune  enough  for  them  all.  This  calm
system  jnay  not  be  sufficient  for  that  unceasing
,  eagerness,  hurry,  and  anxiety  about,  worldly  af-
fairs, in  which  some  men  pass  their  lives ;  but  it
is  sufficient  for  every  thing  which  reasonable  pru-
dence requires  ;  and  it  is  perfectly  consistent  with
usefulness  in  our  stations,  which  is  a  main  point
Indeed,  compare  the  hours  which  serious  persons
spend  in  religious  exercises  and  meditations,  with
toe  hours  which  the  thoughtless  and  irreligious
spend  in  idleness  and  vice  and  expensive  enver-
siOBfl,  and  you  will  perceive  on  which  side  of  the
comparison  the  advantage  lies,  even  in  this  view
of  the  subject'

Nor  is  there  any  thing  in  the  nature  of  religion
to  support  the  objection.  In  a  certain  sense  it  is
true,  what  has  been  sometimes  said,  that,  religion
ought  to  be  the  rule  of  life,  not  the  business ;  by
which  is  meant,  tfeat  the  subject  matter  even  of
religious  duties  lies  in  the  common  affairs  and
transactions  of  the  world.  Diligence  in  our  call-
ing is  an  example  of  this;. which,  however,  keeps
both  a  mans  head  and  hands  at  work  upon  busi-
ness merely  temporal ;  yet  religion  may  be  govern-
ing him  here  meanwhile,  (rod  may  be  feared  in
the  busiest  scenes.  .

In  addition  to  the  above,  there  exists  another

ejodice  against  religious  seriousness,  arising
_  xn  a  notion  very  commonly  entertained,  mz.  that
religion  leads  to  gloom  and  melancholy.  This  no-
tion, I  am  convinced,  is  a  mistake.  Some  persons
are  constitutionally  subject  to  melancholy,  which
is  as.  much  a  disease  in  them,  as  the  ague  is  a  dis-
,  and  it  may  happen  that  such  men's  melan-


prcjoc
from!


choly  shall  fall  upon  religions  ideas,  as  it  may
urxra  any  other  subject  which  seises  their  distem-
pered imagination/  But  this  is  not  religion  lead*
log  to  melancholy.  Or  it  sometimes  is  the  case
that,  men  are  brought  to  a^sense  of  religion  by
calamity  and  affliction,  which  produce,  at  tivnwimo
time,  depression  of  spirits.  But  neither  here  is
religion  the  cause  of  this  distress  or  dejection,  or
to  be  blamed  for  it.  These  cases  being,  excepted,
the  very  reverse  of  what  is  alleged  against  religion
is  the  truth.  No  man's  spirits  were  ever  hurt  by
doing  his  duty.  On  the  contrary,  one  good  action,
one  temptation  resisted  and  overcome,  one  sacri-
fice of  desire  or  -interest  purely  for  conscience'
sake,' will  prove  a  cordial  for  weak  and  low  spirits.
beydndVwhat  either  indulgence  or  diversion  or
company  can  do  for  them.  And  a  succession  anil
course  of  such  actions  and  self-denials,  springing
from  a  religious  principle  and  manfully  main-
tained, is  the  best  possible  course  that  can  be  fol-
lowed as  a  remedy  lor  sinkings  and  oppressions  of
tub  kind.  Carwt  then  be  true,  that  religion  leads,
to  melancholy  1  Occasions  arise  to  every  man
living;  to  many  very* severe, as  well  as  repeated
occasions,  in  which  the  hopes  of  religion  are  the
only  stay  that  is  left  him.  Godly  men  have  that
within  them  which  cheers  and  comforts  them  in
their  saddest  hours :  ungodly  men  have  that  which
strikes  their  heart,  like  a  dagger,  in  its  gayest  mo-
ments. Godly  men  discover,  what  is  very  true,
but  what,  by  most  men,  is  found  out  too  late,
namely,  that  a  good  conscience,  and  the  hope  of
our  Creator's  final  favour  and  acceptance,  are.  the
only  solid  happiness  to.be  attained  in  this  wostd.
Experience  corresponds  with  the  reason  of  the
thing.  I  take  upon  me  to  say,  that  religious  men
are  generally  cheerfuL  If  this  be  not  observed,
as  might  be  expected,  supposing  it  to  be  true,  it  is
because  the  cheerfulness  which  religion  inspires;
does  not  show  itself  in  noise  or  in  fits  and  starts
of  merriment,  but  is  calm  and  constant.  Of  this
the  only  true  and  valuable  kind,  or  cheerfulness,
for  all  other  kinds,  are  hollow  and  unsatisfying,
religious  men  possess-  not  less  but  a  greater  share
than  others.

Another  destroyer  of  religious  seriousness,  and
which  is  the  last  I  shall  mention,  is  a  certain  fatal
turn  which  some  minds-  take,  namely,  that  when
they  find  difficulties  in  or  concerning  religion,  or
any  of  the  tenets  of  religion,  they  forthwith  plunge
into  irreligion ;  and  make  these  difficulties,  or  any
degree  of  uncertainty  which  seems  to  their  appre-
hension to  hang  over  the  subject,  a  ground  and.
occasion  forgiving  full  liberty  to  their  inclinations,
and  for  casting  off  the  restraints  of  religion  en-
tirely. This  is  the  case  with  men,  who,  at  the
best,  perhaps,  were  only  balancing  between  the
sanctions  of  religion  and  the  love  of  pleasure  or
of  unjust  gain,  but  especially  the  former.  Jxx  this
precarious  state,  any  objection,  or  appearance  of
objection,  which  diminishes  the  force  of  the  reli-
gious impression,  determines  the  balance  agains$
the  side  M  virtue,  and  gives  up  the  doubter  to
sensuality,  to  the  world,  and  to  the  flesh.  Now,
of  all  Ways  .which  a  man  can  take,  this  is  the
surest  way  to  destruction;  and  it  Js  completely
irrational.  I  say  it  is  completely  irrational;  for.
when  we  meditate  upon  the  tremendous  conse-
quences which  form  the  subject  of  religion,  we
cannot  avoid  this  reflection,  that  any  degree  of
probability  whatever,  1  had  almost  said  any  degrea
45


630


SERMONS  ON  SEVERAL  SUBJECTS.


j  whatever,  of  religion  being  true,
Ja%  to  determine  a  rational  creature  so  to  act  as
to  Wore  Mmself  from  punishment  in  a  future
state,  and  toe  loss  of  that  qappiness'which  may  be
attained.  Therefore  he  has  no  pretence  for  al-
leging uncertainty  as  an  excuse  for  his  conduct,
because  he  does  not  act  in  conformity  with  that  in
which  there  is  no  uncertainty  at  all.  (n  the  next
place,  it  is  giving  to  apparent  difficulties  more
weight  than  they  are  entitled  to.  I  only  request
any  man  to  consider,  first,  the  necessary  allow-
ances to  be  made  for  the  shoit-sightedness  and
the  weakness  of  the  -human  understanding ;  se-
condly, the  nature  of  those  subjects  concerning
winch  religion  treats,  so  remote  from  our  senses,
so  different  from  our  experience,  so  above  and  be-
yond the  ordinary  train  and  course  of  our  ideas;
and  then  say,  whether  "difficulties,  and  great  diffi-
culties also,  were  not  to  be  expected ;  nay  further,
whether  they  be  not  in  some  measure  subservient
to  the  -very  purpose  of  religion.  The  reward  of
everlasting  life,  and  the  punishment  or  misery  of
which  we  know  no  end,  if  they  were  present  and
Immwlifr'y,  coiildjiot  be  withstood,  ana  would  not
leave  any  room  for  liberty  or  choice.  But  this
sort  of  mice  upon  the  will  is  not  what  God  de-
signed; nor  is  suitable  indeed  tooths  nature  of
free,  moral,  and  accountable  agents.  The  truth
is,  and  it  was  most  likely  beforehand  that  it  would
be  so,  that  'amidst  some  points  which  are  dark,
some  which  are  dubious,  there  are  many  which
are  clear  and  certain.  Now,  I  apprehend,  that,  if
we'  act  faithfully  up  to  those  pouts  concerning
which  there  is  no  question,  most  especially  if  we
determine  upon  and  choose  our  rale  and  course  of
life  according  to  those  principles  of  choice  which
all  men  whatever  allow  to  be  wise  and  safe  prin-
ciples, and  the  only  principles  which  are  so;,  and
conduct  ourselves  steadfastly  according  to  the  rule
thus  chosen .  the  difficulties  which  remain  in  religion
will  not  move  or  disturb  us  milch :  and  will,  as  we
proceed,  become  gradually  less  and  fewer.  Where-
as, if  we  begin  with  objections;  If-all  we  consider
about  religion  be  its  difficulties ;  but,  most  espe-
cially, if  we  permit  the  suggestion  of  difficulties
to  drive  us  into  a  practical  rejection  of  religion  itself,
and  to  afford  us,  which  is  what  we  wanted,  an  ex-
cuse to  ourselves  for  casting  off  its  restraints ;
then  the  event  will  be.  that  its  difficulties  will  mul-
tiply upon  us;  its  light  grow  more  and  more  dim,
and  we  shall  settle  in  the  worst  and  most  hopeless
of  all  conditions;  the  last  condition,  1  will  ven-
ture to  say,  in  which  any  man  living  would  wish
his  son,  or  any  one  whom  he  loved,  and  for  whose
happiness  he  was  anxious,  to  be  placed ;  a  life' of
confirmed  vice  and  dissoluteness;  founded  in  a
formal  renunciation  of  religion.


He  that  has  to  preach  Christianity  to  pe;
in  this  state,  lias  to  preach  to  stones.  He  must
not  expect  to  be  heard,  either  with  complacency
or  seriousneeSj  or  patience^  or  even  to  escape  con-
tempt and  derision.  Habits  of  thinking  are  fixed
by  habits  of  acting ;  and  both  too  solidly  fixed  to
be  moved  by  human  persuasion.  God  in  his
mercy,  and  by  his  providences,  as  well  as  by  his
Spirit,  can  touch  and  soften  the  heart  of  stone.
Ami  it  it  seldom  perhaps,  that,  without  some
strong,  and;  it  may  be,  sudden  impressions  of  this
kind,  and  from  this  source,  serious  sentiments
ever  penetrate  dispositions  hardened  in  the  man-
ner which  we  have  here  described.


SERMON  II.

TASTE  FOR  DEVOTION.  .

But  the  hour  cometh  and  now  is.  when  the  true
worshipper*  thali  worshipihe  Father -in  spirit
and  in  truth :  for  the  Father  seeketh  such  to
worship  him.  God  is  a  Spirit;  and  they  thai
worship  Aim,  must  worship  him  in  spirit  and
in  truth.— John  iv.  23, 24. *

A  taste  and  relish  for  religious  exercise,  or
the  want  of  it,  is  one  of  the  marks  and  tokens  by
which  we  may  judge  whether  our  heart  be  right
towards  Odd  or  not.  God  is  unquestionably  an
object  of  devotion  to  every  creature  which  he  has
made  capable  of  devotion ;  consequently,  our
mind*  can  never  be  right  towards  nim,  unless
they  be  in  a  devotional  frame.  It  cannot  be  dis-
puted, but  that  the  Authorand  Giver  of  all  things,
upon  whose  will  and  whose  mercy  we  depend  for
every  thing  we  have,  and  for  every  thing  we  look
for,  wight  to  live  in  the  thooghtrand*  affection*  of
his  'rational  creatures.  ,"  Through  thee  nave  I
been  holden  up  ever  since  r  was  born :  thou  art
he  that  took  me  from  my  mother's  womb
praise  shall  be  always  of  thee."  If  there  he
things  as  first  sentiments  towards  God,  these
words  of  the  Psalmist  express  them.  That  devo-
tion to  God  is  a  duty,  stands  upon  the  same  proof
as  that  God  exists.  But  devotion  is  an  act  of  the
mind  strictly:  In  a  -certain  sense,  duty  to  a  fel-
low-creature may  be  discharged"  if  the  outward
act  be  performed,  because  the  benefit  to  him  de-
pends upon  the  act.  Net  so  with  devotion.  It
is  altogether  the  operation  of  the  mind.  God  is  a
Spirit,  and  must  l>e  worshipped  in  spirit,  that  is.
in  mind  and  thought.  The  devotion  of  the  mind
may  be,  will  be,  ought  to  be,  testified -and  accom-

Eanied  by  outward  performances  and  expressions:
ut,  without  the  mind  going  along  with  it,  no
form,  no  solemnity  can  avail,  as  a  service  to  God.
It  is  not  so  much  a  question  under  what  inode
men  worship  their  Maker;  but  this  is  the  ques-
tion, whether  their  mind,  and  thoughts,  and  affec-
tions, accompany  the  mode  which  they  adopt  or
not.  I  do  not  say,  that  modes  of  worship  are  in-
different things ;  for  certainly  one  mode  may  be
more  rational,  more  edifying,  more  pure  than  ano-
ther ;  but  they  are  indifferent,  in  comparison  with
the  question,  whether  the  heart  attend  the  worship,
or  be  estranged  from  it.

These  two  points,  then,  being  true ;  first,  tint
devotion  is  a  duty ;  secondly,  that  the  heart  must
participate  to  malce  any  thing  we  do  devotion ;  H
follows  that  the  heart  cannot -be  right  toward  God,
unless  it  be  possessed  with  a  taste  and  relish  for  his
service,  and  for  what  relates  to  it.

Men  may,  and  many  undoubtedly  do,  attend
upon  acts  of  religious  worship,  and  even  from
religious  'motives,  yet,  at  the  same  time,  without
this  taste'  and  relish  of  which  we  are  speaking.
Religion  has  no  savour  fof  them.  I  do  not  allude
to  the  case  of  those  who  attend  upon  the  public
worship  of  the  church;  or  of  their  communion,
from  compliance  with  custom,  out  of  regard  to
station,  for  example's  sake  merely,  from  habit
merely ;  stfll  less  to  the  case  of  those  who  have
particular  worldly  views  in  so  doing.  I  lay  the
case  of  such  persons,'  for  the  present,  out  of  the
question;  and  I  consider  only  the  case  of  those,
who  knowing  and  believing  the  worship  of  God


SERMONS' ON  SEVERAL  SUBJECTS.


631


tote*  duty,  ana  that  the  wilful  neglect  of  this,
as  of  other  duties,  must  look  forward  to  future
punishment,  do  join  in  worship  from  a  principle
of  obedience;  from  a  consideration  of  those  conse-
quences which  will  follow  disobedience ;  from  the
tear  indeed  of  God,  and  the  dread  of  his  judg-
ments (and  so  &r  from  motives  of  religion,)  yet
without  any  taste  or  relish  for  religious  exercise
itself.  That  is  the  case  I  am  considering.  It  is
not  for  us. to  presume  to  speak  harshly  of  any
conduct,  which  proceeds,  in  any  manner,  from  a
regard  to  God,  and  the  expectation  of  a  future
judgment.  God,  in  his -Scriptures,  holds  out  to
man  tenon,  as. well  as  promises;  punishment
after  death,  as  well  as  reward.  Undoubtedly  he
intended  those  motives  which  he  himself  proposes,
to  operate  and  have  their  influence.  Wherever
.they  operate,  good  ensues ;  very  great  and  import-
ant good,  compared  with  the  cases  in  which  the^
do  not  operate ;  yet  not  all  the  good  we  would
desire,  not  air  which  is  attainable,  not  all  which
*re  ought  to  aim  at,  in  our  Christian  course.  The
.fear  of  the  Lord  is  the  beginning  of  knowledge :
but  calling  it  the  beginning,  implies  that  we  ought
to  'proceed  further;  namely,  from  his  fear  tonis
love.

"  To  appty  this  distinction  to  the  subject  before
us:  the  man  who  serves  God  from  a  dread  of  his
displeasure,  and  therefore  in  a  certain  sense  by
constraint,  is,  beyond  all  comparison,  in  a  better
situation  as -touching,  his  salvation,  than  he  who
defies tbisdread  and  breaks  through  this  constraint.
He,  in  a  word,  who  obeys,  from  whatever  motive
his  obedience  springs,  provided  it  be  a  religious
motive,  is  of  a  character,  as  well  as  in  a  condition,
infinitely  preferable  to  the  character  and  condition
of  the  man  whom  no  motives  whatever  can  induce
to  perform  his  duty.  '  Still  it  is  true,  that  if  he
feels  not  within  himself  a  taste  and  relish  for  the
service  which  he  performs,  (to  say  nothing  of  the
consideration  how  much  less-  acceptable  his  ser-
vices may  be,)  and  for  devotion  itself,  he  wants
one  satisnctory  evidence  of  his  heart  being  right
towards  God.  A  further  progress  in  religion
win*  give  him  this  evidence,  but  it  is  not  yet
attained:  as  yet,  therefore,  there  is' a  great  defi-
ciency.

The  taste  and  relish  for  deration,  of  which  we
aire  speaking,  is  what  good  men  in  all  ages  have
felt  strohgly.  It  appears  in  their  history :  it
appears  in  their  writings.  The  book  of  Psalms,
in.  particular,  was,  great  part  of  it,  composed
under  the  impression  of  this  principle.  Many  of
the  Psalms  are  written  m  the  truest  spirit  of  de-
motion;  and  it  is  one  test  of  the  religious  frame  of
our  own  minds,'  to  observe  whether  we  have  a
relish  for  these  compositions;  whether  our  hearts
are  stirred  as  we  read  them ;  whether  we  perceive
in  them  words  alone,  a  mere  letter,  or  so  many
grateful,  gratifying  sentiments  towards'  God  in
unison  with  what  we  ourselves  feel,  or  have  be-
fore felt  And  what  we  are  saying  of  the  book
of  Psalms,  is  true  of  many  religious  books  that  are
put  into  our  hands,  especially  books  of  devotional
religion  4  which,  though  they  be  human  composi-
tions, and  nothing  more,  are  of  a  similar  cast  with
the  devotional  writings  of  Scripture,  and  excel-
lently calculated  for  their  purpose.* We  read  of

•  Amongst  these  I  particularly  recommend  toe  pray*
as  and  devotions  annexed  to  the  new  Wools  Daly  of


aged  persons,  who  passed  the  greatest  part  of
their  time  in  acta  of  devotion,  and  passed  it  with
enjoyment.  "  Anna,  the  prophetess,  was  of  great
age,  which  departed  not  from  the  temple;  but
served  God  with  fastings  and  prayers,  night  and
day."  The  first  Christians,  so  far  a*  can  be
gathered  from  their  history  in  the  Acts  of  the
Apostles,  and-  the  Epistles,  as  well  as  from  the
subsequent  account  left  of  them,  took  great  de-
light in  exercises  of  devotion.  These  setfmed  to
form,  indeed,  the  principal  satisfaction  of  their
lives  in  this  world.  -  "Continuing  daily,  with  one
accord,  in  the  temple,  and  breaking  bread,"  that
is,  celebrating  the  holy  communion,  "from  house
to  liouse,  they  eat  their  meat- with  gladness  and
singleness  of  heart,  praising  God."  in  this  spirit
Christians  set  out,  finding  the  greatest  .gratifica-
tion they  were  capable  of,  in  acts  and  .exercises
of  devotion.  A  great  deal  of  what  is  said  in  the
New  Testament,  by  St  Paul  in  particular,  about
"rejoicing  in  the  Load,  rejoicing  in  the  Holy
Ghost,  rejoicing -in  hope,  rejoicing  in  consolation,
rejoicing  in  themselves,  as  sorrowful,  yet  always
rejoicing/'  refer  to  the  pleasure,  and  the  high  and
spiritual  comfort  which  they,  found,  itf  jeligious
exercises.  Much,  I  fear,  of  this  spirit  is.  fled.
There  is  a  coldness  in  our  devotions,  which
argues  a  decay  of  religion-  amongst  us.  Is  it  true
that  men,  in  these  days,  perform  religious  exer-
cises as  frequently  as  they  ought,  or  as  those  did
who  have  gone  before  us  in  the  Christian  course  ?
that  is  one  question  to  be  asked.:  but  there  is- also
another  question  of  still  greater  importance,  vter
do  they  find  in  these  performances  that  gratifica-.
tion  which  the  first  and  best  disciples  of  the  reli-
gion actually  found  1  which  they  ought  to  find ;
and  which  they  would  find,  did  they  possess  the
taste  and  relish  concerning  which  we  are  dis-
coursing, and  which  if  they  do  not  possess,  they
want  one  great  proof  of  their  heart  being  right
towards  God.  *

If  the  spirit  of  prayer,  as  it  is  sometimes  called,
if  the  taste  and  relish  for  devotion,  if  a  devotional
frame  of  mind  be  within  us,  it  will  show  itself  in
the  turn  and  cast  of  our  meditations,  in  the
warmth,  and  earnestness,  and  frequency  of  our
secret  applications  to  God  in  prayer ;  in  the  deep,
unfeigned,  heart-piercing,  heart-sinking  sorrow,
of  our  confessions  and  our  penitence;  in  the  shv^
cerity  of  our  gratitude  and  of  our  praise ;  in  our
admiration  of  the  divine  bounty  to  nis  creatures;
in  our  sense,  of  particular  mercies  to  ourselves,
We  shall  pray  much  in  secret.  >  We' shall  address
ourselves  to  God  of4  our  own  accord,  in  our  walks;
pur  closet,  our  bed;  Form,  in  these  addresses,
will  be  nothing.  -  Every  thing  will  come  fiom  the
heart  We  snail  feed  the  flame  of  devotion  by
continually  returning  to  the  subject.  No  man,
who  hi  endued  with  the  taste  and  relish  we  speak
of,  will  have  God  long  out  of  his  mind.  Under  .
one  view  or  other,  God  cannot  be  long  out  of  a
devout  mind. "  Neither  was  God  in  all  his


Man.  Bishop  Burnet,  in  spenking  of  such  kind  of
books,  very  truly  says,  "  By  the  frequent  reading  of
these  books,  by  the  relish  that  one  has  in  them,  by  the
delight  they  give,  and  the  effects  they  produce,  a  man
will  plainly  pt'rceive  whether  his  soul  is  made  for
divine  matters,  or  not ;  what  suitableness  there  is  be-
tween hiih  and  them,  and  whether  he  is  yet  touched
with  such  a  tense  of  religion,  as  to  be  capable  of  dedi-
cating himself  toil"


SERMONS  ON  SEVERAL  SUBJECTS.


is  a  true  description  of  a.
of  religious  principle;  but  it  can,  by
no  possibility,  be  the  ease  with  a  man,  who  has
the  spirit  of  devotion,  or  any  portion  of  that  spirit,
within  him.-  >

But  it  is  not  in  our  private  religion  alone,  .that
the  affect  and  benefit  ot  this  principle  is  perceived.
The  true  taste  and  relish  we  so  much  "dwell  upon,
will  bring  a  man  to  the  public  worship  of  God ;  and,
what  is  more,  will  bring-  him  in  such  a  frame  of
mind  as  to  enable  him  to  join  in  it  with  effect;
with  effect  as  to  his  own  soul ;  with  effect  as  to
every  object,  both  public?  and  private,  intended  by
public  worship.  Wanderings  and  forgetnilness,
•  remissions  and  intermimiens  of  attention,  there
win  be  j  but  these  will  be  fewer  and  shorter,  in
proportion  as  more  of  this  spirit  is  prevalent
witnin  us;  and  some  sincere,  some  hearty,  some
deep,  some  true,  and,  as  we  trust,  acceptable  ser-
vice will  be  performed,  before  we  leave  the  place;
some  pouring  forth  of  the  soul  unto  God  in  prayer
end  in  thanksgiving;  in  prayer'  excited  by  wants
end  weaknesses ;  I  Tear  also,  by  sins  and  neglects
without  number.;  and  in  thanksgivings,  such  as
mercies,  the  most  undeserved,  ought  to  call  forth
from  a  heart,  filled,  as  the  heart  of  man  should  be,
with  a  thorough  consciousness  of  dependency  and


nbfigati
Fort]


Forms  of  public  worship  must,  by  their  very
nature)  be  in  a  great  degree  general;  that  is,  must
be  calculated  for  the  average  condition  of  human
lead  of  Christian  life;  but  it  is  one  property  of  the
devotional  spirit,  which  we  speak  of,  to  give  a
particularity  to  our  worship,  though  it  be  carried
on  in  a  congregation  of  fellow  Christians,  and  ex-
pressed in  terms  which  were  framed  and  conceiv-
ed for  the  use  of  all  And  it  does  this  by  calling
up  recollections  which  will  apply  most  closely,
and  bring  home  most  nearly  to  ourselves,  those
terms  and  those  expressions.  For  instance,  in
public  worship,  we  thank  God  in  general  terms,
•hat  is,  we  join  with  the  congregation  in  a  general
thanksgiving ;  but  a  devout  man  brings  to  church
the  recollection  of  special  and  particular  mercies,
particular  bounties,  particular  providences,  par-
ticular deliverances,  particular  relief  recently  ex-
perienced, specially  and  critically  granted  in  the
moment  of  want  or  danger,  or  eminently  and
supereminently  vouchsafed  to  us  individually.
'These  he  bears  in  his  thoughts;  he  applies  as  he
proceeds;  that  which  was  general,  he  makes  close
and  cfircumstandal ;  his  heart  rises  towards  God,
by  a  sense  of  mercies  vouchsafed  to  himself. He


not  however,  confine,  himself  to  those  fa-
i  of  Providence,  which  he  i


e  enjoys  above  many
others,  or  more  than  most  others.;  he  does  not
dwell  upon  distinctions  alone ;  he  sees  God  in  all
his  goodness,  in  all  his  bounty.  Bodily  ease,  for
instance^  is  not  less  valuable,  not  less  a  nfercv,
because  others  are  at  ease,  as  well  as  himself.
The  same  of  his  health,  the  use  of  his  limbs,  the
■acuities  of  bis  understanding.  But  what  I  mean
is,  that,  in  his  mind,  he  brines  to  church  mercies,
in  which  he  is  interested,  and  that  the  most  gene-
ral expressions  of  thankfulness  attach  with  him
upon  particular  recollectionrof  goodness,  particu-
lar, subiects  of  gratitude)  so  that  the  holy  fervour
of  ius'pevotion  is  supported ;  never  wants,  nor  can
went,  materials  to  act  upon.  It  is  the  office,
therefore,  of  an  internal  spirit  of  devotion  to'make
worship  personal. We  have  seen  that  it  will  be


so  with  thanksgiving.  It  wfllhe  the  same  like-
wise with  every  other  part  of  divine  worship.  The
confession  of  sua  in  our  liturgy;  and  perhaps  in  all
liturgies,  is  general ;  but  our  sins^  alas!-  are  parti-
cular :  our  conscience  not  only  acknowledges  a  de-
plorable weakness  and  imperfection  ki  the  die-
charge  of  our  duty,  but  is  stung  also  with  remem-
brances and  compunctions,  excited  by  particular
offence*.  When  we  come,  therefore,  to  confess  our
sins,  let  memory  -do  its  -office  faithfully.  Let
these  sins  rise  up  before  our  eyes.  All
is  imperfect.  Forms,  intended  for  gen
must  consist  of  general  terms,  and  are  so  for. in-
adequate. They  may  be  rehearsed  by  the  lips
with  very  little  of  application  to  our  own  case.
But  this  trill  never  be  so,  if  the  spirit  of  devotion
be  within  us.  A  devout  mind  is  exceedingly  stir-
red, when  it  has  sins  to  confess.  None  but  a
hardened  sinner  can  even  think  of  hie  sins  with-
out pain.  But  when  be  is  to  lay  them,  with  sup-
plications for  pardon^,  before  his  Maker ;  when  ne
is  to  expose  his  heart  to  God ;  it  will  always  be
with  powerful  inward  feelings  of  guilt  and  cala-
mity. It  hath  been  well  saidof  prayer,  that  prayer
will  either  make  a  man  leave  off  sinning,  or  sin
will  make  him  leave  off*  prayer.  And  the  same  is
true  of  confession.  If  confession  be  sincere,  if  it
be  such  as  a  right  capacity  for  devotion  will  make
it  to  be,  it  will  call  up  pur  proper  and  particular
sins  so  distinctly -to  our  view,  their  guilt,  their
danger,  their  end ;  whither  they  are  carrying  us ;
in  what  they  will  conclude ;  that,  if  we  can  return
to  them  again  without  molestation  from  our  con-
science, then  religion  is  not  within  us.  If  we
have  approached  God  in  his  worship  so  ^effectu-
ally as  to  ouiselves,  it  is  because  we  have  not  wor-
shipped him  in  spirit;  we  may  say  of  all  we  have
done,  "  we  drew  near  him  with  our  lips,  but  <m
hearts  were  far  from  him.1*

What  we  nave  said  concerning  thankagiving
and  confession,  is  likewise  true  o(  prayer'  univer-
sally. The  spirit  of  devotion  will  apply  our  prayers
to  our  wants.  In  forms  of.  worship,  be  they  ever
so  well  composed,  i(  is  impossible  to  exhibit  human
wants,  otherwise  than  in  general  expressions.
But  devotion  will  apply  them.  It  will  teach  every
man,  in  the  first  place,  to  know  how  indigent,
how  poor  a  creature  without  a  continued  exercise
of  mercy  and  supply  of  bounty  from  God,  he  would
be;  because,  when  he., begins  to  enumerate  his
wants,  he  will  be  astonished  at  their  multitude.
What  are  we,  any  of  us,  hut  a  complication  of
wants,  which  we  have  not  in  ourselves  the  power
of  supplying!  But,  beside  those  numerous  wants,
and  that  common  helplessness,  in  which  we  all
partake,  every  man  has  his  own  sore,  hie  own
grief,  hia  own  difficulties;  every  man  has  some
distress,  which  he  is  suffering,  or  fearing.  Kay,
were  worldly  wishes  -satisfied,  was  worldly  pros-
perity complete,  he  has  always  what  is  of  more
coiiseuuence  -than  worldly  prosperity  Co.  pray
for;  he  has  always  his  sins  to  pray  against.
Where  temporal  wants  are  few,  spiritual  wants
are  often  the  most  and  the  greatest.  The  grace
of  God  is  always  wanted.  His  governing,  his
preventing,  his  inspiring,  his  insisting  grace  is
always  wanted.  Here,  therefore,  is  a  subject  for
prayer,  were  there  no. other;  a  subject  personally
and  individually  interesting  in  the  highest  degree;
a  subject  above  all  others,  upon  which  the. spirit
of  devotion  will  be  sure  to  fix.


SERMONS  ON  SEVERAL  SUBJECTS.


538


'  I  assign,  therefore-  as  the  first  effect  of  a  right
spirit  of  devotion,  that  it  gives  particularity  to
all  odt  worship!  It  applies,  and  it  appropriates.
Forma  of  worship  may  he  general,  but  a  spirit
of  devotion  brings  them  home  and  dose  to  each
and  every  one.

One  happy,  consequence  of  which  is,  that  it
prevents  the  tediousness  of  worship.  Things
which  interest  us,  are  not  tedious.  If  we  find  wor-
ship tedious,  it  is  because  it  does  not  interest  us  as
ir ought  to  do.  We  must  allow  (experience  com-
pels us  to  allow)  for  wanderings  aiid  inattentions,
as  amonffst  the  infirmities  of  our  infirm  nature.
But,  as  I  have  already  safd,  even  these  will  be
fewer  and  shorter,  in  proportion  as  we  are  pos-
sessed of  the  spirit  of  devotion.  Weariness  will
not  be  perceived;  by  reason  of  that  succession  of
devout  feelings  and  consciousnesses  which  the  se-
veral offices  -of  worship  are  calculated  to  excite.
If  our  heart  be  in  the  business,  it  will  not  be  tedi-
ous. Ifj  in  thanksgiving,  it  be  lifted  up  by  a  sense
of  mercies,  and  a  knowledge  from  whom  tfrey  pro-
ceed, thanksgiving  will  be  a  grateful  exercise,  and
not  a  tedious  form.  What  relates  to  our  sins  and
wants,  though  not  of  the  same  gratifying  nature,
though,  accompanied  with  deep,  nay,  with  afflict-
ing cause  of  huimfiation  and  fear,  must,  neverthe-
less, t»e  equally  interesting,  Qr  more  so,  because  it
is  of  equal  concernment  to/us,  or  of  greater.  In
neither  case,  therefore,  if  our  duty  be  performed
ssi  it  ought  to  be,  will  tediousness  be  perceived.

I  say,  thai  the  spirit  of  devotion  removes  from
toe  worship  of  God  the  perception  of  tediousness,
and  with  that  also  every  disposition  to  censure  of
cavil  at  particular  phrases,  or  expressions  used  in
public  worship.  All  such  faults,  even  if  they  be
real,  and  such  observations  upon  them,  are  ab-
sorbed by  the  immense  importance  of  the  business
in  which  we  an  engaged.  GLuickness  in  disco-
vering blemishes  of  this  sort  is  not  the  gift  of  a
xsoos  mind ;  still  less  either  levity  or  acrimony  in
^peaking  of  them.

Moreover,  the  spirit  of  devotion  reconciles  us  to
repetitions.  In  other  subjects,  repetition  soon  be-
comes tiresome  and  offensive.  In  devotion  it  is
cWerent  Deep,  earnest,  heartfelt  devotion,  na-
turally vents  itself  in  repetition.  Observe  a  per-
son racked  by  excruciating  bodily  pain ;  or  a  per-
son suddenly  struck  with  the  news  of  some  dread-
ful calamity;  or  a  person  labouring  under  some
catting  anguish  of  soul :  and  you  will  always  find
trim  breaking  out  into  ejaculations,  imploring  from
God  support,  mercy,  and  relief;  over  and  over  again,
littering  the  same  prayer  in  the  same  words,  rfo-
thira  he  finds,  suits  so  well  the  extremity  of  his
smflenngs,  the  urgency  of  his  wants,  ar  a  con-
tinual recurrence  to  the  same  cries,  and  the  same
call  for  divine  aid.  Our  Lord  himself  in  his  last
agony,  affords  a  high  example  of  what  we  are
saying:  thrice  he  besought  his  heavenly  Father;
and  thrice  he  used  the  same  words.  Repetition,
therefbre^is  not  only  tolerable  in  devotion,  but  it
as  natural :  it  is  even  dictated  by  a  sense  of  suffer-
ing, and  an  Muteness  of  feeling.  It  is  coldness  of
affection,  which  requires  to  be  enticed  and  grati-
fied by  continual  novelty  of  idea,  or  expression,  or
action.  The  repetitions  and  prolixity  of  Phari-
saical prayers,  winch  our  Lord  censures,  are  to  be
wnderstoodof  those  prayers  which  run  out  into
mere  formality  and  into  great  length;  no  senti-
ment or  affection  of  the  heart  accompanying  them ;
bat  uttered  as  a  task,  firom  an  opinion  (of  which


our  Lord  justly  notices  the  absurdity.)  that  they
should  really  be  heard  -for  their  much  speaking.
Actuated  by  the  spirit  of  devption,  we  can  never
offend  in^this  way,  we  can  never  be  the  object  of
this  censure.

Lastly,  and  what  has  already  been  intimated,
the  spirit  of  devotion* will  cause  our  prayers  to
have  an  effect  upon  our  practice.*  For*  example;
if  we  repeated  the  cortfeirion  in  oar  liturgy  with  a
true  penitential  sense  of-  guilt  upon  our  souls,  we
should  not,  day  after  day,  be  acknowledging  to
God  out  transgressions  and  neglects,  and  yet  go
on  exactly  in  the  same  manner  without  endea-
vouring to  make  them  less  and  fewer.  We  should
plainly  perceive  that  this  was  doing  nothing  to-
wards salvation ;  and  that,  St  ibis  rate'  we  may  <
be  sinning  and  confessing  all  our  lives.  Whereas,
was  the  right  spirit  of  confessional  piety,  viz:
thoughtfulness  or  soul,  within  us  at  the  time,  this
would  be  the  certain  benefit,  especially  in  the  case
of  an  often-repeated  sin,  that  the  mind' would  be-
come more-and  more  concerned,  more  and  more,
filled  with  compunction  and  remorse,,  so  as  to  be
forced  into  amendment.  Even  the  most  heartfelt
confession  might  not-  immediately  do  for  us  ait
that  we  could  wish:' vet  by  perseverance  in  the
same,  it  would  certainly,  in  a  short  time,  produce
its  desired  effect.  -  For  the  same  reason,  we  should
not,  time  after  time,  pray  that  we  might  thence-
forward;  viz.  after  each  time  of  so  praying,  kad
godly,  righteous,  and  sober  lives,  yet  persist,  fast
as  usual,  in  ungodliness,  unrighteousness,  ana  in-
temperance. The  thing  would  be  impossible,  if


we  prayed  as^we  ought.  ~So  likewise,  if  real  thank-
fulness of 'heart  accompanied  our  thanksgivings^
we  should  not  pray  in  vain,  that  we  might  show
forth  the  praises  of  God,  not  only  with  our  lips
but  in  our  lives.  As  it  is,  thousands  repeat  these
words  without  doing  a  single  deed  for  the  sake  of
pleasing  God,  exclusive  of  other  motives,  or  re-
training from  a  single  thing  they  like  to  do  out  of
the  fear  of  displeasing  him.  So  again,  every  time
we  hear  the  third  service  at  church,  we  pray  that
God  would  incline  our  hearts  to  keep  his  com-
mandments; yet  immediately,  perhaps,  after*
wards,  allow  our  hearts  and  inclinations  to  wan-
der, without  controul,  to  whatever  sinful  tempta-
tion entices  them.  This,  I  say,  all  proceeds
from  the  want  of  earnestness  in  our  devotions.
Strong  devotion  is  an  antidote  against  am. '

To  conclude;  a  spirit  of  devotion  is  one  of  the
greatest  blessings ;  and,  by  consequence,  the  want
of  it  one  of  the  greatest  misfortunes,  which  a
Christian  can  experience.  Whenit  is  present,  it
gives  life  to  every  act  of  worship  which  we  per-
form; it  makes  every  such-  act  interesting  and
comfortable'  to  ourselves.  It  is  felt  in  our  most
retired  moments,  in  our  beds,  our  closets,  our  rides,
our  walks.  It  n  stirred  within  us,  whin  we  are
assembled  with  our  children,  and  servants  in  fa-
mily prayer.  It  leads  us  to  church,  to  the  ceingre-
gation  of  our  fellow  Christians  there  collected;  it
accompanies  us  in  our  joint  offices  of  religiorrut
an  especial  manner  ^  and  it  returns  us  to  pur
homes  holier,  and  happier,  and  better;  and  lastly,
what  greatly  enhances  its  value  to  every  anxious
Christian,  it  affords  to  himself  a  proof  that  his
heart  is  right  towards  God:  when  4t  is  followed
up  by  a  good  life,  by  abstinence  from  sin,  and  en-
deavours after  virtue,  by  avoiding  evil  and'  doing
1,  the  proof  and  tho  satisfaction  to  be  drawn
it  are  complete.

45*


S34


SERMONS  OK  SEVERAL  SUBJECTS.


SERMON  III.


?HB  LOTS  OF  GOO.


We  lave  him,  because  he  first  loved  us.

Uohniv.  19.

Religion  out,  and  it  can  hardly,  I  flunk,  be
questioned  bat  that  it  sometimes  does,  spring  from
terror,  from  grief,  from  pain,  from  punishment,
flbm-the  approach  of  death;  and  provided  it  be
amcere,  that  is,  such  aa  either  actually  produces,
or  la  would  produce*  change  of  life, -it  is  genuine
religion,  notwithstanding  the  bitterness,  the  vio-
lence, or,  if  it  must  be  so  called,  the  baseness  and
^worthiness,  of  the  motive  -from  which  it  pro-
ceeds. We  are  not  to  narro^r  the  promises  £f
God;  and«accaptance  is  promised  to  sincere  peni-
tence, without  specifying  the  cause  from  which  it
originates,  or  confining  A  to  one  origin  more  than
another.  There  are,  however,  higher,  and  wor-
thier; and  better  motives,  from  which  religion  may
begin  in  the  heart;  and  on  this  account  especially
are  they  to  be  deemed  better  motives,  that  the  re-
ligion which  issues  from  them  has  a  greater  pro-
bability of  being  sincere.  I  repeat  again,  that  sin-
cere religion,  from  any  motive,  will  be  effectual ;
but  there  is  a  neat  deal  of  difference  in  the  pro-
bability of  its  being  sincere,  according  to  the  dif-
ferent cause  in  the  mind  from  which  it  sets  out

.The  purest  motive  of  human  action  is  the  love
of  God.  There  may  be,  motives  stronger  and
more  general,  but  none  so  pure.  The  religion,
the  virtue;  which  owes  its  birth  in  the  soul  -to  this
motive,  is  always  genuine  religion,  always  true
virtue.  Indeed,  speaking  of  religion,  I  should  call
the  love  of  Goa  not  so  much  the  groundJw.or|  of
religion^  as  religion  itself.  So  fit*  as  religion  is
disposition,  it  is  religion  itself  But  though  of  re-
ligion it  be  more  than  the  ground-work,  yet,  beinjg
a  disposition  of  mind,  like  other  dispositions,  it  is
the  ground- work^of  action.  Well  might  our  bleated
Saviour  preach  up,  as  he  didj  the  love  of  God.  It
is  the  source  of  every  thing  which  is  good  in  man.
I  do  not  mean  that  it  is  the  only  source,  or  that
goodness  can  proceed  irorn  jto  other,  but  that  of  all
prineiplea  of  conduct  it  is  the  safest,  the  best,  the
truest,  the  highest.  Perhaps  it  is  peculiar  to  the
Jewish  and  Christian  dispensations  (and,  if  it  be,
it  is  a  peculiar  excellency  in  them)  to  have  for-
mally and  solemnly  laid  down  this  principle,  as  a
ground  of  human  action.  I  shall  not  deny,  that
elevated  notions  were  entertained  of  the  Deity  by
•some  wise  and  excellent  heathens ;  but  even  these
did.  not,  that  I  can  find;  so  inculcate  the  love  of
that  Deity,  or  so  propose  and  state  it  to  their  fol-
lowers, as  to  make  it  a  governing,  actuating  prin-
ciple of  life  amongst  therm  This  did  Moses,  or
rather  God  by  the  mouth  of  Moses,  expressly,
formally,  solemnly.  This  did  Christ,  adopting,
repealing,  ratifying,  what  the.law  had  already  de-
clared ;  and  not  only  ratifying,  but  singling  it  out
from  the  body  of  precepts  which  composed  the  old
institution,  and  giving  it  a  pre-erninenee  to  every
other.

Now  this  love,  so  important  to  our  religious
character,  and,  by  its  effect  upon  that,  to  our  sal-
vation, whlcJris  the  end  of  religion;  this  love,  I
say.  is  to  be  engendered  in  the  soul,  not  so  much
'by  hearing  the  words  of  others,  or  by  instruction
"from  others,  as  by  a  secret  and  habitual  contem-
plation of  God  Almighty's  bounty,  and  by  a  con-


stant refer  ring  of  our  enkiyjuents  and  our  hopes  to
his  goodness.  This  is  in  a  great  degree  a  matte*
of  habit ;  and,  like  all  good  habits,  particularly
mental  habits,  is  what  every  person  must  form  in
himself  and  for  himself  by  endeavour  and  perse-
verance. In  this  great  article,  as  well  as  in  others
which  are  less,  every  man  must  be  the  author  to
himself  of  his  train  of  thinking,  be  it  good  or  bad.
I  shall  only  observe,  that  when  this  habit,  or,  aa
some  would  call  it,  this  turn  and  course  of  thought,
is  once  happily  generated,  occasions  will  continu-
ally arise  to  minister  to  its  exercise  and  augmenta-
tion. A  night's  rest,  or  a  comfortable  meal,  will
inimediately  direct  our  gratitude  to  God.  The  use
of  out  limbs,  the  possession  of  our  senses;  every
degree  of  health,  every  hour  of  ease,  every-  sort
of  satisfaction,  which  we  enjoy,  will  .carry  our
thoughts  to  the  same-  object.  But'  if  our  enjoy-
ments raise  our  affections,  still  more  will  our  hopes
do  the  same ;  and.  most  of  all  beyond  comparison,
those  hones  which  religion  inspires.  Think  of
man,  ana  think  of  heaven ;  think  what  he  is,  and
what,  it  is  in  nia  power  hereafter  to  become.
Think  of  this  again  and  again:  and  it  is  impossi-
ble, but  that  the  prospect  of  being  so  rewarded  for
our  poor  labours,  so  resting  from  our  past  troubles,
so  forgiven  .for  our  repented  sins>  must  fill  our
hearts  with  the  deepest  thankfulness ;  and  thank-
fulness is  love.  Towards  the  author  of  an  obliga-
tion which  is  infinite,  thankfulness  is  the  only
species  of  love  that  can  exist.

But,  moreover,  the  love  of  God  is  specifically  re-
presented in  Scripture  as  one  of  the  gifts  of  the
Holy  Ghost  The  love  of  God  shed  abroad  in.
the  heart  is  described  asjone  of  the  works  of  the
Spirit  upon  the  souls  of  Christians.  Now  what-
ever is  represented  in  Scripture  to  be  the  gift  of
the  Spirit,  is  to  be  sought  for  by  earnest  and  pe-
culiar prayer.  That  is  the -practical  use  to  be
made  or,  and  the  practical  consequence  to  be  drawn
from,  such  representations ;  the  very  purpose  pro-
bably for  which  they  were  delivered:  the  mere
point  of  doctrine  being  seldom  that  in  which
Scripture  declarations  rest.  Let  us  not  fail  there-
fore; let  us  not  cease  to  entreat  the  Father  of
mercies,  that  the  love  of  him  may  be  shed  abroad
in  our  hearts  continually.  It  is  one  of  the  things
in  which  we  are  sure  that  our  prayers  are  right  in
their  object;  in  which  also  we  may  humbly  hope,
that,  unless  obstructed  by  ourselves,  they  will  not
be  in  vain.  ,

Nor  let  it  be  said  that  this  aid  is  superfluous,
forasmuch  as  nature  herself  had  provided  suffi-
cient means  for  exciting  this  sentiment  This  is
true  with  respect  to  those  who  are  in  the  ful^  or
in  any  thing  near  the  full,  enjoyment  of  the  gifts
of  nature.  With  them  I  do  allow-  that  nothing
bur  a  criminal  stupefaction  can  hinder  the  love  o?
God  from  being  felt.  But  this  is  not  the-  case  with
all;  nor  with  any  at  all  times.  Afflictions,  sirk-
nes8,>poverty,  the  maladies  and  misfortunes  of  life,
will  interrupt  and  damp  this  sensation,  so  tar  as
it  depends  upon  our  actual  experience  of  God's
bounty.  I  do  not  say  that  the  evtfs  of  life  ought
to  have  this  effect:  taken  in  connexion  with  a  fu-
ture state,  they  certainly  ought  not ;  because,  when
viewed  in  that  relation,  afflictions  and  <*»l*n»ftifT
become  trials,  warnings,  chasf  isements ;  and  when
sanctified  by  their  fruits,  when  made  the  means
of  weaning  us  from  .the  world,  bringing  Us  nearer
to  God,  and  of  purging  away  that  dross  and  defile-
ment which  our  souk  have  contracted,  axe  in  truth


SERMONS  ON  SEVERAL  StTBJECTfJ.


536


impnMtthiefiistof  favour*  and  t>f  blessings:  ne-
vertheless, as  an  apostle  himself  confesses,  they
an  for  a  season  grievous;  tEeyare  disheartening ;
and  they  are  too  apt  to  produce  an  unfavourable
effect  upon  oar  gratitude!  Wherefore  it  is  upon
these  occasions  most  especially,  that  the  aid  of
God's  Spirit  may  be  required  to  maintain  in  our
soul*  the  love  of  God.

JM  those,  therefore,  who  an  conscious  to  them-
selves:that  they  have. not  the  Jove  of  God  within
•  them  as  they  ought  to  have  it,  endeavour  to  ac-
quire and  to  increase  this  holy  principle  by  seri-
ousness of  mint),  by  habitual  meditation,  by  de-
vout reading,  devout  conversation,  devout  society.
These  are  all  aids  and  helps  towards  inducing
upon  the  mind  this  most  desirable,  nay,  rather  let
me  cajl  it,  this  blessed  frame  and  temper,  and  of
fixing  us  in  it:  and  forasmuch  as  it  is  declared  in
Scripture  to  be  shed  abroad  in  the  -heart  by  the
Spirit  of  God,  let  us  labour  in  oar  payers  for  this
bestgift.

The  next  consideration  upon  the  subject  is  the
fruit  and  effect  of  this  disposition  upon  our  lives.
If  ii  be  asked  how  does  the  love  of  God  operate
in  the  production  of  virtuous  conduct,  I  shall  an-
swer, that  it  operates- exactly  in  the  same  manner
as  affection  towards  a. parent  or  gratitude  towards
a  human  benefactor  -operates,  by  •stirring  up  a
strong  -rebuke  in  the  mind  upon  the  thought  of
offending  aim.  This  lays  a  constant  check  upon
our  conduct.  And  this  sensation  is  tip  necessary
accompaniment  of  love;  it  cannot,  I  think,  be  se-
parated from  it-  But  it  is  not  the  whole  of  its  in-
fluence. Love  and  gratitude  towards  a  benefactor
not  only  fill  us  with  remorse  and  with  internal
ahame,  whenever,  by  our  wilful  m&behaviour,  we
have  given  cause  to  that  benefactor  to  be  displeased
with  us;  but  also  prompts  us  with  a  deain  upon
all  occasions  of  doing  what  we  believe  he  wills  to
be  done,  which,  with  respect  to  God,  is  in  other
words  a  desire  to  serve  him.  Now  this  is  not  only
a  restraint  from  vice,  -but  an  incitement  to  action.
Instructed,  as  in  Christian  countries  mankind
generally  an,  in  the  main  articles  of  human  duty,
Sua  motive  will  seldom  mislead  them.

in  one  important  respect  the  love  of  God  excels
aQ  moral  principles  whatever;  and" that  is,  in  its
comprehensiveness.  It  reaches  every  -  action;  it
includes  every  duty.  You  cannot  mention  an-
other moral  principle  which  has  this  property  in
the  same  perfection.  For  instance,  I  can  hardly
name  a  better  moral  principle  than  humanity.  It
is  at  principle  which  every  one  commends,  and
justly:  yet  in  this  very  article  of  comprehensive-
ness* it  k  deficient,  when  compared  with  the  love
of  God.  -  It  will  prompt  us  undoubtedly  toflo  kind,
and  generous,  and  compassionate.things  towards
our  mends,  oar  acquaintance,  our  neighbours,  and
towards  the  poor.  In  our  relation  to,  and  in  our
intercourse  with,  mankind,  especially  towards
those  who  are  dependent  upon  us,  or  over  whom
we  have  power,  it  will  keep  us  from  hardness,.
and  rigour,  and  cruelty.  In  all  this  it  is  excellent.
Bat  it  will  not  regulate  us,  as  we  require  to  be  re-
gulated, in  another  great  branch  of  Christian  duty,
self-government  and  self-restraint.  We  may  be
exceedingly  immoral  and  licentious  in  sinful  in-
dulgences, without  violating  our  principled  huma-
nity;  at  least,  without  specifically  violating  it,  and
without  being  sensible  of  violating  it.  And  this
j»  by  no  means  an  uncommon  case  or  character,


namely,  humanity  of  temper  subsisting  along  with
the  most  criminal  licentiousness,  and  under  a  total
want  of  personal  self-government.  .The  reason  is,
that  the.  principle  of  conduct,  though  excellent  as
far  as  it  goes,  tails  in  comprehensiveness.  Not  so
with  the  love  of  God.  He,  who  is  influenced  by
that,  feels  its  influence  in  all  jiarts  of  duty,  upon
every  occasion  -of  action,  throughout  the  whole
course  of  conduct

The  thing  with  most  of  as  tq  be  examined  into
and  ascertained  is,  whether  it  indeed  guide  us  at
all ;  whether  it  he  within  us  an  efficient  motive,  I
am  far  from  taking  upon  me  to  sas  that  it  is  essen-
tial to  this  principle  to  exclude  ajl other  principles
of  conduct  especially  the  dread  of  God's  wrath  and
of  'its  tremendous  consequences :  or.  that  a  person,
who  is  deterred  from  evu  actions  by"  the  dread  ot
Gob?s  wrath,  is  obliged  to  conclude,  that  because
he  so  much  dreads  God,  he  cannot  love  him.  '  l
will  not  venture  to  say  any' such  thing.  The
Scripture,  it  is  true,.speaxing.of  the  love  of  God,
hath  said,  that  "perfect  love  caste  th  out  fear :"  but
it  hath  not  said  t£at  in  the  soul  of  man  this  love  is
ever  perfect:  what  the  Scripture  hath  thus  de-
clared of  perfect  love  is  no  morethanAwhat  is  just
The  love  of  God,  were  It  perfect,  that  is  to  say,
were  it  such  as  his  natureyhis  relation>-his  bounty
to  us  deserves ;  were  it  adequateeither  to  its  object
or  to  our  obligation,  were  it  carried  up  as  high  aa
in  a  perfectly  rational  and  virtuous  soul  it  might
be  carried,  would,  I  believe,  absorb  every  other
motive  and  every  other  principle  of  action  what-
ever, even  the  fear  of  God  amongst  the  rest  This
principle,  by  its  nature,  might  gain  a  complete
possession  of  the  heart  and  will'  eo  that  a  person
acting  under  its  influence  would  take  nothing  else
into  the  account,  would  reflect  upon  no  other  con-
sequence or  consideration  whatever.  Possibly,
nay  probably,  this  is  the  condition  of  some  higher
orders  of  spirits,  and  may  become  ours  by  future
-improvement,  and.  in  a  more  exalted  state  of  exist-
ence': but  it  cannot,  I  am  afraid,  be  said  to  be  our
condition  now.  The  love  oi  God  subsists  in  the
heart  of  (rood  men  as  a  powerful  principle  of  ac-
tion :  but  it  subsists  there  in  conjunction  with  other
principles,  especially  with  the  fear  of  him.  All
goodness  is  in  a  certain  degree  comparative ;  and
I  think,  that  he  may  be  called  a. good  man  in
whom  this  principle  dwells  and  operates  at  all.
Wherefore  to  obtain ;  when  obtained,  to  cultivate,
to  cherish,  to  strengthen,  \o  improve  it,  ought  to
form  the  most  anxious  concern  of  our  spiritual
life.  He  that  loveth  God  keepeth  his  command-
ments ;  bat  still  the  love  of  God  is  something  more
than  keeping  the  commandments.  For  which
reason  wa  must  acquire,  what  many,  it  is  to  be
feared,  have  even  yet  to  begin,  a  habit  of  contem-
plating God  in  the  bounties  and  blessings  of  his
creation.  I  think  that  religion  can  hardly  subsist
in%the  soul  without  tlus  habit  in  some  degree.  Bat
the  greater-part  of  us,  such  is  the  natural  dulness  .
of  our  souls,  require  something  more  exciting  and
stimulating  than  the  sensations  which  large  and
general  views  of  nature  or  of  providence'  produce;
something  more  particular  to  ourselves,  and  which
more  nearly,  touches  our  separate  nappuiess.  Now
of  examples  of  this  kind;  namely,  of  direct  and
special  mercies  towards  himself,  no  one,  who  calls
to  mind  the  passaggi  and  providences  of  .his  life,
can  be  destitute,  xhere  is  one  topic  of  gratitude
falling  under  this  head,  which  almost  every  man,


686


BEEMON8  ON  SEVERAL  SUBJECT*.


who*  tolenUyfeithral  ana  extol  in  hfasehtreeot.
lections,  will  mid  in  events  upon  which  he  has  to
look  back;  and  it  k  this:  How  often  -have  we
been  spared,  when  we  might  have  been  overtaken
and  cot  off  m  the  midst  of  sin!  Of  all  the  attri-
butes of  God,  forbearance,  perhaps,  is  that  which
we  hate  moat  to  acknowledge.  We  cannot  want
occaaions  to  bring  the  remembrance  of  it  to  oar
thoughts.  Hate  there  not  been  occasions,  in
which,  ensnared  in  vice,  we  might  have  been  de-
tected and  exposed ;  have  been  crushed  by  punish-
ment of-  shame,  have  been  lirecoverably  rained  1
cccaaions  in  which  wt  might  have  been  suddenly
stricken  with  death,  in  a  state  'of  soul  the  most
unfit  for  it  that  was  possible!  That  we  were
none  of  these,  that  we.  nave  been  preserved  from
these  dangers,  that  oar  sin  was  not  ouruestruc-
thm,  that  instant  judgment  did  not  overtake  us,  is
to  be  attributed  to  the  long-suffering  of  God.  Sup-
posing, what  is  undoubtedly  true,  that  the  secrets
of  our  conduct  were  known  to  him  at*  the  time,  it
can  be  attributed  to  no  other  cause.  Now  this  is
a  topic  which  son  never  mil  to  supply  subjects  of
thankfulness,  and  of  a  species  of  thankfulness,
which  must  bear  with  direct  force  upon  the  regu-
lation of  our  conduct.  We  were  not  destroyed
when  we  might  have  been  destroyed,  and  when
we  merited  destruction/  We  have  been  preserved
for  farther  trial  This  is,  or  ought  to  be  a  touch-
ing reflection.  How  deeply,  therefore,  does  it  be-
hove us  not  to  trifle  with  the  patience  of  God,  not
to  abuse  this  enlarged  space,  this  respited,  pro-
tracted season  of  repentance,  by  plunging  afresh
into  the  same  crimes,  or  other^or  greater  crimes  ?
It  shows  that  we  are  not  to  be  wrought  upon  by
mercy :  that  our  gratitude  k  not  moved  j  that
things  are  wrong  within  us;  that  there  is  a  de-
plorable void  ami  chasm  in  our  religious  prin-
ciples, the  lore  of  God  not  heing^present  in  our
hearts.

But  to  return  to  that  with  which  we  set  out :  relU
gion  may  spring  from  various  principles,  begin  in
various  motives.  It  is  not  for  us  to  narrow  the  pro-
mises of  God  which-belong  to  sincere  religion,
from  whatever  cause  it  originates.  But  of  these
principles,  the  purest  the  forest,  is  the  love  of
God,  forasmuch  as  the  religion  which  proceeds
from  it  is  sincere,  constant,  and  universal.  It  will
not,  like  fits  of  terror  and  alarm  (which  yet  we  do
not  despise')  produce  a  temporary  religion.  The
love  of  Uod  is  an  abiding  principle.  It-win1  not,
like  some  other,  (and  these  also  good  and  laudable
principles  of  action,  as  for  as  they  go,)  produce  a
partial  religion.  It  is  co-extensive  with  all  our
obligations.  Practical  Christianity  may  be  com-
prised in  thne  wordss  devotion,  self-government,
and  benevolence.  The  love  of  God  in  the  heart
is  a  fountain,  from  which  these  three  streams  of
virtue  will  not  foil  to  issue.  The  love  of  God
also  ia  a  guard  against  error  in  conduct,  because
« is  a  guard  against  those  evil  influences  which
mislead  the  understanding  in  moral  questions:  In
some'  measure,  it  supplies  the  place  of  every  rule.
He  who  has  it  truly  within  him,  has  little  to  learn.
Look  stead&stly  to  the  will  of  God,  which  he  who
loves,God  necessarily  does,  practise  what  you  be-
lieve to  be  well  pleasing  to  him,  leave  off  what  you
believe  to  be  displeasing  to  him :  cherisli,  confirm,
strengthen  the  principle  itself  which  sustains  this
course  of  external  conduct,  and  you  will  not  want
many  lessons,  you  need  not  listen  to  any  other


SERMON  IV.  ?x -  —

lrjaniTATiKO  upon  RXtranwc

Have  I  net  remembered  thee  in  my  bed?  mad
thought  upon  thee  when  I  was  mking? —
Psalm  lxhi  7.  •

The  life  of  God  hi  the  soul  of  man,  as  it  ia
f**i&n*+  emphatically  called,  the  Christian  life,
that  ia,  or  the  progress  of  Clinstasnity  in  the  heart
of  any  particular  person,  is  marked,  amongst  other
things,  by  rengjoar  gradually  gsining  poser  saiau  of
tl»  thoughts.  It  has  been*^tb*t,tf  we  thought
shoot  religion  as  it  deserved,  we  should  never
think  shout  any  thing  else;  nor  with  strictness,
perhapa, -can  we  deny  the  truth  of  tins  proposition.


Religious  concerns  do  so  surpass  and  outweigh  in
value  and  importance  all  concerns  beside,  that  (fid
they  occupy  a  place  in  oar  minds  proportioned  1o
that  importance,  they  would,  in  truth,  exclude
every  other  but  themselves.  I  am  not,  therefore,
one  of  those  who  wonder  when  I  see'  a  man  en*
grxmed  with,  religion :  the  wonder  with  me  is,
that  men  care  ana  think  so  little  concerning  k.
With  all  the  allowances  which  must  be  made  for
our  employments,  our  activities,  oar  anxieties,
about  the  interests  and  occurrences  of  the  present
life,  it  is  still  true,  that  oar  forgetnilnesSjand  neg-
ligence, and  mdinerence  about  religion  are  00001
greater  than  can  be  excused,  or  can  easily  be  ac-
counted for  by  these  causes. Few


busy  but  that'they  contrive  to  find  time  for  any
'" " their  neart  is  set  upon,  and  thought


any  subject  in  which  they  are  interested:  they
want  not  leisure  for  these,  though  they  want  let-
sure  for  religion.  Notwithstanding,  therefore,  sin-
gular  cases,  if  indeed  there  be  any  cases  of  being
over-religious,  over-intent  upon  spiritual  aJfitira,
the  Teal  and  true  complaint  is  all  on  theother  side,
that  men  think  not  about  them  enough,  as  they
ought,  as  is  reasonable,  as  it  is  then*  duty  to  do.
Thai  is  the  malady  and  the  mischief  The  cast
and  turn  of  our  infirm  and  fleshly  nature  lean  all
on  that  side.  For,  first,  this  nature-is  affected
chiefly  by  what  we  see.  Though  the  things
which  concern  us  most  deeply  be  not  seen ;  for
this  very  reason,  that  they  are  not  seen,  they  do
not  affect  us  as  they  ought.  Though  these  things
ought  to  be  meditated  upon,  and  must  be  acted
upon,  one  way  or  other,  long  before  we  come  ac-
tually to  experience  them,  yet  in  feet  we  do  not
meditate  upon  them,  we  do  not  act  with  a  view  to


shall  indeed  experience  what  they  are.

The  world  of  spirits,  the  world  for  which  we
are  destined,  is  invisible  to  us.  Hear  St  Paul's
account  of  this  matter:  "We  look  not  at  the
things  which  are  seen,  but  at  the  things  which
are  not  seen ;  for  the  things, which  are,  seen  are
temporal,  but  the  things  which  are  not-  seen  are
eternal."  "  We  walk  by  faith,  not  by  sight;  feith
is  the  evidence  of  things  not  seen."  Some  great
invisible  agent  there  must  be  in  the  universe;
"  the  things  which  are  seen  were  not  made  of
things  which  do  appear.*  Now  if  the  great  Au-
thor of  all  things  be  himself  invisible  to  oar  senses,
and  if.  our  relation  to  him  must  necessarily  form
the  greatest  interest  and  concern  of  our  existent*,
then  it  follows,  that  our  greatest  interest  and  000-


SERMONS  OJ¥  SEVERAL  SUBJECTS.


637


©em  are  with  those  things  which  are  now  invisi-
ble. "We  are  saved  by  hope,  bat  hope  that  is
seen  is  not  hope:  for  what  a.  man  seeth,  why  doth
he  yet  hope  fori  but  if  we  hope  for  that  we  see
no(,  then  do  we  with  patience  wait  for  It."  The
-first  'infirmity,  therefore,  which  religion  has  to1
conquer  within  u*;  is  that  which  binds  down  our
attention  to  the  things  which  wtf  see.  The  natu-
ral man  is  immersed  in  sense :  nothing  takes  hold
of  his  mind  but  what  applies  immediately  to  his
sense;  but  this  disposition  will  not  do  for  religion  :
the  religious  character  is  founded  in  hope,  as  con-
tradistinguished from  experience,  in  perceiving  by
the  mind  what  is  not  perceived  by  the  eve :  unless
a  man  can  do  this,  he  cannot  be  religious :  and
with  many  it  is  a  great  difficulty.  This  power  of
hope,  which,-  as  St.  Paul  observes  of  it,  is  that
which  jrfaoes  the  invisible  world  before  our  view,
is  specifically  described  in  Scripture,  as  amongst
the  gifts, of  the' Spirit,  the  natural  man  standing
indeed  much  in  need  of  it,  being;  altogether  of  an
opposite  tendency.  Hear  St.  Paul's  prayer  for
his.  Roman  converts;  "  The  God  of  hope  fill  you
with  all  joy  and  peace  in  believing,  that  you  may
abound  m  hope  through  the  power  of  the  Holy
Ghost"  Again  to  the  Galatians,  how  does  he
describe  the  state  of  mind  of  a  Christian  1  "  we
through  the  Spirit  wait  for  the  hope  of  righteous^
nessj  by  forth.''

Again;  another  impediment  to  the  thought  of
religion  is  the  faculty  and  the  habit  we  have  ac-
oained  of  regarding  its  concerns  as  at  a  distance,
A  child  is  ejected  by  nothing  but  what  is  present,
and many  thousands. in  this  respect  continue
children  all  their  lives.  In  a  degree  this  weakness
cleaves  to  us  all ;  produces  upon  us  the  same  effect
tinder  a  different  form;,  namely,  in  this  way,
when. we  find  ourselves  necessarily  disturbed  by
near  or  approaching  evil,  we  have  the  means  of
forgetting  the  nearness  or  the  approach  of  that,
which  must  bring  with  it  the  greatest  evil  or  the
greatest  good  we  are  capable  of,  our  change  at
death.  -Though  we  cannot  exactly  oner  any  ar-
~gument*to-show  that  it  is  either  certainly  orjpro-
habhr  at  a  distance,  yet  we  have  the.  means  of  re-
jrarding  it  in  our  minds  as .  though  it  were  at  a
distance;  and  this  even  in  cases  in  which  it  can-
not possibly  be  so. Do  we  prepare  for  it  1 no :
why  1  because  we  regard  it  in  our  imaginations
as  at  a  distance :  we  cannot  prove  that  it  is  at  a
diatance;  nay,  the  contrary  may  be  proved  against
OS :  but  still  we  regard  it  so  in  our  imaginations,
and  regard  it  so  practically ;  for  imagination  is
with  most  men  the  practical  principle. But,  how-
ever strong  and  general  this  delusion  be,  has  it
any  foundation  in  reason  1 Can  that  be  thought
at  a  distance  which  may  come  to-morrow,  which
most  come  in'  a  few  years'? in  a  very  few  years
to  moat  of  us,  in  a  few  years  to  all,  it  will  be  fixed
and  decided,  whether  we  an  to  be  in  heaven  or
bell ;  yet  we  go  on  without  thinking  of  it,  with^
out  preparing  for.it :  and  it  is  exceedingly  observa-
ble, that  it  is  only  in  religion  we  thus  put  away
the  thought  from  us. In  the  settlement  of  our
worldly  attain  after  our  deaths,  which  exactly  de-
pend on  the  same  event,  commence  at  the  same
time,  are  equally  distant,  if  either  were  distant,
equally  nable  to  uncertainty  as  to  when  the  dispo-
sition wiH  take  place ;%  in  these,  I  say,  men  are  not
usually  negligent,  or  think  that  by  reason  of  its
diatance  it  can  be  neglected,  or  by  reason  of  the
'  ' f  whan  it  mayhappen,  left  unprovided


for.  This  is  a  flagrant  Inconsistency,  and  proves
decisively  that  religion  possesses  a  small  portion
of  our  concern,  in  proportion  with  what  it  ought
to  do.  For  instead  of  giving  to  it  that  superiority
which  is  due  to  immortal  concerns,  above  those
which  are  transitory,  perishable,  and  perishing,  it
is  not' even  put  upon  an  equality  with  them;  nor
with  those  which,  in  respect  Jo  time,  and  the  un-
certainty of  time,  are  under  the  same  circum-
stances with  itself.

Thirdly ;  the  spiritual  character  of  religion  iff
another  great  impediment  to  its-  entering  our
thoughts.  An  religion,  which  is  effectual,  is,  and
must  be,  spiritual.  Offices  and  ordinances  are
the  handmaids  and  instruments  of  the  spiritual
religion,  calculated  to  generate1,  to  promote;  to.
maintain,  to  uphold  it  in  the  heart,  but  the  thing
itself  is  purely  spiritual.  Now  the  t)e*h  weighed*
down  the  spirit,  as  with  a  load  and  burden.  It  is
difficult  to  rouse  the  human  constitution  to  a  sense
and  perception  of  what  is  purely  spiritual.  They
who  are  addicted,  not  only  to  vice,  but  to  gratifi-
cations and  pleasures ;  they  who  know  ho  other
rule  than  to  go  with  the  crowd  in  their  career  of
dissipation  and  amusement;  they  whose  atten-
tions are  all  fixed  and  engrossed  by  business,
whose  minds  from  morning  to  night  are  counting
and  computing ;  the  weak,  and  foolish,  and  stu-
pid ;  lastly,  which  comprehends  a  class  of  man-
kind deplorably  numerous,  the  indolent  and  sloth-
ful ;  none  of  these  can  bring  themselves  to  medi-
tate upon  religion.  The  last  class  slumber  over
its  interests  and  concerns ;  perhaps  they  cannot
be  -said  to  forget  it  absolutely,  but  they  slumber
over  the.  subject,  in  which  state  nothing  as  to
their  salvation  gets  done,  no  decision,  no  practice.
There  are,  therefore,  we  see,  various  obstacles
and  infirmities  in  our  constitutions,  which  obstruct
the  reception  of  religious  ideas  in  our  mind,  still
more  such  a  voluntary  entertainment  of  them  as
may  bring  forth  fruit.  It  ought,  therefore,  to  be
our  constant  prayer  to  God.  that  he  will  open  our
hearts  to  the  influence  of  nis  word,  by  which  is
meant  that  he  will  so  quicken  and  actuate  the
sensibility  and  vigour  of  our  minds,  as  to  enable
us  to  attend  to  the  things  which  really  and  truly
belong  to  our  peace.

So  soon  as,  religion  gains  that  hold  and  that
possession  of  the  heart,  which  it  must  do  to  be-
come the  means  of  our  salvation,  things  change
within  us,  as  in  many  otl^er  respects,  so  especial-
ly in  this.  We  think  a  great  deal  more  frequent-
ly about  it,  we  think  of  it  for  a  longer  continu-
ance, and  our  thoughts  of  it  have  much  more  of
vivacity  and  impressiveness.  First,  we  begin  to
think  of  religion  more  frequently  than  we. did.
Heretofore  we  never  thought  of  it  at  all,  except,
when  some  melancholy  incident '  had  sunk  our
spirits,  or  had  terrified  our  apprehensions;  it  was
either  from  lowness  or  from  fright  that  we  thought
of  religion  at  all.  -Whilst  tilings  went  smoothly,
and  prosperously,  and  gaily  with  us,  whilst  all
was  well  and  safe  in  our  health  and  circumstances,
religion  was  the  last  thing  we  wished  to  turn  our
minds  to:  we  did  not  want  to  have  our  pleasure
disturbed  by  it.  But  it  is  not  so  with  us  noV:
there  is  a  change  in  our  minds  in  this  respect.  It
enters  our  thoughts  very  often,  both  by  day  and
by  Jiight,.  "  Have  I  not  remembered  thee  in  my
bed.  and  thought  upon  thee  when  I  was  waking?"
This  change  is  one  of  the  prognostications  of  the
religious  principle  forming  within  us. Secondly,


538


SERMONS  ON  SEVERAL  SUBJECTS.


these  thought*  settle  themselves  upon  oar  minds.
They  were  formerly  fleeting  and  transitory,  as
the  cloud  which  passes  along  the  sky ;  and  they
were  so  for  two  reasons;  first,  they  found  no  con-
genial temper  and  disposition  to  rest  upon,  no  se-
riousness, no  posture  of  mind  proper  for  their  re-
ception; and,  secondly,  because:  we  of  our  own
accord,  by  a  positive  exertion  and  endeavour  of
our  will,  put  them  away  from  us,  we  disliked
their  presence,  wc  rejected  and  cast  them  out.
But  it  is  not  so' now;  we  entertain  and  retain  re-
ligious meditations,  as  brine,  in  fact,  those  which
concern  us  most  deeply.  1  do  hot  speak  of  the.
•olid  comfort  which  is  to  be  found  in  th«m,  be-
cause that  -belongs  to  a  more  advanced  state  of
Christian  fife  than  t  am  now  considering :  that
will  come  afterwards;  and,  when  it  does  come,
will  form  the  support,  and  consolation,  and  happi-
ness of  our  lives. .  But  whilst  the  religious  princi-
ple is  forming,  at  least  during  the  first  steps  of'
tjiat  formation,  we  are  inducedto  think  about  reli-
gion chiefly  from' a  sense  of  its  vast  consequences :
and  this  reason  is  enough  to  make  wise  men
think  about  it  both  long  and  closely.  Lastly,  our
religious  thoughts  come  to  -have  a  vivacity  and
impressiveness  in  them  which  they  had  not  hither-
to: that  is  to  say,  they  interest  us  much  more
than  they  did.  There  is  a  wonderful  difference
in  the  light  in  which  we  see  the  same  thing,  in
the  force  and  strength  with  which  it  rises  Up  be-
fore our  view,  in  the  degree  with  which  we  are
affected  by  it.  This  difference  is  experienced  in
no  one  thing  more  than  in  religion,  not  only  be-
tween different  persons,  but  by  the  same  person
at  different  times,  the  same  person  in  different
stages  of  the  Christian  progress,  the  same  person
under  different  measures  of  divine  grace.

Finally,  would  we  know  whether  we  have
made,  or  are  making,  any  advances  in  Chris-
tianity or  not?  These  are  the  marks  which  will
tell  us.  Do  we  think  more  frequently  about  reli-
gion than  we  used  to  do  1  Do  we  cherish  and  enter-
tain thsse  thoughts  for  a  longer  continuance  than
we  did  1  Do  they  interest  us  more  than  former-
ly ?  Do  they  impress  us  more,  do  .they  strike  us
mote  forcibly,  do  they  sink  deeper  3  If  we  per-
ceive this,  then  we  perceive  a  change,  upon  which
we  may  ground  good  hopes  and  expectations ;  if
we  perceive  it  not,  we  have  cause  for  very  afflict-
ing apprehensions,  that  the  power  of  religion  hath
not  yet  visited  us ;  cause  for  deep  and  earnest  in-
tercession with  God  for  the' much  wanted  succour
of  his  Holy  Spirit,


SERMON  V.

, t OP  THE  STATE  AFTER  DEATH.

.  Beloved,  now  are  we  the  sons  qf  God;  and  it
doth  not  yet  appear  what  we  shall  be :  but  we
know  thai,  when  he  shall  appear,  we  shall  be
Wee  him;  for  we  shall  see  him  as  he  is. —
I  John  iil  g.

Onb  of  the  most  natural  solicitudes  of  the  hu-
man mind,  is  to  know  what  will  become  of  us  af-
"  ter  death,  what  is  already  become,  of  those  friends
who  are  gone.  I  do  not  so  much  mean  the  great
question,  whether  we  and  they  shall  be  happy  or
miserable,  as  I  mean  the  question,  what  is  the  na-


ture and  condition  of  that  state  which  we  are  so
soon  to  try.  *  This  solicitude,  which  is  both  natu-
ral and  strong,  is  sometimes,  however,  carried  too
far:  slid  this  is  the  case,  when  it  renders  as  un-
easy, or  dissatisfied,  or  Impatient  under  the  ob-
scurity in  which  the  subject  is  placed :  and  placed,
not  only  in  regard  to  us,  or  in  regard  to  common
men,  but  in  regard  even  to  the  apostles  them*
selves  of  our  Lord,  who  were  taught  float  his
mouth,  as  well  as  immediately  instructed  by  ma
-Siririt.  Saint  John,  the  author  of  the  text  which
I  nave  read  to  you,  waa  one  of  these ;  not  only  an
_apostte,  but  of  all  the  apostles*  perhaps,  the  mast
closely  connected  with  his  Master,  and  admitted
to  the  most  intimate  familiarity  with  him.  What
it  was  allowed,  therefore,  for  man  to  know,  Saint
John  knew.  Yet  this  very  Saint  John  acknow-
ledges "  that  it  doth  not  yet  appear  what  we  snail
be ;  the  exact  nature,  and  condition,  and  circum-
stances of  our  future  state  are  yet  bidden  from  ua\
I  think  it  credible  that  this  may,  in  a  very  great  de-
gree, arise  from  the  nature  of  the  human  under-
standing itself.  Our  Saviour  said  to  Nkxxfemua, "  If
I  have  told  you  earthly  things;  and  ye  believe  not.
how  shall  ye  believe,  if  I  tellyou  of  heavenly  thing*?*
It  is  evident  from  the  strain  of  this  extraordinary
conversation,  that  the  disbelief  on  the  part  of  Nioo-
demus,  to  which  our  Saviour  refers,  -w*s  thai
which  arose  from  the  difficulty  of  comprehending
the  subject:  Therefore  our  Saviour  s  wowJa  to
him  may  be  construed  thus:  If  what  I  have  just
now  said  concerning  the  new  birth,  concerning
being  born  again,  concerning  being  bom  of  the
Spirit,  concerning  the  agency  of  the  Spirit,  which
are  all  "earthly  things,"  that  is,  are  aU  things  that
pass  in  the  hearts  of  Christians  in  Una  their  pre-
sent life,  and' upon  this  earth ;  if  this  information
prove  so  difficult,  that  you  cannot  bring  yourself
to  believe  it,  by  reason  of  the  difficulty  of  appre-
hending it ;  "  how  shall  ye  believe  1"  now  would
ye  be  able  to  conquer  the  much  greater  difficulties
which  would  attend  my  discourse,  "  if  I  told  yon
heavenly  thing*  V  that  is  to  say,  if  I  apeak  to  yon
of  those  things  which  are  passing,  .or  which  will
pass,  in  heaven,  in  a  totally  different  state  and
stage  of  existence;  amongst  natures  and  beinga
unlike  yours  1  The  truth  •seems  to  he,  that  the
human  understanding,  constituted  as  it  is,  though
fitted  for  the  purposes  for  which  we  want  it,  that
is,  though  capable  of  receiving  the  instruction  and
knowledge,  which  are  necessary  for  our  conduct
and  the  discharge  of  our  duty,  has  a  native  origi-
nal incapacity  for  the  reception  of  any  distinct
knowledge  of  our  future  condition.  The  reason
is,  that  all  our  conceptions  and  ideas  are  drawn
from  experience,  (not,  perhaps,  all  immediately
from  experience,  but  experience  lies  at  the  bottom
of  them  all,)  and  no  language,  no  information,  no
instruction,  can  do  more  for  us,  than  teach  ua  the
relation  of  the  ideas  which  we  have.  Therefore,
so  far  as  we  can  judge,  no  words  whatever  that
could  have  been  used,  no  account  or  deecrtpUan
that  could  have  been  written  down,  would  have
been  able  to.  convey  to  us  a  conception  of  out  fu-
ture state,  constituted  as  our  understanding*  now
are.  I  am  far  from  saying,  that  it  waa  not  in  the
power  of  God,  by  immediate  inspiration,  to  have
Ftruck  light  and  ideas  into  our  minds,  of  which  na-
turally we  have  ho  conception.  I  am  far  from  say-
ing, that  he  could  not,  by  an  act  of  hia  power,  have
assumed  a  human  being,  or  the  soul  of  a  human  be-
ing into  heaven;  and  have  shown  to  huh  or  it,  the


SERMONS  ON  SEVERAL  SUBJECTS.


nature  arid  the  .glories  of  that  kingdom;  but  it  is
evident,  that,  unless  the  whole  order  of  our  present
world  be  changed,  such  revelations  as  these  must
be  rare;  must  be  limited  to  ver^  extraordinary
persons,  and4  very  extraordinary  occasions:  And
even  then,  with  reaped  to  others,  it  is  to  be  ob-
served, that  the  ordinary  modes  of  communication
by  speech'  or  writing  are  inadequate  to  the  trans-
mitting of  any  knowledge  or  information  of  this
sort:  and  from  a  cause,  which  has  already  been
noticed,  namely,  that  language  deals  only  with  the
ideas  which  we  have ;  that  these  ideas  are  all  found-
ed in  experience ;  that  probably,  most'  probably
indeed,  the  things  of  the  next  World  are  very  re-
mote from  any,  experience  which  we  have  in  this ;
the  consequence  of  which  is,  that,  though  the  in-
spired person  might  himself  possess  this  superna-
tural knowledge,  he  could  not  impart  it  tp  any
other  person  not  in  like  manner  inspired.  Wljcn,
therefore,  the  nature  and  constitution  of  the  hu-
man understanding  is  considered,  it  can  excite  no
surprise,  it  ought  to  excite  no  complaint,  it  is  no
Jair  objection  to  Christianity,  "  that  it  doth  not  yet
appear  what  we  shall  be."  1  do  not  say  that  the
imperfection  of  pur  understanding  forbids  it/  (for,
in  strictness  of  speech,  mat  is  not  imperfect  which
answers  the  purpose  designed  by  it,),  but  the  pre-
sent constitution  of  our  understanding  forbids  it.

"  It  doth  not  yet  appear,'*  saith  the  apostle,
"what we  shall  be,  but  this  we  know,  that,,  when
he  s^all  appear,  we  shall'  be  like  him.""  As  if
he  had  said.  Though  we  be  far  from  understand-
ing the  subject  either  accurately  or  clearly,  or  from
having  conceptions  and  notions  adequate  to  the
truth  and  reality  of  the  case,  vet  we  know  some-
thing: this,  for  instance,  we  know,  that,  "when
he  snail  appear,  we  shall  be  like  him."  '  The  best
commentary  upon  this  last  sentence  of  Saint  John's
text  may  be  drawn  from  the  words  of  Saint  Paul.
His  words  state  the  same  proposition  more  fully.
when  he  tells  us  (Phil.  iii.  21)  "  that  Christ  shall
change  our  viletody,  that  it  may  be  like  his  glo-
rious body."  From  the  two  passages  together^  we
may  lay  down  the  following  points.  First,  that
we  shall  have  bodies.  One  apostle  informs  us,
that  we  shall  be  like  him ;  the  other,  that  our  vile
body  shall  be  like  his  glorious  body.:  therefore  we
shall  have  bodies.  Secondly,  that  these  bodies
shall  be  greatly  changed  from  what  they  are  at
present.  If  we  had  had  nothing  but  Saint  John's
text  to  havegone  upbn,  this  would  have  been  im-
plied. "  When  he  shall  appear,  we  sjtitll  be  like
him.11  We  are  not  like  him  now,  we  shall  be  like
him :  we  shall  hereafter  be  like  him,  namely,  when
he  snail  appear.  Saint  John's  words  plainly  re-
gard this  similitude  as  a  future  thing,  as  what  we
■hall  acquire,  as  belonging  to  what  we  shall  be-
come, m  contradistinction  to  what  we  are/  There-
fore they  imply  a  change  which  must  take  place
in  our  bodily  constitution.  Bat  what  Saint  John's
words  imply,- Saint  Paul's  declare.  "He  shall
change  our  vile  bodies."  That  point,  therefore,
may  be  considered  as  .placed  put  of  question.

That  such  a  change  is  necessary,  that  such  a
change  is  to  be  expected,  is  agreeable  even  to  the
established  order  of  nature.  T^toughout  the  uni-
verse this  Tule  holds,  viz.  that  the  body  of  every
animal  is  suited  to  its  state.  Nay,  more;  when  an
animal  changes  its  state^  it  changes  its  body.
When  animals  which  lived  underwater,  after-
wards live  in  air,  their  bodies  are  ©hanged  almost
entuelf ,  so  at  hardly  to  be  known  by  any  one


mark  of  resemblance  to  their  former  figure ;  as,  for
example,  from  worms  and  caterpillars,  to  flies  and
moths.  These  are  common  transformations ;  and
.the  like  happens,  when  an  animal  changes  its  ele-
ment from  the  water  to  the  earth,  or  an  insect  from
living  under  .ground  to  flying  abroad  in  the  air.
And  these  changes  talte  place  in  consequence  of
that,  unalterable  rule,  that  the  body  be  fitted  to  the
state ;  which  rule  obtains  throughout  every  region
of  nature  with  which  we  are  acquainted.  Now
our  present  bodies  are  by  no  means  fitted  for  hea-
ven. So  saith  Saint  Paul  expressly,  "  Flesh  and
blood  cannot  inherit  the  kingdom^  of  pod ;  cor-
ruption doth  not  inherit  incorruption."  Between
our  bodies  as  they  are  now  constituted,  and  the
state  into  which  we  shall  come  then,  there  is  a
physical,  necessary,  and  invincible"  incongruity.
Therefore  they  must  undergo  a  cjiange,  and  that
change  will,  first,  be  universal,  at  least  as  to  those
who  shall  be  saved ;  secondly,  it  will  be.  sudd  en ;
thirdly,  it  will  be  very  great.  First,  it  will  be  uni-
versal. Saint  Paul's  words  in  the  fifteenth  chap-
ter of  his  first  epistle  to  the  Corinthians  are,  "  We
shall  all  be  changed.11  I  do,  however,  admit,  that
this  whole  chapter  -of  Saint  Paul's  relates  only
to  those  who  shall  be  saved :  of  no  others  did  he
intend  to  speak.  This,  I  think,  has  been  satis-
factorily made  out ;  but  the  argument  is  too  long
to  enter  upon  at  present.  If  so,  the  expression
of  the  apostle,  "  We  shall  all  be  changed,  proves
only  that  we  who  are  saved,  who  are  admissible
into  his  kingdom,  shall  be  changed.  Secondly,
the  change  will  lie  instantaneous.  So  Saint  Paul
describes  it ;  "  In  a  moment,  in  the  twinkling  of
an  eye,  the'  dead  shall  bo  raised  incorruptible ;"
and  "therefore  their  nature  must  have  undergone
the  change.  Thirdly,  it  will.be  very  great.  No
change,  which  we  experience  or  see,  can  bear  arty
assignable  proportion  to  it  in  degree  or  importance.
It  is  this  corruptible  putting  on  incorruption ;  it  is
ihis  mortal  putting  on  immortality.  Now  it  has
often  been  made  a  auestion,  whether,  after  so  great
a  change,  the  bodies,  with  which  we  shall  be
clothed,  are  to  be  deemed  new  bodies,  or  the  same
bodies  under  a  new  form.  This  is  a  question
which  has  often  been  agitated,  but  the  truth  is,  it
is  of  no  moment  or  importance.  We  continue
the  same  to  ail  intents  and  purposes,  so  long  as  we
are  sensible  and  conscious  tnat  we  are  so.  In  this
life  our  bodies  are  continually  changing.  Much,
no  doubt,  and  greatly  is  the  body  of  every  human
being  changed  from  his  birth  to  his  maturity ;  yet,
because  we  are  nevertheless  sensible  of  what  we
are,  sensible  to  ourselves  that  we  are  the  same,  we
are  in  reality  the'  same.  Alterations,  in  the  size
or  form  of  our  visible  persons,  make  no  change  in
that  respect. Nor  would  they,  if  they  were  much

greater,  as  in  some  animals  they  are ;  or  even  if
ley  were"  total.  Vast,  therefore,  as  that  change
must  be,  or  rather,  as  the  difference  must  be  be-
tween our  present  and  our  future  bodies,  as  to  their
substance,  their  nature,  or  their  form,  it  will  not
hinder  us  from  remaining  the  same,  any  more  than
the  alterations  which  our  bodies  undergo  in  this
life,  hinder  us  from  remaining  the  same.  We
know  within  ourselves  that  we  are  the  same;  and
that  is  sufficient :  and  this  knowledge  or  con-
sciousness we  shall  rise  with  from  the  grave,  what-
ever be  the  bodies  with  which  we  be  clothed.

The  two  apostles  go  one  step  further  when  they
tell  us,  that  we  shall  be  like  Christ  himself ;- and
that  this  likeness  will  consist  in  a  resemblance  to


640


SERMONS  ON  SEVERAL  SUBJECTS.


his  glorified  body. Now  of  the  glorified  bo&f  of
Christ  all  that  we  know  is  this. At  the  transfiV

£  ration  upon  the  mount,  the  three  apostles  saw
9  person  of  our  Lord  in  a  very  different  state
from  its  ordinary  state.  "  He  was  transfigured
before  them,  and  his  face  did  shine  as  the  son,
and  his  raiment  was  white  as  the  light"  Saint
Luke*  describes  it  thus:  "The  fashion  of  his
countenance  was  altered,  and  hia  raiment  was
White  and  glistening :  and  behold  there  talked  with
him  two  men  who  appeared  in  glory."  Then  he
adds,  "  that  the  apostles,  when  they  awaked,  saw
his  glory."  Now  I  consider  this  transaction  as  a
specimen  of  the  change  of  which  a  glorified  body.
is  susceptible.  Saint  Stephen,  at  his  martyrdom,
saw  the  glory  of  God,  and  Jesus  standing  at  the
right  hand  of  God.  Saint  Paul,  at  his  conversion,
saw  a  light  from  heaven,  above  the  brightness  of
the  sun,  shining  round  about  him  ;  and  in  this  light
Christ  then  was.  These  instances,  like  the  for-
mer, only  show  the  changes  and  the  appearances.
of  which  a  glorified. body  is  susceptible,  not  the
form  or  conduipn  in  which  it  must  necessarily  be
found,  or  must  always  continue.  You  .will  ob-
serve, that  it  was  necessary  that  the  body  of  our
Lord  at  his  transfiguration,  at  his  appearance  after
hia  resurrection,  at  his  ascension  into  heaven,  at
his  appearance  to  Stephen,  should  preserve  a  re-
semblance *to  his  human  person  upon  earth,  be-
cause it  was  by-that  resemblance  akme  he  could
be  known  to  his  disciples,  at  least  by  any  means
of  knowledge  naturally  belonging  to  them  in  that
human  state.  But  this  was  not  always  necessary  j
&er  continues  to  be  necessary.  Nor  is  there  any
sufficient  reason  to  suppose,  that  this  resemblance
to  our  present  bodies  will  be  retained  in  our  fu-
ture bodies,  or  be  at  all  wanted.  Upon  the  whole,
the  conclusions,  which  we  seem  authorised  to
draw  from  these  intimations  of  Scripture,  are,

First,  that  we  shall  have  bodies.

Secondly,  that  they  will  be  so  far  different  from
our  preserit  bodies,  as  to  be  suited,  by  that  diffe-
rence, to  the  state  and  life  into  which  they  are
to  enter,  agreeably  to  that  rule  which  prevails
throughout  universal  nature ;  that  the  body  of
every  being  is  suited  to  its  state,  .and  that,  when
it  changes  its  state,  it  changes  its  body.

Thirdly,  that  it  is  a  question  by  which  we  need
not  at  all  be  disturbed,  whether  the  bodies  with
which  we  shall  arise  be  new  bodies,  or  the  same
bodies  under  a  new  form ;  for,

Fourthly,  no  alteration  will  hinder  us  from
remaining  the  same,  provided  we  are  sensible  and
conscious  that' we  ere  so;  any  more  than  the
changes  which  our  visible  person  undergoes  even
in  this  life,  and  which  from  infancy  to  manhood
are  undoubtedly  very  great,  hinder  us  from  being
the  same,  to  ourselves  and  in  ourselves,  and  to  all
intents  and  purposes  whatsoever.

Lastly,  that  though,  from  the  imperfection  of
our  faculties,  we  neither  are,  nor,  without  a  con-
stant miracle  upon  our  minds,  could  be  made  able
to  conceive  or .  comprehend  the  nature  of  our
future  bodies;  yet  we  are  assured  that  the  change
will  be  infinitely  beneficial ;  that  our  new  bodies
will  be  infinitely  superior  to  those  which  we  carry
•bout  with  us  in  our  present  state;  in  a  word,
that  whereas  our  bodies  are  now  comparatively
vile,  (and  are  so  denominated,)  they  will  so  far
rise  in  glory,  as  to  be  made  like  unto  his  glorious
body;  that  whereas,  through  our  pilgrimage  here,
we  have  borne,  that  which  we  inherited,  the


image  of  the  earthy ,  ef  our  parent,  thefirst  Adam,
created  far  a  life  upon  this  earth ;  we  ahaU,m  our
future  state,  bear  another  image,  a  new  resem-
blance, that  of  the  heavenly  inhabitant,  the  se-
cond man,  the  second  nature,  even  that  of  the
Lord  from  heaven.


SERMON  VL

ON  PUBITT  OP  THE  HEiRT  AND  AFFECTIONS,

Beloved,  now  are  we  the  sons  of  God:  and  it
doth  not, yet  appear  what  we  shall  be;  but  we
know  that,  when  he  shall  appear ,  we  shall  be
like  him  ;  for  we  shall  see  him  as  he  is.  And
every  man  that  hath  this  hope  in  him  puri/ictk
himself ,  even  as  he  is  pure.— 4  John  liL  3,  3.

When  the  text  tells  us,  "  that  every  man  that
hath  this  hope  in  him  punfieth  himself,"  it  must
be  understood  as  intending  to  describe  the  natu-
ral, proper,  and  genuine  effects  of  this  hope,
rather,  perhaps,  than  the  actual  effects,  or  at  least
as  effects,  which,  in  point  of  experience,  uni-
versally follow  from  it  As  hath  already  been
observed,  the  whole  text  relates  to  sincere  Chris-
tians, and  to  these  alone ;  the  ward  tee,  in  the
preceding  part  of  it,  comprises  sincere  Christiana,
and  no  others.  Therefore  the  word  every  man,
must  be  limited  to  the  same  sort  of  men,  of  whom
he  was  speaking  before.  It  is  not  probable,  that
in  the  same  sentence  he  would  chance  the  persons
and  characters  concerning  whom  he  discoursed.
So  that  if  it  had  been  objected  to  Saint  John,  that,
in  point  of  fact,  every  man  did  not  purify  himself
who  had  this  hope  in  him,  he  would  have  replied,
I  believe,  that  these  were  not  the  kind  of -persons
he  had  in  his  view ;  that  throughout  the  whole
of  the  text,  he  had  in  contemplation  the  religious
condition  and  character  of  sincere  ''Christians,
and  no  other.  When  in  the  former  part  of  the
text,  he  talked  of  we  being  the  sons  of  God,  of  we
being  like  Christ,  he"  undoubtedly  meant  sincere
Christiana  alone ;  and  it  would  be  strange  if  he
meant  anv.other  in  this  latter  part  of  the  text,
which  is  in  fact  a  continuation  of  the  same  dis-
course, of  the  same  subject,  nay,  a  portion  of  the
same  sentence.

I  have  said  thus  much  in  order  to  obviate  the  con-
trariety which,  there  seems  to  be  between  Saint
John's  assertion  and  experience.  Experience,  I
acknowledge,  proves  the  inefficacy,  in  numerous
case?,  of  religious  hope  and  religious  motives :
and  it  must  be  so ;  for  if  religious  motives  ope-
rated certainly  and  necessarily,  if  they  produced
their  effect  by  an  infallible  power  over  the  mind,
we  should  only  be  machines  necessarily  actuated ;
and  that  certainly  is  not  the  thing  which  a  moral
agent,  a  religious  agent,  was  intended  to  be.  It
was  intended  that  we  should  have  the  power  of
doing  right,  and,  consequently,  of  doing  wrong ;
for  he  who  cannot  do  wrong,'  cannot  do-  right  by
choice ;  he  is  a  mere  tool  and  instrument,  or  ra-
ther a  machine,  whichever  he  does.  Therefore  all
moral  motives,  and  all  religious  motives,  unless
they  went  to  deprive  man  of  his  liberty  entirely,
which  they  most  certainly  were  not  meant  to  do,
must  depend  for  their  influence  and  success  upon
the  man  himself.
This  success,  therefore,  is  various;  bat  when


SERMONS  ON  SEVERAL  SUBJECTS.


511


ft  fails,  it  is  owing  to  some  vice  and  corruption  in
the  mind  itsel£  Some  men  are  very  little  affected
-by  religious  exhortation  of  any  kind,  either  by
hearing  or  reading.  That  is  a  viee  and  corrup-
tion in  the  mind  itself  Some  men,  though
affected,  are  not  affected  sufficiently  to  influence
their  lives.  That  is  a  vice  and  corruption  in  the
mind,  or  rather  in  the  heart ;  and  so  it  will  always
be  found.  But  I  do  not  so  much  wonder  at  per-
sons being,  unaffected  by  what  others  tell  them,
be  those  others  who  |pey  may,  preachers,  or
teachers,  or  friends,  or  parents,  as  I  wonder  at
seeing  men  not  affected  by  their,  own  thoughts,
their  own  meditations ;  ,yet  it  is  so;  and  When  it
is  so,  it 'armies  a  deep  corruption  of  mind  indeed.
We  can  think  upon  the  most  serious,  the  most
solemn  subjects,  without  any  sort  of  consequence
upon  our  lives.  Shall  we  call  this  seared  insensi-
bility 1  shall  wer  call  it  a  fatal  inefficiency  of  the
rational  principle  within  usl  shall  we  confess,
that  the  mind  has  lost  its  government  over  the  man  1
These  are  observations  upon  the.state  of  morals
and  religion,  ss  we  see  them  in  the  world :  but
whatever  these  observations  be,  it  is  still  true,  and
'TOyis  Saint  John's  assertion,  that-  the  proper,


_  tarsi;  and  genuine  effect  of  religious  hope  is  to
cause  us  to  strive  "  to  purify  ourselves,  even  as  he
is  pare."  Saint  John  strongly  fixes  our  attention,
I  mean,  as  he  means,  such  of  us  as  are  sincere
Christians,  upon  what  we  are  to  be  hereafter.
This,  as  to  particulars,  is  veiled  from  us,  as  we
have  observed,  by  our  present  nature,  but  as  to
generals,  as  to  what  is  of  real  importance  and
concern  for  us  to  know  (I  do  not  mean  but  that
it  might  be  highly  gratifying  and  satisfactory  to
know  more,  bujt  as  to  what  is  of  the  first  import-
ance and  concern  for  us  to  know,)  we  have  a
glorious  assurance,  we  have  an  assurance  that  we
shall*  undergo  a  change  in  our  nature  infinitely
for  the  better ;  that  when  be  shall  appear  glorified
as  he  is,  we  shall  be  like  him.  Then  the  point
is,  what  we  are  to  do,  how  we  are  to  net,  under
this  expectotion,  having  this  hope,  with  this  pros-
pect placed  before  our  eVes.  Saint  John  tells  us,
*'-we  are  to  purify  ourselves,  even  s*  he  is  pure."
New  what  is  the  Scriptural  meaning  of  puri-
fying ourselves  can  be  made  out  thus.  The  con-
trary of  purity  is  defilement,  that  is  evident :  but
oar  Saviour  himself  hath  told  us  what  the  things
which  defile  a  man  are ;  and.  this  is  the  enume-
ration ;  evil  thoughts,  adulteries,  fornications,.
murders,  thefts,  cQveto'usness,  wickedness.,  deceit,
lasciviousness,  an  evil  eye,  blasphemy,  pride,  fool-
ishness ;  and  the  reason  given  why  these  are  the
real  proper  defilements  of  our  nature  is,  that  they
proceed  from  within,  out  of  the  heart :  these  evil
things  come  from  within,  and  defile  the  man.
The  seat,  therefore,  of  moral  defilement,  according
to  our  Saviour,  is  the  heart ;  by  which  we  know,
that  he  always  meant  the  affections  and  the  dis-
position. The  seat,  therefore,  of  moral  purity
must  necessarily  be  the  same ;  for  purity  is  the


reverse  of  -defilement :  consequently,  to  purify
ourselves,  is  to  cleanse  our  hearts  from  the  pre-
sence and  pollution  of  sin ;  of  those. sins  particu-
larly, which  reside  in,  and  continue  in  the  heart.
This  is  the  purgation  intended  in  our  text.  This
is  the  task  of  purgation  enjoined  upon  us.

It  is  to  be  noticed,  that  it  goes  beyond  the  mere
control  of  our  actions.  It  adds  a  further  duty,  the
purifying  of  our  thoughts  and  affections.  Nothing
can  be  more  certain,  than  that  it  was  the  design


of  our  Saviour,  in  the  passage  here  referred  to,  Id
direct  the  attention  of  his  disciples  to  the  hearty  to
that  wnich  is  within  la  man,  in  contradistinction
to  that  which' is  external.  Now  he  who  only
strives  to  control  his  outward  actions,  but  lets  his
thoughts  and  passions  indulge  themselves  without
check  or  restraint,  does- not  -attend  to  that  which1
is  within  him,  in  .'contradistinction  to  that  which
is  external.  Secondly,  the  instances  whkh  our
Saviour  -  has  given,  though,  like  all  instances  in
Scripture,  and  to  say  the -truth,  in  all  ancient
writings,  .they  be  specimens  and  iUustrations  of
his  meaning,  ss  to  the  kind  and  nature  of  the
duties  or  the  -vices  which  he- had  in  view,  rather
than  complete  catalogues,  including  all  such
duties  or  vices  by  name,  so  that  no  other  but  what
are  thus  named  and  specified  were  intended:
though  this  qualified  way  of  understanding  the
.enumerations  be  right,  yet  even  this  enumeration
itself  shows,  that  our  Saviour's  lesson  went  beyond
the  mere  external  action.  Not-  only  are  adulte-
ries and  fornications  mentioned,  but  evil  thoughts
and  lasciviousness ;  not  only  murders,  but  an  evil
eye;  not  only  thefts,  butcovetousnessoT  coveting*.
Thus  by  laying  the  axe  to  the  root;  not  by.  top-
ping off  the  branches,  but  by  laying  the  axe  to
the  root,  our  Saviour  fixed  the  only  rule  whkh
can  ever  produce  good  morals.

Merely  controlling  the  actions,  without  go-
verning the  thoughts  and  affections,  will  -not  do.
In  point  of  fact  it  is  never  successful.  It  is  cer-
tainly not  a  compliance  with  our  Saviour's  com-
mand, nor  is  it  what  St.  John  meant  in  the  taxi
by  purifying  ourselves.

"  Every  man  that  hath  this  hope  in  him  purt-
fieth-  himself,  even  as  he,"  namely,  Christ  himself,
"  is  pure."  It  is  a  doctrine  and  lesson  of  the  New
Testament,  not  once,  but  repeatedly,  inculcated,
that  if  we  hope  to  resemble  Christ  in  his  glorified
state,  we  must  resemble  him  in  his  human  state.
And  it  is  a  part, 'and  a  most  significant  part,  of.
this  doctrine,  that  the  resemblance  must  consist  ia
purity  from  sin,  especially  from  those  sins  which
cleave  and  attach  to  the  heart  It  is  by  Saint
Paul,  usually  pit  thus:  "If  we  be  dead  with
Christ,  we  believe  that  we-  shall  also  live  with
him."  "Dead  with  Christ;"  what  can  that
mean  1  for  the  apostle  speaks  to  those  who  had
not  yet  undergone  natural  death.  He  explains :
'* Reckon  yourselves  to  be  dead  unto  an;*'  -that,
you  hear,  is  the  death  he  means.  "He  that  is
dead,  is  freed  from  sin ;"  that  is  Saint  Paul's  own
exposition  of  his  own  words;  and  then,  keep-
ing the  sense  of  the  words  in  bis  thoughts,  he
adds ;  "  if  we  be  dead  with  Christ,  we  believe
that  we  shall  also  Kve  with  him."  Again,  still
keeping  the  same  sense  in  view,  and  no  other
sense :  "If  we  have  been  planted  together  in  the
likeness  of  his'  death,  we  shall  be  also  in  the  like-
ness of  his  resurrection."  Once  more,  but  stUl
observe  in  the  same  sense,,"  We  are  buried  with
him  by  baptism  unto  death ;  our  old  man  is  cruci-
fied with  him."  The  burden  of  the  whole  passage
is,  that  if  we  hope  to  resemble  what  Christ  ism  hea-
ven, we  must  resemble  what  he  was  upon  earth ;
and  that  this  resemblance  must  consist  specifically
in  the  radical  casting  off  of  our  sins.  The  ex-
pressions of  the  apostle  are  very  strong ;  "that  the
body  of  sin  may  be  destroyed.  Let  not  sin  reign
in  your  mortal  body ;  obey  it  not  in  the  lusts  there*
of;1'  not  only  in  its  practices,  but  in  its  desires,
"  Sin  shall  not  have  doniinion  over.  you,M
46


SERMONS  ON  SEVERAL  SUBJECTS.


In  another  epistle,  that  to  the  Cploasjans,  Sunt
Paul  speaks  of  an  emancipation  from  sin,  aa  a  vir-
tual rising  from  the  dead,  like  as  Christ  rose  from
the  dead.  "  If  ye  then  be  men  with  Christ,  seek
those  things  that  are  above,  where  Christ  sitteth
at  the  right  hand  of  God:  set  your  affections  on
things  above,  not  on  things  of  the  earth;  for  ye
are  dead,  and  your  life  is  hid  with  Christ  in  God.
When  Christ,  who  is  onr  tile  shall  appear,  then
■halite  also  appear  with  him  in  glory.  In  this
way  la  the  comparison  carried  on.  And  what
is  the  practical  exhortation  which  it  suggests?
"Mortify,  therefore,  your  members t  winch  are
«pon  the  earth,  fornication,  uncleanness,  evil  con-
scenes,  and  covetousness;''  which  »  an  equi-
nt  exhortation,  and  drawn  from  the  same  pre*
«,  as  that  of  the  text;  "Purify  yourselves,
•van  as  he  is  pure."

The  Scriptures  then  teach,  that  we  are  to  make
ourselves  like  Christ  upon  earth,  that  we  may  be-
come like  him  in  heaven,  and  this  likeness  is  to
consist  in  purity.

Now  there  are  a  class  vof  Christians,  and  I  am
ready  la  allow,  real  Christians,  to  whom  this  ad-
■wnstion  of  the  text  is  peculiarly  necessary.

They  are  not  those  who  set  aside  religion ;  they.
are  not  those  who  disregard  the  will  of  their  Ma-
ker, but  they  are  those  who  endeavour  to  obey  him
pastislly,  and  in  this  way:  finding  it  an  easier
thing  to  do  good  than  to  expel  their  sins,  espe-
cially those  which  cleave  to  their  hearts,  their  af-
fcctaons,  or  their  imaginations,  they  set  their  en-
deavours more  towards  beneficence  than  purity.
You  say  we  ought  not  to  speak  disparagingly  of
doing  good:  by  no,  means;  but  we  affirm,  that  it
is  not  the  whole  of  our  duty,  nor  the  most  difficult
part  of  it  j  in  particular,  it  is  not.  that  part  of  it
which  is  moisted  upon  In  the  text,  and  in  those
other  Scriptures  that  have  been  mentioned.  The
text,  enjoining  the  imitation  of  Christ  upon  earth,
in  order  that  we  may  become  like  him  in  heaven,
does  not  say,  do  good  even  as  he  went  about -doing
good,  but  it  says ;  "  purify  yourselves  even  as.  he
is  ptfce : "  so  saith  Saint  John.  "  Mortify  the  deeds
of  the  body,  let  not  sin  aeign  in  you ;  die  with
Christ  unto  sin;  be  baptized  unto  Jesus  Christ,
that  is,  unto  his  death ;  be  buried  with  him  by
baptism  unto  death ;  be  planted  together  in  the
likeness  of  his  death ;  crucify  the  old  man,  and
destroy  the  body  of  am ;  as  death  hath  no  more
dominion  over  him,  so  let  sin  no  mora  reign  in
your  mortal  Mies:"  so  Saint  Paul  All  .these
atrong.and  significant  metaphors  are  for  the  pur-
•  pose  of  impressing  more  forcibly  upon  us  this
great  lesson  K  that  to  participate  with  Christ  in  his
glory,  we  must  participate  with  him  in  his  humi-
liation ;  and  that  this  participation  consists  in  di-
vesting ourselves  of  those  sins,  of  the  heart  espe-
cially, and  affections,  whether  they  break  out  into
action  or  not,  which  are  inconsistent  with  that
purity,  of  which  he  left  us  an  example ;  and  to
the  attainment  and  preservation  of  which  purity,
we  are  moot  solemnly  enjoined  to  direct  our  first,
it,  and  our  most  sincere  endeavours.


SERMON  VII.

OP  THX  DOCTRINE  OP  CONVEHSTON.

lam  wot  coins  to  call  the  righteous,  but  tinner*,
-to  repentance.— Matthew  ix.  13.


It  appears  from  these*  words*  that  our  Saviour
in  his  preaching  held  in  view  the  character  and
spiritual  situation  of  the  persons  whom  he  ad-
dressed ;  and  the  differences  which  existed  amongst
men  in  these  respects :  and  that  he  had  a  regard
to  these  considerations,  more  especially  in  the
preaching  of*  repentance  and  conversion,  Now  I
think,  that  these  considerations  have  been  toe
much  omitted  by  preachers  of  the  Gospel  since,
particularly  in  this  very  article ;  and  that  the  doc-
trine itself  has  suffered  by  such  omission.

It  has  been  usual  to  divide  all  mankind  into  two
classes,  the  converted  and  tjie  unconverted ;  and,
by  so  dividing  them,  to  infer  the  necessity  of  con-
version to  every  person  whatever.  In  proposing
the  subject  under  this  form,  we  state  the  distinc-
tion, in  my  opinion,  too  absolutely,  and  draw  from
it  a  conclusion  too  universal :  because  there  is  a
class  and  description  of  Christians,  who,  having
been  piously  educated,  and  having  persevered  in
those  pious  courses  into  which  they  were  first
brought,  are  not  conscious  to  themselves  of  ever
having  been  without  the  influence  of  religion,  of
ever  having  lost  sight  of  its  sanctions,  of  ever  hav-
ing renounced  them;  of  ever,  in  the  general
course  of  their  conduct,  having  m>ne  against  them.
These  cannot  properly  be  reckoned  either  con-
verted or  unconverted.  They  are  not  converted,
for  they  are  not  sensible  of  any  such  religious  al-
teration having  taken  place  with  them,  at  any  par-
ticular time,  as  can  properly  be  called  a  conver-
sion., They  are  not  Unconverted,  because  that
implies  a  state  of  ^reprobation,  and  because,  if  we
call  upon  them  to  be  converted,  (which  if  they  be
unconverted  we  ought  to  do,)  they  will  not  well
understand  what  it  is  we  mean  them  to  do ;  and,
instead  of  being  edified,  they  may  be  both  much
and  unnecessarily  disturbed!,  by  being  so  called
upon.

There  is,  in  the  nature  of  things,  a  great  variety
of  religious  condition.  It  arises  from  hence,  that
exhortations,  and  calls,  and  admonitions,  which
are  of  great  use  and  importance  in  themselves,
and  very  necessary  to  be  insisted  upon,  are,  ne-
vertheless, not  wanted  by  all,  arc  not -equally  ap-
plicable to  all,  and  to  some  are  altogether  inap-
plicable. This  holds  true  of  most  of  the  topics  of
persuasion  or  warning,  which  a  Christian  teacher
can  adopt.  When  we  preach  against  presump-
tion, for  instance,  it  is  not  because  we  suppose  that
all  are  presumptuous  \  or  that  it  is  necessary  for
all,  or  every  one,,  to  become  more  humble,  or  diffi-
dent, or  apprehensive  than  he  now  is :  on  the  con-
trary, there  may,  amongst  our  hearerB^be  low,  and
timorous,  and  dejected  spirits,  who,  if  they  take
to  themselves  what  we  say,  may  increase  a  dispo-
sition which  is  already  too  much ;  "or  be  at  a  loss  to
know  what  it  is  herein  that  he  would  enjoin  upon
them.  Yet  the  discourse  and  the  doctrine  may,
nevertheless,  be  very  good ;  and  for  a  great  portion
of  our  congregation,  very  necessary.  The  like,  I
thmk,  is  the  case  with  the  doctrine  of  conversion.
If  we  were  to  omit  the  doctrine  of  conversion,  we
should  omit  a  doctrine,  which,  to  many, -must  be
the  salvation  of  their  souls.  To  them,  all  calls
without  this  call,  all  preaching  without  this  doc-
trine, would  be  in  vain ;  and  it  may  be  true,  that
a  great  part  of  our  hearers  are  of  this  description.
On  the  other  hand,  if  we  press  and  insist  upon
conversion,  as  indispensable  to  all  for  the  purpose
of  being  saved,  we  should  mislead  some,  who
would  not  apprehend  how*hey  could  be  required


SERMONS  ON  SEVERAL  SUBJECTS.


549


Id  turn,  or  be  converted  to  religion,  who  were  ne-
ver, that  they  knew,  either  indifferent  to  it,  or
alienated  from  it.

In  opposition,  "however,  to  what  is  here-  said',
%  then?  are  who  contend,  that'  it  is  necessary  for
every  man  living  to  be  converted  before  he  can  be
saved:  This  opinion  undoubtedly  deserves  serious
consideration,  because  it  founds  itself  upon  Scrip-
ture, whether  rightly  or  erroneously  interpreted  is
the  question.  The  portion  of  Scripture  upon
which  they  who  maintain  the  opinion  chiefly  rely,
is  our  Saviour's  conversation  with  Nicodemus,
recorded  in  the  third  chapter  of  St.  John's  Gospel.
Our  Saviour  is  there  stated  to  have  said  to  Nicode-
mus,"  Except  a  man  be  born  again,  he  cannot  see
tile  kingdom  of  God ;  and  afterwards,  as  a  confirms-
tion;  and,  in  some  sort,  an  exposition,  of  his  as-
sertion, to  have  added,  "  Except  a  man  be  born  of
water  and  of  the  Spirit,  he  cannot  enter  into,  the
kingdom  of  God."  It  is  inferred  from  this  passage,
that  all  person*  whatever  mast  undergo  a  conver-
sion, before  they  be  capable  of  salvation :  and  it
Cannot  be  said  that  this  is  a  forced  or  strained  in-
ference: bat  the  question  before  us  at  present  is,
is  it  a  necessary  inference  1  I  am  not  unwilling
to  admit,  that  this  short,-  but  very  remarkable  con-
versation, is  fairly  interpreted  of  the  gift  of  the
Spirit,  and  that  when  this  Spirit  is  given,  there  is
a  Dew  birth,  a  regeneration ;  but  I  say,  that  it  is
no  where  determined  at  what  time  of  life,  or  un-
der what  circumstances,  this  gift  is  imparted :  nay,
the  contrary  is  intimated  by  comparing  it  to  the
blowing  of  the  wind,  which,  in  its  mode  of  action,
is  out  of  the  reac{i  of  our  rules  and  calculation :
H  the  wind  bloweth  where  it  listeth,  andthou  bear-
cat the  sound  thereof,  but  canst  not  tell  whence
it  coroeth,  and  whither  it  goeth;  so  is  every  one
that  is  born  of  the  Spirit"  The  effect  of  this  un-
certainty is,  that  we  are  left  at  liberty  to  pray  for
spiritual  assistance;  and  we  do  pray  for  it,  in  all
stages,  and  under  all -circumstances  of  our  exist-
ence. We  pray  for  it  in  baptism,  for  those  who
are  baptized ;  we  teach  those  who  are  catechised,
to  pray  for  it  in  their  catechism :  parents  pray  for
its  aid  and  efficacy  to  give  effect  to  their  parental
instructions,  to  preserve  the  objects  of  their  love
and  eare  from  sin  and  wickedness,  and  from  every
spiritual  enemy :  we  pray'for  it,  particularly  in  the
office  of  confirmation,  for  young  persons  just  en-
tering into  the  temptations  of  life.  Therefore  spk
ritual  assistance  ma*y  be  imparted  at  any  time,
from  the  earliest  to  the  latest  period  of  our  exist-
ence; and  whenever  it  is  imparted,  there  is  that
being  born  of  the  Spirit  to  which  our  Saviour's
words  refer.'  And  considering  the  subject  as  a
matter  of  experience,  if  we  cannot  ordinarily  dis-
tinguish the  operations  of  the  Spirit  from  those  of
ear  own  minds,  H  seems  to  follow/that  neither  can
-we  distinguish  when  they  commence ;  so  that  spi-
ritual assistance  may  be  imparted-,  and  the  thing
designated  by  our  Lord's  discourse  satisfied,  with*
out  such  a  sensible  conversion,  that  a  person  can
fix  his  memory  upon  some  great  and  general
change  wrought  in  nim  at  an  assignable  time.

Tqe  consciousness  of  a  great'  and  general
change  may  be  the  feet  with  many.  It  may  be
essentially  necessary  to  many. .  I  only  allege,
that  it  is  not  so  to  all,  so  that  every  person,  who
is  not  conscious  of  such  a  change,  must  set  him-
self down  as  devoted  to  perdition.

This;  I  repeat,  is  all  1  contend  for;  for  I  by  no
means  intend  to  say  that  any  one  is  without  sin,


and  in  thaTtense  not  to  stand  in  need  of  conver-
sion; still  less,  thqtany  sin  is  to  be  allowed,  and
not;  on  the  contrary,  strenuously  and  sincerely  re-
sisted 4md  forsaken.  I  only  maintain,  that  there
may  be  Christians  whd  are,  and  -have  been,  in
such  a  religious  state,  that  no  such  thorough  and
radical  change  as  is  usually  meant  ty  conversion,
is  or  was  necessary  for  them ;  and  that  they  need
not  be  made  miserable  by  the  want  of  conscious-
ness of  such  a  change,  i

I  do  not,  in  the  smallest  degree,  mean  to  under-
value, er  speak  lightly  of  such  changes;  whenever
ox  in  whomsoever  they  take  place :  nor  to  deny
that  they  may  be  sudden,  yet  lasting,  (nay,  I  am
rather  inclined  to  think  that  it  is'  in  this  -manner
that  they  frequently  do  take  place ;)  nor  to  dispute
what  is  upon  good  testimony  alleged  concerning
conversion  brought  about  by  affecting  incidents  of
life ;  by  striking  passages  of  Scripture ;  by  impres-
sive discourses  from  the  pulpit;  by  what  we  meet
with  in  bopks;  or  even  by  single  touching  sen-
tences or  expressions  in  sum  discourses  or  books.
I  am  not  disposed  to  question  these  relations  un-
necessarily, but  rather  to '  bless  God  for  such  in-
stances, when  I  hear  of  them,  and  to  regard.them
as  merciful  ordinations  T»f  his  providence.

But  it  will  be  said,  that  conversion  implies  a
revolution  of  opinion.  Admitting  this  to  be  so,
such  a  change  or  revolution  cannot  be  necessary
to  all,  because  there  is  no  system  of  religious
opinions,  in  which  some  have  not  been  brought
up  from  the  beginning.  -  To  change  {rom  error
to  truth  in  any  great  and  important  article  of  re-
ligious belief,  deserves,  I  allow,  the  name  of  con-
version ;  but  all  cannot  be*  educated  in  «rror,  on
whatever  side  truth  be  supposed  to  Jie.  . .

-  To  me,  then,  it  appears,  that  although  it  can-
not be  stated  with  safety,  or  without  leading  to
consequences  which  may  confound  and  alarm
many  good  men,  that  conversion  is  necessary  to
all,  and  under  all  circumstances ;  yet  I  think,  that
there  are  two  topics  of  exhortation,  which  together
comprise' the  whole  Christian  life,  and  one  or
other  of  which  belongs  to  every  man  living,  and
these  two  topics  are  conversion  and  improvement;
when  conversion  is  noi  wanted,  improvement  is.

'Now  this' respective  preaching  or  conversion  or
improvement,  according  to  the,  respective  spiritual
condition  of  those  who  hear  us,  or  read  what  we
write,  is  authorised  by  the  example  of  Scripture
preaching,  as  set  forth  in  the  New  Testament.
It  is  remarkable,  that,  in  the  four  Gospels  and*  the
Acts  of  the  Apostles,  we  read  incessantly  of  the
preaching  of  repentance,  which  I  admit  to  mean
conversion.  Saint  John  the  .Baptist's  < preaching
set  out  with  it:  our  Lord's  own  preaching  set  eat
with  it.  It  was  the  subject  which  he  charged
upon  his  twelve  apostles  to  Breach.  Jt  was  the
subject  which  he  sent  forth  his  seventy  disciples
to  preach.  It  was  the  subject  which  the  first
missionaries  of  Christianity  pronounced  and
preached*,  in  every  place  which  they  came  to,  in.  the
course  of  their  progress  through  different  coun-
tries. Whereas,  in  the  epistles  written  by  the
same  persons,  we  hear  proportionably  much  less
of  repentance,  and  much  more  of  advance,  profi-
ciency, progress,  and  improvement  in  holiness  of
life :  and  of  rules  and  maxims  for  the  leading  of  a
holy  and  godly  life.  These  exhortations  to  con-
tinual improvement,  to  sincere,  strenuous,  and
continual  endeavours  after  improvement,  are  de-
livered under  a  variety  of  expressions,  but  with  a


544


SERMONS  ON  SEVERAL  SUBJECTS.


strength  and  earnestness,  sufficient  to  show  what
the  apostles  thought  of  the  importance  of  what
they  were  teaching.

Now  the  reason  of  the  difference  is,  that  the
preaching  of  Chriat  and  his  apostles,  as  recorded
in  the  Gospels,  and  in  the  Acta  of  the  Apontlea,
was  addressed  to  Jews  and  Gentiles,  whom  they
called  upon  to  become  disciples  of  the  new  religion.
This  call  evidently  implied  repentance  and  con-
version. Bat  the  epistles,  which  the  apostles,
and  some  of  which  the  same  apostles,  wrote  after-
wards, were  addressed  to  persons  already  become
Christians;  and  to  some  who,  like  Timothy,  had
been  such  from  their  earliest  youth,  Speaking
to  these,  you  find,  they  dwell  upon  improvement,
proficiency,  contained.  endeavours  after  higher
ftnd  .greater  degrees  of  -holiness  and  purity,  in-
stead of  saying  so  much  about  repentance  and
Tf*  " *  %*  '* ' "


his  conduct  was  highly  rational,
and  was  an  adaptation  of  their  ^instruction  to  the
circumstances  of  the  persons  whom  they  addressed,
and  may  be  an  example  to  us,  in  mooeHing  our
exhortations  to  the  different  spiritual  conditions
of  our  hearers.
Seeing,  then,  that  the  two  great  topics  of  our

ment*,  it  remains  to  be  considered,  who  they  are
to  whom  we  must  preach  conversion,  and  who  they
an  to  whom  we  must  preach  improvement
-  First;  Nowof  the  persons  in  our  congregations,
to  whom  we  not  only  may, -but  must,  preach  tfee
doctrine  of  conversion  plainly  and  directly,  are
those  who,  with  the  name  indeed  of  Christians,
have  hitherto  passed  their  lives  without  any  in-
ternal'religion  whatever;  who  have  not  at  all
thought  Upon  the  "subject;  who,  a  few  easy  and

'  Customary  forms  excepted,  (and  which  with  them
mre  mere  forms,  J  cannot  truly  say  of  themselves,
that  they  have  done  one  action  which  they  would
not  have  done  •equally,  if  there  had  been  no  such
thing  as  a  God  in  the  world ;  or  that  they  have
ever  sacrificed  any  passion,  -any  present  enjoy-
ment, or  even  any  inclination  of  their  minds,  to
the  restraints  and  prohibitions  of  religion ;  with
whom  indeed  religious  motives  have  not  weighed
a  feather  in  the  scale  against  interest  or  pleasure.
To  these  it  is  utterly  necessary  that  we  preach
conversion.  At  this  day- we  have  not  Jewa^and
Gentiles  to  preach  to ;  but  these  persons  are  really
in  as  unconverted  a  state  as  any  Jew  or  Gentile
could  be  in  our  "Saviour's  time.  They  are  no
more  Christians,  as  to- any  actual  benefit  of  Chris-
tianity to  tneir  souls,  than  the  most  hardened  Jew,
or  the  most  profligate  Gentile  was  in  the  age  of
the  Gospel.  As  to  any  difference  in  the  two
oases,  the  difference  is  ail  against  them.  These
must  be  .converted,  before  they  can  .be  saved.
The  course  of  their  thoughts  must  be  changed,
the  very  principles  upon  which  they  act  must  be
changed.  Considerations,  which  never,  or  which
hardly  ever  entered  into  their  minds,  must  deeply
and  perpetually  engage  them.  Views  and  mo-
tives, which  did  not  influence  them  at  all,  either  as
checks  from  doing  evil,  or  as  inducements  to  do
good,  must  become  the  views  and  motives  which
they  regularly  consult,  and  by.  which  they  are
guided :  that  is  to  arfy,  there  must  be  a  revolution
of  principle:  the  visible  conduct  will  follow  the
change ;  out  there  must  be  a  revolution  within^

-A  change  so  entire,  so  deep,  so  important  as  this,'
1  do  allow  to  be  a  conversion;  and  no  one  who  is
m  the  situation  above  described,  can  be  saved


without  undergoing  H;  and  he  must  necessarily
both  be  sensible  of .  it  at  the  time,  and  remember
it  all  hjs  life  afterwards,  it  is  too  momentoBs  an
event  ever  to  be  forgot.  A  man  ought  as  easily
forget  his  escape  from  a  shipwreck. — Whether  it
was  sudden,  or  whether  it  was  gradual,  if  it  was
effected,  (and  the  fruits  will  prove  that,)  it  was  a
true  conversion:  and  every  such  person  may
justly  both  believe  and  *&y  of  himself,  that  he
was  converted  at  a  particular  assignable  time.  It
may  not  be  necessary  to  speak  of  his  conversion,
but  he  will  always  think  o(  it  with  unbounded
thankfulness  to  the  Giver  of  all  grace,  the  Author
of  all  mercies,  spiritual  as  well  as  temporal.
-  Secondly :  Tne  next  description  of  persons,  to
whom  we  must  preach  conversion,  properly  sa
called,  are  those  who  allow  themsehes  in  die
course  and  hafiit  of  some  particular  sin.  With
more  or  less  regularity  in  other  articles  of  behavi-
our, there  is  some  particular  sin,  which  they  prac-
tise constantly  aha  habitually,  and  allow  them-
selves in^hat  practice.  Other  sins  they  strive
against ;  but  in  this  they  allow  themselves.  Now
no  man  can  go  on  in  this  course,  consistently
with  the  hope  of  salvation.  Therefore  it  must  be
broken  off  The  essential  and  precise  difference
between  a  child  of  God  and  another  is.  not  so
much  in  the  number  of  sins  into  which  he  may
fell  (though  that  undoubtedly  be  a  great  difference,
yet  it  is  not  a  precise  difference ;  that  ia  to  say,  a
difference,  in  which  an  exact  tine  of  separation
can  be  drawn,)  but  the  precise  difference  is,  that
the  true  child  of  God  allows  himself  in  no  sin
whatever.  Cost  what  it  may,  he  contends  against,
he  combats,  all  sin ;  which  he  certainly  cannot  be
said  to  do,  who  is  still  in  the  course  and  habit  of
some  particular  sin ;  for  as  to  that  sin,  he  reserves
it,  he  compromises  it  Against  other  sins,  and
other  sorts  of  sin,  he  may  strive;  in  this  he  allows
himsejf.  If  the  child  of  God  sin,  he  does  not  al-
low himself  in  the  sin;  on  the  contrary,  hegrieves,
he  repents,  he  rises  again ;  which  is  a  different
thing  from  proceeding  in  a  settled  self-allowed
course  of  sinning.  Sins  which  are  compatible
with  sincerity,  are  much  more  likely  to  be  objects
of  God's  forgiveness,  than  sins  that  are  not  so;
which  is  the  case  with  allowed  sins.  Are  there
then  some  sins,  in  which  we  five  continually  1
some  duties,  which  we  continually  neglect  1  we
are  not  children  of  God;  we  are'  not  sincere  dis-
ciples of  Christ  The  allowed  prevalence  of  any
one  known  sin,  is -sufficient  to  exclude  us  from
the  character  of  God's  children.  And  we  must
be  converted  from  that  sin.  in'  order  to  become
such.  Here  then  we  must  preach  conversion.
The  habitual  drunkard,  the  habitual  fornicator,
the  habitual  cheat  must  be  converted.  Now  such
a  change  of  principle,  of  opinion,  and  of  sentiment,
as  no  longer  to  allow  ourselves  in  that  which  we
did  allow  ourselves,  and  the  actual  sacrifice  of  a
habit,  the  breaking  off  of  a  course  of  sinful  indul-
gence, or  of  unfair  gain,  in  pursuance  of  the  new
arid  serious  views  which  we  nave  formed  of  these
subjects,  is  a  conversion.  The  breaking  off  of  a
habit,  especially  when  we  had  placed  much  of  our
gratification  in  it,  is  alone  so  great  a  thipg,  and
such  a  step  in  our  Christian  life,  as  to  merit  the
name  of  conversion.  Then  as  to  the  tjme  of  our
conversion,  there _can  be  little  question  about  that.
The  drunkard  was  converted,  when  Jie  left  off*
drinking;  the  fornicator,  when  he  gave  up  his
criminal  indulgences,  haunt*;  and  connexions ;  the


SERMONS  ON  SEVERAL  SUBJECTS.


615


cheat,  when  be  Uuitted  his  dishonest  practices,
however  gainful  and  successful :  provided,  in  these
several  cases,  that  religions  views  and  motives  in-
fluenced the  determination,  and  a  religious  cha-
racter accompanied  and  followed  these  sacrifices.

In  these  two  cases,  therefore,  men  mast  be  con-
verted, and  live i  or  remain  unconverted,  and  die.
And  the  time  of  conversion  can  be  ascertained.
There  must  that  pass  within  them,  at  some  par-
ticular, assignable  time,  which  is,  properly  a  con-
version ;  and  will,  all  their  lives,  be  remembered.
as  such.  This  description,  without  all  doubt,
comprehends  great  numbers;'  rfhd  it  is  each  per-
son's -business  to  settle  with  himself,  whether  he
be  not  of  the  number ;  if  he  be,  he  sees  what  irto
be  done.  ...

But  I  am  wiHing-  to  believe,  that  there  are  very
many  Christiana)  who.  neither  have  in  any  part  of
their  fives  been  without  influencing  principles,
nor  have  at  any  time  been  involved  in  the  habit
and  course  of  a  particular  known  sin,  or  have  al-
lowed themselves  in  such  course  and  practice.
Sins,  without  doubt,  they  have  committed,  more'
than  sufficient  to  humble  them  to  the  dust ;  but
they  have  riot,  to  repeat  the  same  words  again,
lived  in  a,  course  of  any  particular  known  sin,
whether  of  commission  6r  neglect ;  and  by  deli-
beration, and  of  aforethought,  allowed  themselves
in  such  course.  The  conversion,,  therefore,  above
described,  cannot  apply  to,  or  be  required  o£  such
Christiana. Te  these  we  must  preach,  not  con-

,  but  improvement. Improvement,  conti-
■_.  . . ,  ___Tto_


tionj
, m  '  improve-

ment, not  merely  upon  the  consideration,  which
yet  is  founded  upon  express  Scripture  authority,
that,  whatever  improvement  we  make  in  ourselves,
we  are  thereby  pure  to  meliorate  our  future  condi-
tion, receiving  at  the  hand  of  God  a  proportion-
able reward  for  our  efforts,  our  sacrifices,  our  per-
severance,  so  that  pur  labour  is  never  lost,  is  never,
a*  Saint  Paul  expressly  assures  us,  in  vain,  in  the
Lord;  though  this,  I  say,  be  a  firm  and  establish-
ed ground  to  go  upon,  yet  it  is  not  the  ground
upon  which  I,  at  present,  place  the  necessity  of  a
constant  progressive  improvement  in  virtue,  I
imther  wisa  to  lay  down  upon-  the  subject  this
proposition;  namely,  that  continual  improvement
is  essential  is  the  Christian  character,  as  an  evi-
dence of  its  sincerity;  that,  if  what- we  have  hi-
therto done  in  religion  has  been  done<from  truly
religious  motives,  we  shad  necessarily  go  on;
that,  if  our  religion  be  real,  it  cannot  stop.  There
m  no  standing  still :  it  is  not  compatible  with  the
nature  of  the  subject :  if  the  principles  which  ac-
tuated us,  be  principles  of  godliness?  they  must
continue  to  actuate  us ;  ana,  under  this  continued
stimulus  and  mfluence.  we  must.necessarily  grow
better  and  better.  If  this  effect  do  not  take  place,
the  conclusion  is,  that  our  principles  are  weak,  or
hollow,  or  unsound.  Unless  we  find  oursejves
jjrow  better,  we  are  not  right.  For  example,  if
*ur  transgressions  do-not  become  fewer  and  fewer,
it  is  to  be  feared,  that  we  have  left  off  striving
against  sin,  and  then  we  are  not  sincere.

I  apprehend,  moreover,  that  with  no  man  living"
can  there  be  a  ground  for  stopping,  as  though


there  was  nothing  more  left  for  him  to  be  done.
If  any  man  had  this  reason  for  stopping,  it  was
the  apostle  PaoJ.  Yet  did  he  stop  1  or  cud  he  so
judge!  Bear/bit  own  account;  "  This  1  do,  for-
3Z


getting  thoseythings  that  are  behind,  (those  things
whereunto  1  have  already  attained,)  and  looking
forward  to  those  things  that  are  before,  (to  still
further  improvement,  J  I  press  towards  the  mark
for  the  prize  of  the  high  calling  of  God  in  Ch'rjst
Jesus."  This  was  not  stopping;  it  was  pressing
on.  The  truth  is,  in  the  way  of  Christian  improve-
ment,- there  is  business  for  the  best*  there  is
enough'to  he  done  for  all. •  .

First :  In  this  stageofthe  Christian  life  it  is  fit
to  suppose,  that  there  are  no  enormous  crimes,
such  aa  mankind  universally  condemn  and  .cry
out  against,  at  present  committed  by  us ;  yet  less
faults,  stjll  clearly  faults,  are  not  Unfreouent  with
us.  ate  too  easily  excused;  too  soon  ''repeated.
This  must  be  altered.

Secondly :  We  may  not  avowedly  be  engaged
in  any  course  or  habit  of  known  sin,  being  at  the
time  conscious  of  such  sin ;  but  we  may  continue
in  some  practices  which  our  consciences  cannot,
and.  would  not,  upon  examination,  approve,  and
in  Which  we  have  allowed  the  wrongheas  of  the  .
practice  to  be  screened  froifi-  our  sight  by  general
usage,  or  by  the  example  of  persons  of  whom  we
think  well*.  This  is  not  a  cdufse  to  be  proceeded
in  longer.  Conscience,  our  own  conscience,  is  to
be  our  guide  in  all  things.

Thirdly :  We  may  not  absolutely'  omM  any
duty  to  our  families,  our  station,  our  neighbour-
hood, or  the  public,  with  which  we  are  acquaint-
ed ;  but  might  not  these  dqtjea  be  mpre'eflfectivelv
performed,  if  they  were  gone  about  with  more  di-
ligence than  we  have  hitherto  used  %  and  might
nor  .further  means  and  opportunities  of  doing  good
/be  found  out,  if  we  took  sufficient  pains  to  inquire
and  to  consider  1

^  Fourthly,  again:  Even  where  less  is  to  be
blamed  in  our  uvea,  much  may  remain  to  be  set
right  in  our  hearts,  our  tempers,  and  dispositions.
Let  our  affections  grow  more  and  more  pure  and
holy,  our  hearts  more  and  more  lifted  up  to  God,
and  loosened  from  this  present  world;  not  from
its  duties,  but  from  its  passions,  its  temptations,
its  over  anxieties,  and  great  selfishness;  our  souls
cleansed  fijom  the  dross  and  corruption  which
tney  have  contracted  in  their  passage  through  it

Fifthly:  It  is  ho  slight  work  to  bring  our  tem-
pera to  what  they  should  be ;  gentle,  patient,  pla-
cable, ^compassionate ;  slow  to  be  offended,  soon: .
to  be  appeased ;  free  from  envy,  which,  though  a
necessary,  is  a  difficult,  attainment;  free  from
hursts  of  anger;  from  aversions  to*  particular  ar-
sons, which  is  hatred ;  able  heartily  to  rejoice
with  them  that  do  rejoice ;  and,  from  true  tender-
ness of  mind,  weeping,  even  when  we  can  do  no
more,  with  them  that  weep;  in  a  word,  to  pot  on
charity  with  all  those  qualities  with  which  Saint
Paul  hath  cfothed  it,  1  Cor.  xffi.  which  read  for
this  purpose.

Sixthly:  Whilst  any  good  cat!  be  done  by  us,
we  shall  not  fail  to  do  it;  but  even  wheil  our
powers  of  active  usefulness  fail,  which  not  seldom
happens,  there  still  remains  that  last-,  that  highest,
that  most«ifficult,  and,  perhaps,  most  acceptable
duty,  to  our  Creator,  resignation  to  his  blessed
wilLin  the^  privations,  and  pains;  and  afflictions,
with  which  we  are  visited ;  thankfulness  to  him
for  all  that  is  spared  to  us,  amidst  much  that  is
gone ;  for'  any  mitigation  of  our  sufferings,  any
degree  of  ease,  and  comfort,  and  support,  arid  as-
sistance, which  we  experience.  Every  advanced
life,  every  life  of  sickness  or  misfortune,  afford*
46*


546


SERMONS  £>N  SEVERAL  SUBJECTS.


materials  for  virtuous  feeling*. In  a  word,  I  am

gjrsuaded,  that  there  is  no  4tate  whatever  of
hristian  trial,  varied  and  Various  as  it  is,  in
which  there  will  not  be  found. both,  matter  and
room  for  improvement ;  in  which- a  trucX  hristian
will  not  be  incessantly  striving,  month  by  month,
and  year  by  year,  to  grow  sensibly  .better  and  bet-
ter: and  in  which  his  endeavours,  if  idncere,  and
assisted,  as.  if  sincere,  they  may  hope  to  be  assist-
ed, by  God's  grace,  will  not  be  rewarded  with


8ERMON  Vni.

PRAYER  IN  IMITATION  OF  CHRIST.

And  he  withdrew  himself  into  the  wilderness,
and  prayed. — Luke  v.  16.

The  imitation  of  our  Saviour  is  justly  held  out
to  us  as  a  rule  of  life ;  but  then  there  are  many
things  in  which  we  cannot  imitate  him.  .  What
depends  upon  his  miraculous  character  must  ne-
cessarily surpass  our  endeavours,  and  be  placed
oat  of  the  reach  of  our  imitation.  This  reason
makes  those  particulars,  in  which  we  are  able
to  follow  his  example,  of  great  importance  to  be
observed  by  us ;  because  it  is  to  these  that  our
hopes  of  taking  him  for  our  -pattern,  of  treading
in  bis  footsteps,  are  necessarily  confined.

Now,  our  Lord's  piety  is  one  of  these  particu-
lars. We  run,  if  we  be  so  minded,  prey  to  God,
as  he  did.  We  can  aim- at  (he  spirit,  and  wasmth,
and  earnestness,  of  his  devotions;  we  can  use,  at
least,  those  occasions,  and  that 'mode  of  devotion,
which  his  example  points  out  to  us.  •
.  It  is  to  be  remarked,  that  a  fulness  of  mental
devotion  yvsa  the  spring  and  source  of  our  Lord's
visible  piety.  And  this  state  of  mind  /we  must
acquire.  It  consists  in  this ;  in  a  habit  of  turning
our  thoughts  towards  God,  whenever  they  are  not
taken  up  with  some  particular  engagement.*—
Every  man  has  some  subject  or  other,  to  which
his  thoughts  turn,  when  they  are  not  particularly
occupied  Jn  a  good  Christian  this  subject  h  God,
or  what  appertains  to  him.  A  good -Christian,
walking  in  his  fields,  sitting  in  his  chamber,  lying
upon  hu  bed,  is  thinking  ofGtxl.  His  meditations
draw,  of  their  own  accord,  to  that  object,  and  then
his  thoughts  kindle  up  his  devotions ;  and  devo-
tion never  burns  so  bright,  or  so  warm,  as  when
it  is  lighted  up  from  within.  The  immensity,  the
stupendous  nature  of  the  adorable  Being  who
made,  and  who  supports,  every  thing  about*  us,
his  grace,  bis  love,  his  condescension  towards  his
reasonable  and  moral  creatures  .that  is,  towards
men ;  the  good  things  which  he*  has  placed  within
oar  reach,  the  heavenly  happiness-  which,  he  has
put  it  in  our  power  to  obtain ;  the  infinite  mo-
ment of  our  acting  well  and  right,  so  as  not  to
miss- of  the  great  reward,  and  not  only- to  miss  of
our  reward,  out  to  sink  into  perdition;  such  re^
flections  will  not  fail  of  generating  devotion,  of
moving  within  us  either  prayer,  or  thanksgiving,
or  both.  This  is  mental  devotion.  Perhaps  the
difference  between  a  religious  and  an  irreligious
character,  depends  more  upon  this  mental  devo-
tion, than  upon  any  other  thing.  The  difference
will  'show  itself  in  men's  lives  and  conversation,
in  their  dealings  with  mankind,  and  in  the  various


duties  and  offices  of  their  station ;  but  it  originates
and  proceeds  from  a  difference  in  (heir  internal
habits  of  mind,  with  respect  to  God  :  in  the  ha-
bit of  thinking  of  him  in  private,  ana  of  what  re-
lates to  him ;  in  cultivating  these  thoughts,  or
neglecting  them ;  inviting  them,  or  driving  them
from  us ;  m  forming,  or  in  having  formed  a  habit
and  custom,  as  to  this  point,  unobserved  and  un-
observable  by  others,  (because  it  passes  in  the
mind,  which  no  one  can.  see  ;^"butpf  the  most  de-
cisive consequence  to  our  spiritual  character  and
immortal  interests.  This  mind  was  in  Christ :  a
deep,  fixed,*and  constant  piety.  T^be  expressions
of,  it  we  have  seen  in  all  the  forms,  which  could
bespeak  earnestness  and  sincerity;  but  the -prin-
ciple itself  lay  deep'  in  his  divine  soul ;  the  ex-
pressions likewise  were  occasional,  more  or  fewer,
as  occasions  called,  or  opportunities  oflered ;  but
the  principle  fixed  and  constant^  iminterrupted,
unremitted.

But  again :  Our  Lord,  whose  mental  piety  was
so  unquestionable,  so  ardent,  and  so  unceasing,
did  not,  nevertheless,  content  himself  wi£h  that
He  thought  fit,  we  find,  at  sundry  times,  and  I
doubt  not,  also,  very  frequently,  to  draw  h  forth
in  actual  prayer,  to  clothe  it  with  words,  to  betake
himself  to  visible  devotion,  to  retire  to  a  mountain
for  this  express  purpose,  to  withdraw  himself  a
short  distance  from  his  -  companions,'  to  kneel
down,  to  pass  the  whole  night  in  prayer,  or  in  a
place  devoted. to  prayer.-  Let  all, .who  feel  their
Hearts  impregnated  with  religious  fervour,  remem-
ber this  example ;  remember  that  this  disposition
of  the  heart  ought  to  vent  itself  in  actual  prayer:
let  them  not  either  be  afraid  nor  ashamed,  nor
suffer  any.  -person,  nor  any  thing,  to  keep  them
from  this  holy  exercise.  They^wiD  find  the  de-
vout dispositions  of  their  souls  Strengthened,  gra-
tified, confirmed.  This  exhortation  may  not  be
necessary  to  the  generality  of  pious  tempers'-  ther
will  naturally  follow  their  propensity,  and  it  will
naturally  carry  them  to  prayer.  But  some,  even
good  men,  are  too  abstracted  in  their  way  of
thinking  upon  this  Subject ;  they  think,  that  ones
God  seeth  and  regardeth  the  heart,  if  their  devo-
tion be  there j  if  it  be  within,  all  outward  signs
and  ex  pressions  of  it  are  superfluous.  It  is  enough
to  answer,  that  our  blessed  Lord  did  not  so  think.
He  had  all  the  fulness  of  devotion  in  his  soul;
nevertheless,  he  thought  it  not  superfluous  to  utter
and  pronounce  audible  prayer  to  God ;  arid  not
only  so,  but  to  retire  and  withdraw,  himself  from
other  engagements ;  nay,  even  from  his  most  inti-
mate and  favoured  companions,  expressly  for.  this
purpose.

Again :  Our  Lord's  retirement  to  prayer  appeal*
commonly  to  have  followed  some  Signal  act  and
display  of  his  divine  powers.  He  did  every  thing
to  the  glpry  of  God ;  he  referred  his  divine  powers
to  his  Father's  gift;  be  made  them  the  subject  of
his  thankfulness,  inasmuch,  as  they  advanced  his
great  work.  He  followed  them  by  his  devotions.
Now  every  goodgift  cometh  down  from  the  Fa-
ther of  light.  Whether  they  be  natural,  or  whe-
ther they  be  supernatural,  the  faculties  which  we
possess  are  by  God's  donation;  wherefore,  any
successful  exercise  of  these  faculties,  any  instance
in  which  we  have  been  capable  of  doing  something
good,  properly  and  truly  so,  either  for  the  commu-
nity K  which  is  best  of  all,  for  our.  neighbourhood,
for  our  families,  nay  even  for  ourselves,  ought  ta
fttir  and  awaken  our  gratitude  to  God,  and  to  cal


\


SERMONS  ON  SEVERAL  SUBJECTS.


647


fcrth  that  gratitude  into  **ual^  devotion ;  at  feast,
tins  is  to  imitate  our  blessed  Lord,  so  Jar  as  we  can
.  imitate  him  at  all!  it  is  adopting"  into- our  lives,
the  principle  which  regulated  nil. -

Again:  It  appears,  on  one  occasion  at  least,
that  our  Lord's  retirement  to.  prayer  was  prepara-
tory to  an.  important  work,  which  he  was  about
to  execute.  The  manner  in  which  Saint  Luke
states  this  instance  is  thus: — "And  it  came  to
pass  in*  those  days  that  he  went  out  into  a  moun-
tain to  pray,  and  "continued  all  night  in  prayer  to
God;  and  when  it  was  day,  he  called  unto  him
his  disciples,  and  of  them  he  chose  twelve,  whom
also  he  named  apostles."  From  this  statement  I
infer,  that  the  night,  passed  by  our  Lord  in  prayer,
was 'preparatory  to  the  office  which  he  was  about
to  execute :  and  surely  an  important  office  it  was ;
Important  to  him,,  important  to  his  religion ;  im-
portant to  the  whole  world.  Nor  let  it  be'  said,
that  our  Lord,  after  all,  in  one  instance  at  least,
was  unfortunate  in  his  choice;  of  the  twelve  one
was  a  traitor.  That  choice  was  not  an  error ;  a
remarkable  prophecy  was  to  be  fulfilled,  and  other
purposes  were  to  be  answered,  of  which  we  cannot
now  speak  particularly.  "  I  know,"  says  our  Lord,
"whom  I  have  chosen."  But  let  us  confine  our-
selves to  our  observation.  It  was  a  momentous
choice:  it  was  a  decision  of  great  consequence;
and  it  was  accordingly,  on  our  Lord's  partr  pro-
ceded  by  prayer ;  not  only  so,  but  by  a^  night  spent
.  in  prayer.  "  He  continued  all  nignt  in  prayer  to
God  f  or,  if  you  would  rather  so  render  it,  -in  a
house,  set  apart  for  prayer  to  God.  >Here,  there-
fore, we  have  an  example  given  us,  which  we
both  can  imitate,  and  ought  to  imitate.  Nothing-
of  singular  importance ;  nothing  of  extraordinary
moment,  either  to  ourselves -or  others,  ought  to.  be
resolved  upon,' or  undertaken,  without  prayer  to
God,  without  previous  devotion. .  It  is  a  natural
operation  of  piety  to  carry  the  mind  to  God,  when-
ever any  thins  presses  and  weighs  upon  it :  they,
who  feel  not  this  tendency,  have  reason  to  accuse
and  suspect  themselves  of  want  of  piety.  More-
over, we  nave  for  it  the  direct  example  of  our
Lord  himself:  I  believe  also,  I  may  add,  that  we
nave  the  example  and  practice  of  good  men,  in  all
ages  of  the  world.

.  Again :  We  find  our  Lord  resorting  to  prayer
in  his  last  extremity ;  and  with  an  earnestness,  I
had  almost  said,  a  vehemence  of  devotion,  propor-
tioned to  the  occasion.^  The  terms  in  winch  the
evangelists  describe  our  Lord's -devotion,  in  the
{garden  of  Gethsemane,  the  evening  preceding  his
death,  are  the  strongest  terms  that  could  bs  used.
As  soon  as  he  catae  to  the  place,  he  bid  his  disci-
ples pray. — When- he  was  at  the  place-,  he  said
unto  them.  "  Pray  that  ye  enter  not  into  tempta-
tion." This  did  not  content  him:,  this-  was  not
enough  for  the-  state  and  Bufferings  of  his  mind.
He  parted  even  from  them.  He  withdrew  about
a  stone's-cast,  and  kneeled  down!  Hear  how  his
straggle  in  prayer  i*  described.  Three  times  he
came  to  his  disciples,  and  returned  again  to  prayer;
thrice  he  kneeled  down,  at  a  distance  from  them,
repeating  the  sfime  words..  Being  in  an  agony,
he  prayed  more  earnestly:  drops  of  sweat  felFfrom
his  body ,  as  if  it  had  been  great  drops  of  blood;
yet  in  all  this,  throughout  Die  whole  scene,  the'
constant  conclusion  or  hjs  prayer  was,  "  Not  my
will,  but  thine  be  done."  it  was  the  greatest  oc-
casion that  ever  was:,  and  the  earnestness  of  our
land's  prayer,  the  devotion  of  his  -soul,  corres-


ponded with  it  Scenes  of  deep  distress  await  us
all.  It  is  in  vein  to  expect  to  pass  through  the
world  without-falling  into  them-  'We  have  in  our
'.Lord's  example,  a  model  for  our  behaviour,  in  the
most  severe  and  most  trying  of  these  occasions:
afflicted,  yet  resigned  •,  jrrieved  and  wounded,  vet
submissive  :  not  insensible  of  our  sufferings,  but
mereasing  the  ardomvand  fervency  of  our  prayer  in
proportion  to  the  pain  and  acuteness.of  our  feet
ingB.

But;  whatever  may  be  the  fortune  of  our  lives,
one  great  extremity,  at  least,  the  fcour.of  approach-
ing -death,  is  certainly  to  be  passed  through.
What  ought  then  to  occupy  us  1  what  can  then
support  tial  Prayer.  Prayer,  with  our  blessed
Lord  himself,  was  a  jefuge  mom  the  storm ;  almost
every  word  he  uttered,  during  that  tremendous
scene,  was  prayer:  prayer  the  most  earnest,  the
most  tirgent ;  repeated,  continued,  proceeding  from
the  recesses  of  his  soul;  private,  solitary;  prayer
for  deliverance?  prayer  for  strength;  above  every
thing,  prayer  for  resignation.


SERMON  IX.

ON  FltlAL  PlPTT.

And  Joseph  nourished  hu  father,  and  hit  bre-
thren, and  all  hi*  fathefe  household,  with'
bread,  according  to  their  families— QfinesiB
_  xlvii.  12.

Whoever  reads  the  Bible  at  all,  has  read  the
history  of  Joseph.  It  has  universally  attracted  at-
tention :  and,  without  doubt,  there  is  not  one,  but
many  points  in  it,  which  deserve  to  be  noticed.'  It
is  a  strong  and  plain  example  of  the  circuitous
providence  of  God:  that  is  to  say,  of  his  bringing
about  Che  ends  and  purposes  of  his  providence,  by
seemingly  casual  and  unsuspected  means.  That
is  a  high  doctrine,  both  of  natural  and  revealed
religion ;  and  is  clearly  exemplified  in  this  history.
It  is  an  useful  example,  at  the  same  time,  of  the
-protection  and  final  reward  of  virtue,  though  for
a  season  oppressed  and  calumniated,  or  carried
through  a  long  series  of  distresses  and  misfortunes.
I  say  it  is  an  useful  example,  if  duly  understood,
and  not  urged  too  far.  It  shows. tne  protection
of  providence  to  be  with  virtue  under  all  its  diffi-
culties :  and  this  being  believed  upon  goocl  grounds,
it  is  enough ;  for  the  virtuous  man  will  be  assured
that  this  protection  will  keep  with  him  to  and
through  all  stages  of  his  existence— living  and.
dying  he  is  in  its  hands — and  for  the  same  reason
that  u  accompanies  him,  like  an  invisible  guardian,
through  his  trials,  it  will  finally  recompence  him.
This  is  the  true  application  of  that  doctrine  of  a
directing  providence,  which  is  illustrated  by  the
history  of  Joseph,  as- it  relates,  to  ourselves — I  mean .
as  it  relates  to  those  who  are  looking  forward  to  a
future  state.  If  we  draw  from  it  an  opinion,  or  .an"
expectation,  that,  because  Joseph  was  at  length
rewarded  with  riches  and  honours;  therefore  we
shall  be  the  same,  we  carry  the  example  farther
than  it  will  bear.  It  proves  that  virtue  is  under
the  protection  of  God,  and  will  ultimately  be  taken
care  of  and  rewarded:  but  in  what  manner,  and
in  what  stage  of  our  existence,  whether  in  the
present  or  the  future,  or  in  both,  is.  left  oven  by
the  example:  and  both  may,  and  must  depend,


648


8RHMON8  ON  SEVERAL  SUBJECTS.


,  in  a  great  measure,  unknown  to
and  incalculable  by  ua.

Again :  The*  mstory  of  Joseph  U  a  domestic
•sample.  It  is  an  example  of  the  ruinous  conse-
quences of  partiality  in  a  parent,  and  of  the  quar-
rels and  contentions  in  a  family,  which  naturally
spring  from  such  partiality. "

Again :  It  is  a  lesson  to  aU  schemers  and  con-
federate*  in  guilt,  to  teach  them  this  truth,  that,
when  their  scheme  does  not  succeed,  they  are
aura  to  quarrel  amongst  themselves,  and  to  go  into
the  utmost  hitterness  of  mutual  accusation  and  re-
proach; as  the  brethren  of  Joseph  you  find  did.
,'  Again :  It  is  a  natural  example  of  the  effect  of
adversity,  in  bringing  men  to  themselves,  to  re-
flections upon  their  own  conduct,  to  a  sense  and
perception  of  many  things  which  had  gone  on,  and
might  have  gone  on,  unthought  of  and  unper-
ceived,  if  it  had  not  been  for  .soma  stroke  of  mis-
fortune, which  roused  their  attention.  It  was  af-
ter the  brethren  of  Joseph  had  been  shut  up  by
him  in  prison,  and  were  alarmed,  as  they  wen
might  be,  for  tneir  lives,  that  their  conscienceaso
far  as  appears,  for  the  first  time  smote  them:  "  We
are  venly  guilty  concerning  our  brother,  in  that
we  saw.  the  anguish  of  his  souLwhen  he  besought
us  and  we  would  not  hear."  This  is  the  natural
and  true  effect  of  judgments  in  this  world,  to  brine
us  to  a  knowledge  of  ourselves ;  that  is  to  say,  of
those  bad  things  in  our  lives  which  have  deserved
the  calamities  we  are  made  to  suffer.

These  are  all  point*  in  the  history :  but  there  is
another  point  in  Joseph's  character,  which  I  make
choice  or  as  the  subject  of  my  present  discourse ;
and  that  is  his  dutifulness  and  affection  to  his  la-
ther. Never  was  this  virtue  more  strongly  dis-
played. It  runs  like  a  thread  through  the  whole
narrative-,  and  whether1  we  regard  it  as  a  quality
to  be  admired,  or,  which  would  be  a  -great  deal
better,  as  a  quality  to  "be  imitated  by  us,  bo  far,  as
a  great  disparity  "of  circumstances  will  allow  of
imitation,  (which  in  principle  it  always  will  do,)
it  deserves  to  be  considered  with  a  separate  and
distinct  attention.

When  a  surprising  course  of  events  had  given
to  Joseph,  after  a  long  series  of  years,  a  most  un-
expected opportunity  of  seeing  his  brethren  in
Egypt,  the  first  question  which  he  asked  them
wasy  "Is  your  father  yet  alive?"  This  appears
from  the  account,  which'  Reuben  gave  to  Jacob,,
of  the  conference  which  they  had  held  with  the'
great  man  of  the  country,  whilst  neither  of  them,
as  jet,  suspected  who  he  was.  Joseph,  you  re-
member, had  concealed  himself  during  their  first
journey,  from  tile  knowledge  of  his  brethren;  and
it  was  not  consistent  with  His  disguise,  to  be  more
full  and  particular,  than  he  was,  in  his  inquiries.

On  account  of  the  continuance  of  the  famine  in
the  land,  it  became  necessary  for  the  brethren  of
Joseph  to  go  a  second  time  into  £gypt  to  seek
coin,  and  a  second  tfroe  to  produce  themselves  be-
fore the  lord  of  the  .country.  What  had  been  Jo-,
■eph's.  first  question  on  the  former  visit,  was  his
first  question  in  this,  "  Is  your  father  well,  the
old  man  of  whom  ye  spake  1  is  he  yet  alive  7  And
they  answered,  Thy  servant  our  father  n  in  good
health,  he  is  yet  alive:  and  they  bowed. down
their  heads,  and  made  obeisance.''
-  Hitherto,  you  observe,  all  had  passed  in  disguise.
The  brethren  of  Joseph  knew  nothing  who  they
s  speaking  to;  ana  Joseph  was  careful  to  pre-
a  the  secret You  will  now  take  notice,  how


t  broken,  and  how  Jesspii
eresoio-


Uns  affected  c

found  himself  forced,  as  it  were,  from  the  i
tien  he  had  taken,  of  keeping  his  brethren  in  ig-
norance of  hit  person.  He  had  proposed,  yon
read/lo  detain  Benjamin ;  the  rest,  oeinff  perplex-
ed beyond  measure,  and  distressed  by  this  propo-
sal, Judah,  approacning  Joseph,  presents  a  most
earnest  supplication  for  the  deliverance  of  the
child:  offers  himtjf  to  remain  Joseph's  prisoner
or  slave,  in  his  brother's  place,  and,  in  the  conclu-
sion, touches,  unknowingly,  upon  a  string,  which
vibrates  with  all  the  affections  of  the  person  wham
he  was  addressing.  "  How  shall  I  go  up  to  my
father,  and  tjie  lad  be  not  with  me?  lest  peradven-
ture  I  see  the  evil  that  shall  come  on  my  father."
The  mention  of  this  circumstance,  and  this  per-
son, subdued  immediately  the  heart  ef  Joseph,
and  produced  a  sudden,  and,  as  it  should  seem,  an
undesigned,  and  premature  discovery  of  lujnaelf,
to  his  astonished  family.  Then,  that  is,  upon  Una
circumstance  being  mentioned,  Joseph  could  not
refrain  himself:  and  after  a  little  preparation,  Jo-
seph said  unto  nis  brethren,, "  I  am  Joseph."

The  great  secret  being  now  disclosed,  what  was
the  conversation  which  immediately  followed?
The  next  word  from  Joseph's  mouth  was,  '•Doth
my  father  yet  live1n  ana  his  brethren  cotrid  not
answer  him;'  surprise  had  overcome  their  mcokj
of  utterance.  After  comforting,- however,  and  en-
couraging his  brethren,  who  seemed  to  sinhnnoVr
the  intelligence.  Joseph  proceeds,  "  Haste  ye,  and

S\  up  to  my  father,  and  say  onto  him,  Thus  safes
y  son  Joseph,  .God  hatn  made  me  lord  of  aQ
Egypt:  come  down  unto  me,  tarry  not :  and  thou
shah  dweU  in  the  land  of  Goshen,  and  thou  shall
be  near  unto  me,  and  there  will  I  nourish  thee,
(for  yet  there  are  £ve  years  of  famine,)  lest  thou,
and  thy  household,  and  all  that  thou  hast,  come
to  poverty. ,  .And  ye  shall  tell  my  father  of  all  my
glory  in  Egypt,  and  Of  aU  that  ye  have  seen:  and
ye  shall  haste  and  bring  down  my  father  hither."
It  is  well  known  that  Jacob  yielded  to  tins  in-
vitation, and  passed  over  with  his  family  into

The  next  thing  to  be  attended  to,  is  the  recep-
tion which  he  there  met  with  from  his  recovered
son.  "  And  Joseph  made  ready  his  chariot,  and
went  up  to  meet  Israel  his  father,  toGo&hen-  and
presented  himself  unto  him,  and  be  fell  on  ms
neck,  and  wept  on  his  neck  a  good  while.  And
Israel  said  unto  Joseph,  Now  let  me  die,  since  I
have  seen  thy  lace;  Deo&use  thou  art  yet  alive."
Not  content  with  these  strong  expressions  of  per-
gonal duty  and  respect,  Joseph  now  availed  him-
self of  his  power  and  station  to  fix  his  father's  fa-
mily in  the  enjoyment  of  those  comforts  and  ad-
vantages, which  the  land  of  Egypt  afforded  in  the
universal  dearth  which  then  oppressed  that  region
of  the  world. .  For  this  purpose,  as  well  as  to  give
another  public  token  to  his  family,  and  to  the
country,  of  the  deep  reverence  with  which  he  re-
garded his  parent,  he  introduced  the  aged  Patri-
arch to  Pharaoh  himself.  "  And  Joseph  brought
in  Jacob  his  father,  and  set  him  before  Pharaoh:
and  Jacob  blessed  Pharaoh."  The  sovereign  of
Egypt  received  a  benediction  from  this  venerable
stranger.  "And  Joseph  (the  account  proceeds)
nourished  bis  father,  and  his. brethren,  and  ail  his
father's  household,  with  bread  according  to  their
families."

It  remains  to  be  seen  how  Joseph  conducted
himself  towards  his  father,  on  the  two  <


SERMON*  ON  SEVERAL  SUBJECTS.


MO


in  which  alone  h  ww  left  for  htm  to  discharge  the
office,  end  testify  the  affection  of  a  ion;  in  hia
sickness,  and  upon  hi*  death.  u  And  it  came  to
pass,"  we  read,  "after  theee  things,  one  told  Jo-
seph, behold,  thy  mther  is  sick :  and  he  took  with
him  his  two  sons,  Manasseh  and  Ephfsjm."  Jdr
seph  delayed  not,  you  find,  totahp  the cooit  of
Pharaoh,  the  cares  and  greatness  of  his  station  in
it,  in  older  to  pay  the  last  visit  to  his  dying  parent :
and  to  place  Wore  him  the  hopes  of  his  house
and  family,  in  the  persons  of  his  two-  sons.  "And
Israel  beheM  Joseph's  sons,  and  said,  Who  are
these  1  And  Joseph  said  unto  his  father.  They
are  >my  sona.  whom  God  hath  given  me  nr  this
place..  Ana  he  said,  thing  them,  I  pray  thee,
unto  me;  and  I  will  bless  them. '  (New  the  eyes
of  Israd  were  6Hm,so  that  he  could  not  see.)  And
be  brought  them  near  unto  nun:  and  he  kissed
them,  and  embraced  them :  and  Israel  said  unto
Joseph,  1  had  not  thought  to  see  thy  face  -y  and,  Jo ! .
God  hath  showed  me  abo  thy  seed.  And  Joseph
brought  them  out  from  between  his  knees,  and  lie
bowed  himself  with  his  face  to  the  earth."  Nothing
can  well  he  more  solemn  or  interesting  than  this
interview;  mora  honourable  or  consoling  to  old
age;  or  more  expressive  of  the  dignified  piety  of
tpe  best  of  sons,  and  the  greatest  of  men.  ■

We  now  approach  the  mat  scene  of  this  event-
ful history,  and  the  best  testimony,  which  it  was
possible  for  Joseph  to  give,  of  the  love  and  rever-
ence with  which  he  had  never  ceased  to  treat  his
rather^  and  that  was  upon  the  occasion  of  nis
death,  and,  the  honours  which  he  paid  to  his  me-
mory ;  honours,  vain,  no  doubt,  to  the  dead,  but,
so  far  as  they  are  significations  of  gratitude  or  af-
fection, justly  deserving  of  commendation  and  es-
teem. "And  when  Jacob. had  made  an  end  of
commanding  his  sons,  he  'gathered  up  his  feet  into
the  bed, andyielded  up  the  ghost,  and  was  father-
ed unto  his  people.  And* Joseph  fell  upon  his  fa-
ther's face,  ana  wept  upon  him,  and  kissed  hhn»
And  Joseph  commanded  his  servants,  the  physi-
cians, to  embalm  his  father;  and'  the  physicians
embalmed  Israel.  And  the  Egyptians  mourned
for  him  threescore  and  ten  days.  And  Joseph
went  up  to  bury  his  father;  and  with  him  went
lip  all  the  servants  of  Pharaok  the  elders  of  his
bouse,  and  all  the  eldere  of  the  land  of  Effft*.
And  ah"  the  house  of  Joseph,  and  his  brethren,
and  his  father's  house:  and  there  went  up  with
him  both  chariots  and  horsemen ;  and  it  was'  a
Teryffreat  company.  And  they  came  to  the  thresh-
ing floor  of  Atad,  'which  is  beyond  Jordan ;  and
there  they  mourned  with  a  great  and  a  very  sore
lamentation:  and  he  made  a  mourning  for  nis  fa-
ther seven  days."

-'  TnuB  died)  and  thus  was  honoured  in  his  death,
the  founder  of  the  Jewish  nation,  who,  amidst
many  mercies,  and  many  visitations;  sudden  and
surprising  vicissitudes  of  afflictions  and  joy,  found
it  the  greatest  blessing  of  his  varied,  and  eventful
life,  that  he  had  teen  the  mther  of  a  dutiful  and
affectionate  son.

It  has  been  said,  and,  as  I  Delieve,  truly,  that
there  is  no  virtuous  quality  belonging  to  the  hu-
man character,  of  which  there  is  not  some  distinct
and  eminent  example  to  be  found  in  the  Bible:  no
relation  in  which  we  can  be  placed,  no  duty  which
'  we  have  to  discharge,  but  that  We  may  observe  a
pattern  for  it  in  the^acred  history.  Ctf  the  duty
of  children  to  parents,  of  a  son  to  his  father,  main-
v  tamed  under  great  singularities  and  variations  of


fortune;,  undiminished,  najr,  father  increased,  by
absence,  by  distance,  by  unexampled'  success,  by
remote  and  fofeign  connexions,  you  have  seen,  in
this  most  ancknt  of  all  histories,  a*  conspicuous,
and  as  amiable  an  jnstanoeaw  can  be  met  with  in
the  record*  of  the  world,  in  the  purest,  beat  ages
of  U*  existence.


8ERI40NX '

(PART  L)

v

TO  THINS  LESS  OP  OOB  VIRTUES,  A«
0U»  SINS. .

Jiystntf  et^2^/brei}ie.--Psalmli.3.  ',  -

>,

There  is  a  propensity  in  the  hamanmind,  very
general  and  very  natumi,  yet  at  the  same  time,
unfavourable  in  a  high  degree- to' the  Christian
character;  which  ^  that,  when  we  look;  back  upon
our  Uvea,  our  recollection  dwells  too  maeh  upon
our  virtues;  our  sins  are  not,  as  they  ought  to  be,
before  us;  wetbink  too  much  of  our  good  qnahV
ties,  or  good  actions,  too  little  of  our  crimes,  ant
corruptions,  our  fclUrfgs  off  and  .4eelenaion  front
God's  laws,  our  defects  and  weaknesses.  Theee
we  sink  and  overlook,  in  meditating  upon  our  good
properties.  This,  I  allow  is  natural :  Vransn,  un-
doubtedly, it  is  more  agreeable  to  have  our  mine*
occupied  with  the  cheering  retrospect  of  virtuoqe
deeds,  than  with  the  bitter  humiliating  remem-
brance of  sins  and  follies.  But,  because  it  is  na*
tural.  it  doeanot  follow  that  it  is  good.  It  may  be
the  bias  and  mclmation  of  our  minds;  and  yet'
neither  right  nor  safe.  When  I  say  that  it  is
wrong,  I  mean,  that  it  is  not  the  true  Christian  dis-
position: and  when  I  say  that  it  is  dangerous,  I
have  a  view  to  Ha  effects  upon  our  salvation.

I  say,  that  it  1s  not  the  true  Christian  datpoaW
tien ;  for,  first,  how  does  H  accord  with  what  we


Christian  characteml

Now,  one  precept,  and  that  of  Christ  Umseh^
you  find  to  be  this:  "Ye,  when  ye  shall  have
done  all  those  things,  which  are  commanded  vow,
say,  We  are  unprofitable  servants;  we  have  dons
that  which  was  our  duty  to  do."  Luke  xvii  UK
It  is  evident,  that  this  .strong  admonition  was  in*
tended,  by  our  Saviour,  to  check  inlhis  disciples
an  overweening- opinion  of  their  own  merit  It
is  a  very .  remarkable  passage.  I  think  none
throughout  the  New  Testament  more  so.  And
the  intention,  with  which  the  words  were  spoken,
was  evidently  to  check  and  repel  that  opinion  of
merit,  which  is  sure  to  arise  from  the  habit  of  fix-
ing our  contemplation-  so  much  upon  our  good
Qualities,  and  so  tittle  upon  our  bad  ones.  TYiet
this  habit  is  natural,  and  was  never  prohibited  by
any  teacher,  except  by  our  Saviour.  With  him  at
was  a  great  firak,  by  reason  of  Hs  inconsistency
with  the  favourite  principle  of  his  religion,  hu-
mility. 1  call  humility  not  only  a  duty,  hut  a
principle.  HumWemindedness  is  a  Christian
principle,  if  there  be  one;  above  ail,  humMe-nund-
ednees  towards  God.  The  servants,  to  whom  our
Lord's  expression  refers,  were  to  bet
ed,  we  may  presume,  towards  one  1


850


SERMONS  ON  SEVERAL  SUBJECTS.


toward^  their  Lord,  the  only  answer,  the  only
thought,  the  only  sentiment  wis  to  be,  "  We  are
Unprofitable  servants."'  And  who  were  they ?  that
were  instructed  by  our~Lord  to  bear  constantly
thia  reflection  about  with  them  1  Were  they  sin-
neaa,  distinctively  so  called?  Were  they  grievous,
or  notorious  sinners  1  Nay.  the  very  contrary ;  they
were  persons,  ''who  had  done  all  those  *«■•—


that  were  commanded  them  !"  This  is  precisely
the  description  which  our  Lord  gives  us  of  the
persons  to  whom  his  lesson  was  directed.  There-
fore you  see,  that  an  opinion  of  merit  is  discou-
raged, even  in  those  who  had  the  best  pretensions
to  entertain  it ;  if  aft y  pretensions  were  good.  But
in  opinion  of  merit,  an  over-weening  opinion  of
merit,  is  aura  to  grow  up  in  the  heart,  whenever
we  accustom  ourselves  to  think  much  of  our  vir-
tues, and  little  of  our  vices.  It  is  generated,  fos-
tered, and.  cherished,  by  this  train  0/  meditation
#e  have  been  describing.  It  cannot  be  otherwise.
And  if  we  would  repress  it ;  if  we  would  correct
ourselves  in  this  respect;  if  we  would  bring  our-
selves into  a  capacity  of  complying  with  our  Sa-
viour's rule,  we  must  dter.our.turn  of  thinking ;
we  must  reflect  more  upon  our  sins,  and  leas  upon
our  virtues.  Depend  upon  it,  that  we  shall -view
our  characters)  more  truly,  we  shall  view  them
much  more  safely,  when  we  view  them  in  their
defects,  and  fruits,  and  infirmities,  than  when  we
*lew  them  only,  or  principally,  on  the  side  of  their
good  qualities;  even'  when  these  good  qualities
are  Malr  I  suppose,  and  I  have  aU  along  sup-
posed, thai  the  good  parte  of  our  characters,  which,
as  I  contend,  tee  much  attract  our  attention,  are,
nevertheless,  real;  and  T suppose  this,  because
our  Saviour's  parable  supposes  the  same:

Another-great  Christian  rule  jsr  "Work  out
your  salvation  with  fear  and  trembling."  (Philip.
n.  12?)  These  significant  words  "  fear  aftd  trem-
blftig."  do  not  accord  with  the  state  of  a  mind
which  is  all  contentment,  satisfaction,  and  ae|£
complacency ;  and  which  is  brought  into  that  state
by  the  habit  of  viewing  and  regarding  those  good
qualities,  which  a  person  believes  to  belong  to
himself,  or  those  cood  actions  which  he  remembers
to  have  performed.  The  precept  much  better  ac-
cords with -a  mind  anxious,  fearful,  and  apprehen-
sive; and  niade  so  by  a  sense  of  sin.  But  a  sense
of  sin  exists  not,  as  it  ought  to  do,  in  that  breast
which  is  in  the  habit  of  meditating  chiefly  upon
its  virtues.  I  can  verjrwell  believe,  that  two  per-
sons of  the  same  character  in  truth,  may,  never-
theless, view  themselves  in  very  different  lights,
according  as  one  is  accustomed  to  look  chiefly  at
his  good  qualities,  the  other  chiefly  at  his  trans-
passions  and  imperfections;  and  I  say,  that  this
litter  is  the  disposition  for  working  out  salvation
agreeably  to  Saint  Paul's  rule  and  method;  that
is,  "  with  fear  and  v trembling :"  the  other  is  not

But  further:  There  is,  upon  this  subject,  a  great
deal  to*be  learnt  from  the  examples  which  the
New  Testament  sets  before* us.  Precepts  are
short,  necessarily  must  be  so ;  take  up  but  little
room;  and,  for  that  reason,  do  not  always  strike
with  the  force,  or  leave  the  impression,  which
they  ought  to  do :  but  examples  of  character,  when
the  question  is  concerning  character^  and  what  is
the  proper  character,  have  more  weight  and  body
in  the  consideration,  and  take  up  more  room  in
our  minds  than  precepts. .  Now,  from  one  end  of
the  New  Testament  to  the  other,  you  will  find
the  evangelical  character  to  be  contrition. You


hear  little  of  virtue  or  r^teoosness ;  but  yph  hear
perpetually  of  the  forgiveness  of  sins.  With  the
first  Christian  teachers,  "  repent,  repent,"  was  the
burden  of  their  exhortation*;  the  almost  constant
sound  of  their  voice.  Does  not  this  strain  of  preach-
ing show,  that  the  preachers-  wished  all  who  heard
them,  to  think  much  more  of  offences  than  of
merits?  Nay,  further,  with  respect  to  themselves,
whenever  this  contemplation  of  righteousness
came  in  their  way,  it  came  in  their  way  only  to
be  renounced,  as  natural  perhaps,  and*  also  grate-
ful, to  human  feelings,  but  as  inconsistent -and
irreconcilable  with  the  Christian  condition.  It
might  do  for  a  heathen,  but  it  was  the  reverse  of
every  thing  that  is  Christian.

The  turn  of  thought  which  I  am  recommend-
ing, or  rather,  which  I .  find  it  necessary  to  insist
upon,  as  an  essential  part  of  the  Christian  charac-
ter{  is  strongly  seen  in  one  particular  passage  of
Saint  Paul's  writings ;  namely,  in  the  third  chap-
ter to  the  Philippians :  "  If  any  other  man  thini-
eth  thatt*  hath  whereof  he  might  trust  in  the
flesh,  I  more ;  circumcised  the  eighth  day,  of  the
stock  of  Israel,  of  the  tribe  df  Benjamin,  an  He-
brew of  the  Hebrews ;  as  touching  the  law,  a  Pha-
risee; concerning  zeal,  persecuting  the. church;
touching  the  righteousness  which  »  in  the  law,
"blameless."  -  These'  were  points  which  -at  that
time  of  day,  were  thought  to  be  grounds  of  confi-
dence and  exultation.  But  this-  train  of  thought
no  sooner  rises  in  his  mind',  than  the  apostle  checks
it,  and  turnsfrom  it  to  an-anxious  view  .of  his  own
deficiencies.  "  If  by  any  means  I  might  attain
unto  the  resurrection  of  the  dead."  These  are
the  words  of  an  anxious  man.  "  Not,"  then  he
proceeds;  "  not  as  though  I  had  already  attained,
either  were  already  perfect ;  but  I  follow  after,  if
that  I  may  apprehend  that  for  which  also  I  am
apprehended  of  Christ  Jesus.  Brethren,  I  count
<npt  myself  to  have  apprehended,  but  this  one
thing  I  do;  forgetting  those  things  which^are lie-
hind,  and  reaching  forth  unto  those  things  whkh
are  before,  I  press  towards  the  mark,  for  the  prise
of  the  high  calling  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus."  In
this  passage,  you  see,  that,  withdrawing  his  mind
from  all  notions  of  perfection,  attainment,  accom-
plishment, security,  he  fixes  it  upon  his  deficien-
cies. Then  he  tells  you.  thatforgetting,  that  is,
expressly  putting  out  of  nis  mind  and  bis  thought,
the  progress  ana  advance  which  he  had  already
made,  he  casts  his  eyes  and  attention  upon  those
quatitiesin  which  he  was  short  and  deficient,  upon
what  remained  for  him  yet  to  do;  and  this  I  take
to  be  the  true  Christian  way  of  proceeding.  "  For-
get those  things  that  are  behind  ;n  put  out  of  your
thoughts  the  attainments  and  progress  you  have
already  made,  in  order  to  see  fully  your  defects
and  imperfections.

In  another  passage,  found  in  a  chapter  with
which  all  are  acquainted,  the  fifteenth  01  the  First
Epistle  to  the  Corinthians,  our  apostle,  having
occasion  to  compare  his  situation  with  that  of  the
other  apostles,  is  led  to  say:  "I  laboured  more
abundantly  than  they  all."  Saint  Paul's  labours
in  the  Gospel,  labours  which  consumed  his  whole
life,  were  surely  what  he  might  reflect  upon  with
complacency  and  satisfaction!  If  such  reflections
were  proper  in  any  case,  they  were  proper  in  bis.
Yet  observe  how  ehey  are  checked  and  qualified.
The  moment  he  had  said, "  I  laboured  more  abund-
antly than  they  all,"  he  added,  as  it  were,  correcting
himself  for  the  exjpreaaion,  "  Yet  not  I,  but  the


SERMONS  ON  SEVERAL  SUBJECTS.


861


grace  of  God,  which  was  with  me."  He  mag-
nifies not  himself,  hot  the  grace  of  God  which
was  with  him.  In  the  next  place v  you  will  ob-
serve, that,  though  the  consciousness  of  his  labours,
painful,  indefatigable  labours/  and  meritorious  la-
bours, if  ever  man's  were  so— I  say,  that,  though
the  consciousness  of  these  was  present  to  his  mind
at  the  time,  yet  it  did  not  hinder  him  from  feel-
ing, with  the  deepest  abasement  and  self-degrada-
tion, •his  former  offences  against  Christ,  though
they  were  offences  which  sprang  from  error..  "  I
am  the  least  of  the  apostles,  that  am  not  meet  to
be. called  an  apostle,  because  I  persecuted  the
church  of  God ;  but,  by  the  grace  of  God,  I  am
what  I  am."  The  faults- of  his  life  were  upper-
most in  his  mind.  No  mention,  .no.  recollection
of  iiis  services,  even  when  he  did  happen  to  recol-
lect them,  shut  out  even  for  a  single  moment,  the
deep  memory  of  his  offences,  or  covered  or  con-
cealed it  from  his  view.

In  jtnotber  place,  the  same  apostle,'  looking
.back  upon  the1  history  of  his  singular  and  eventful
file,  exhibits*  himself  to  his  converts,  as  how  ?  not
as  bringing  forward  his  merit,  pleading  his  ser-
vices, or  claiming  his  reward :  hut  aa.  nothing
other,  nothing  more,  than  a  monument  and  exam-

Sof  God  Almighty's  mercy.  Sinners  need  not
»ir  of  mercy,  when  so  great  a  sinner  as  him-
obtained  it.  Hear  his  own  words ;  "  For  this
cause  I  obtained  mercy,  that  in  me  first  Jesus
.Christ  might  show  forth  all  Ipng-suffbring,  for  a
pattern  to  them  which  should  hereafter  believe  on
him  to  life  everlasting;"  1  Timothy  i.  16.  What
could  be  more  humble  or  selfdepressing  than  this
acknowledgment?  yet  this  was-Saint  Paul's.

The  eleventh  chapter  of  the  Second.Epistle  to
the  Corinthians,  ana  also  the  twelfth,  ought  to  be
lead  by  you  on  this  occasion.  They  are  very  re-
matkaole  chapters,  and  very  much  to  our  present
purpose.  It  had  so  happened,  that  some  hostile,
and,  as  it  should  seem,  some  false  teachers,  had
acquired  a  considerable  influence  and  ascendancy
in  the  church  which  Saint  Paul  had  planted..  To
counteract  which  influence  it  became  .necessary
for  him  to  assert  his  character,  to  state  his  preten-
sions to  credit  and  authority,  amongst  them  at
least,  and  in  comparison  with  those  who  were
leading  them  astray.  He  complies  with  the  occa-
sion; and  he  does,  accordingly,  set  .forth  and  enu-
merate his  pretensions:  But  I  entreat  you  to-ob-
serve,  with  how-  many  apologies,' with  what
.reluctance,  and  under  what  strong  'protestations,
he  does  it;  showing. most  manifestly,  how  con-
trary it  was  to  his  habit,  his  judgment,  and  to  the
inclination  of  his  mind  to  do  so.  His  expressions
are  such  as  these :  "Would  to  God  ye  could  bear
with  me  a  little  in*  my  folly ;  and,  indeed,  bear
with  me."  What  was  his  fbjty  1  the  recital  he
was  about  to  give  of  his  services  and  pretensions.
— Though  compelled  by  the  reason  you  have
heard,  to  give  it,  yet  he  calls  it  folly  to  do  so.  He
is  interrupted  as  "he  proceeds  by  the  same  senti-
ment ;  "-That  which  I  speak,  I  speak  it  not  .after
the  Lord,  but,  as  it  were,  foolishly  in  this  confi-
dence of  boasting.'1.  And  again,  referring  to  the
necessity,  which  drew  from  him  this  sort  of  lan-
guage ;  "  I  am  become,"  says  ne,  "  a,  fool  in  glory-
ing; ye  have  compelled  me."

But  what  forms,  perhaps,  the  strongest  part  of
the  example  is,  that  the  apostle  considers  this  ten-
dency to  boast  and  glory,  though  it  was  in  his
gifts,  rather  than  hit  services,  as  one  of  his  dan-


gers, one  ,pf  his  temptstions,-one  of  the  propensi-
ties which  he  had  -both  to.  guard  and  struggle
against,  and  lastly,  an  inclination,  for  whichhe
found  an  .antidote  and  remedy  in  the  dispense,-  '
tions  of  Providence  towards  him.  <  Of  his  gifts,  he  ■
-says{  considering  himself  as  nothing,  as  entirely
passive  in  the  hands  of  God,  "  of  such  a  one/'  of
a  person  to  whom  such  gifts  and  revelations  as
these  have  Been  imparted,  "  I  will  glory;  yet  of
myself  I  will  not  glory,  tyit  in  mine  infirmities."
Then  Jie  goes  on :  "  Lest  I  should  be  exalted
above  measure  through  the  abundance  of  the  re-
velations, there  was  given  to  me  a  thorn  in  .the
-fiesh,  the  messenger  of  Satan  to  buffet  me,  lest  I
should  be  exalted  above  measure."  -  -  -

After  what  you  have  heard,  you  will  not  won-
der, that  this  same  Bairn}' Paul  should  pronounce
himself  to  be  "  the  chief  of  sinners. — "  Jesus
C  hrist  came  into  the  wor^l  to  save  sinners,  of  whom
I  am  the  chief;"  1  Tim.  l  15.  His*  sins  were  up-
pewnostin  his  thoughts.  Other  thoughts- occa-
sionally visited,  his  mind  :  but  the  impression
which  these  )iad  made)  was  constant',  deep,  fixed,
and  indelible. ,

If,  therefore,  you  would  imitate  Saint  Paul  in
his  turn  and  train  of  religious  thought;  .if  yon
would  adopt  his  disposition,  his  frame,  his  habit
of  mind,,  in  this  important- exercise;  you  must
meditate  more  upon  your  sins,  and  less  upon  your
virtues.

Again ;  and  which  is  another  strong  scriptural
reason  for  the  adviqe  I  am  giving,  the  habit,  of
viewing  and  contemplating  our  own  virtues  has  a
tendency  in  opposition  to  a  fundamental  duty  of
our  religion.,  the  entertaining  of  a  due  and  grate-
ful sense  of  the  mercy  of  God  in  the  redemption
of  the  world  by  Jesus  Christ.  The  custom  of
thought,  which  we  dissuade,  is  sure  to  generate
in  us-notions'of  merit ;  and  that,  not  only  in  com-
parison with  other  men,  which  is  hy  no  means
good,  or  likely  to  produce  any  good  effect  upon
our  disposition,  but  also  in  relation  to  Qod  nun-
self;  whereas  the  whole  of  that  sentiment,  which
springs  dp  in  the  mind,  when  we  regard  our  cha-
racters in  comparison  with  those  of  other  men,  if
tolerated  at  all,  ought  to  sink  into  the  lowest  self*
abasement  when  we  advance  our  thoughts  to  God,
and  the, relation  in  whicb  we  stand  to  him.  Then
is  all  boasting,  either  in  spirit  or  by#  words,  to  be
done  away.  The  highest  act  of  faith  and  obedi-
ence, recorded  in  Scripture,  was  Abraham's  con-
sent to  sacrifice  his  son,  when  he  believed  that
God  required  it.  It  was  the  severest  trial  that
hujnan  nature  could  be  put  upon;  and,  therefore,
if  any  man,  who  ever  lived,  were  authorised  h>
boast  o/  his  obedience,  it  was  Abraham  after  this
experiment  Yet  what  says  Saint  Paul  1  "If
Abraham  were  justified  by-works,  he  hath  Wheie-
of  to  glory ;  but  not  before  God."  No  man's  pre-
tensions to  glory  were  greater,  yet,  before  God.
they  were  nothing.  "  By  grace  ye  are  saved
through  faith,  and  thaVnet  of  yourselves,  lest  any
man  should  beast ;"  Eph-  ii.  8,  9.  ,  Here  yon
perceive  distinctly,  that  speaking  of  salvation,  with
reference  to  its  cause,  it  is  by  grace ;  it  is  an  act  of
pure  favour :  it  is  not  of  yourselves ;  it  is  the  gift
of  God;  it  m  not  of  works;  and  that  this  repre-
sentation was  given,  test  any  man  should  boast,
that  is,  expressly  for  the  purpose  of  beating  down
and  humbling  all  sentiments  of  merit  or  desert  in
what  we  do :  lest  they  induce  us,  as  they  will  in-
duce us,  to  dunk  less  gratefully,  or  leas  piously,


698


SERMONS  ON  SEVERAL  SUBJECTS.


of  God's  exceeding  love  and  kindness  towards  as.
There  is  no  proportion  between  even  oar  best
services  end  that  reward  which  God  hath  in  re-
serve lor  them  (hat  love  him.-  Why  then  are
each  services  to  be  so  rewarded?  It  is  the  grace
of  God ;  it  is  the  riches  of  his  grace ;  in  other
words,  his  abounding  kindness"  and  favour;  it  is
his  love  i  it  is  his  mercy.  In  this  manner  the  sub-
ject is  constantly  represented  in  Scripture :  and  it
is  an  article  of  the  Christian  religion.  And  to
.  possess  our  minds  with  a  sense,  an  adequate  sense,
so  Jar  as  it  Is  possible  to  do  so,  of  this  truth,  is  a
tuty  of  the  religion.  But  to  fee  ruminating  and
HMWitatmg  upon  our  virtues,  is  not  the  way  to  ac-
quire that  sense.  Such  tneditatfops  breed  opinions
of  merit  and  desert ;  tit  presumption,  of  pride,  of
agpeicilkmsnese,  of  self-complacency  ^tempers  of
mmd,  in  a  word,  not  only  incompatible  with  hu-
mifity^but  also  mcompe&ble  with  that  sense  of
divine  love  and  mercy  towards  us,  which  lies  at
the  root  of  all  true  religion,  is  the  source  and
fountain  of  all  true  piety.

You  have  probably  heard  of  the  term  self-right-
eousness :  you  find  it  much  in  the  writings  and
dbuwuses  of  a  particular  class  of  Christians,  and
elwavs  accompanied  with  strong  and  severe  ex*
preanom  of  censure  and  reprobation.  If  the  term
mean  the  habit  of  contemplating  our  virtues,  and
not  our  vices;  or  a  atioiigWniiig  and  Inclination
thereto,  I  agree  with  those  Christians  in  thinking,
that*  is  a  msotisitioo- a  turn  of  mind  to  be  strong-
ly resisted,  and  restrained,  and  repressed.  If  the
term  mean  any  other  way  of  viewing  our"  own
character,  so  as  to  diminish  or  lower  our  sense  of.
God  Almighty's  goodness  and  mercy  towards  us,
in  making  us  the  tender  of  a  heavenly  reward,
then  also  I  agree  with  thenl  in  condemning  it,
both  as  erroneous  in  its  principle,  and  highly  dan-
gerous in  its  eilects.  If  the  term  mean  something
jnore  than,  or  different  from  what  is  here  stated,
and  what  has  been  enlarged  upon  in  this  dis-
course,  then  I  profess  myself  not  to  understand  its
meaning;


SERMON  XI.

to  rmtfK  lbm  or  ocb  TntTuas,  ahd  mork  of
' ; . \  oea  sins.  ' .  ^

Ary  tin  fr  ever  before  me.— Psalm  IL  3.

.  To  think  weB  is  the  way  to  act  rightly ;  be-
cause thought  is  die  source  and  spring  of  action.
When  the  course  and  habit  of  thinking  is  wrong,
the  root  is  corrupt;  "  and  a  corrupt  tree  bringeth
not  forth  good  fruit :''  Do  what  you  wiH.  if  the
root  be  corrupt,  the  fruit  will  be,  corrupt  afeo.  It
is  not  onW  true,  that  different  actions  will  proceed
from  different  trains  of  thought ;  but  it  is  also
true,  that  the  same  actions,  the  same  external  con-
duct, may  be  very  different  in  the  sight  of  God,
'  according  as  it  proceeds  from  a  right?  or  a  wrong,
a  more  or  less  proper  principle  ana  motive,  a  more
or  less  proper  mspositibn.  Such  importance'  is  at-
tached to  the  disposition;  of  such  great  conse-
quence is  it,  that  our  disposition  in  religious  mat-
ters be  what  it  should  be.  By  disposition  is
i  toe  bant  or  tendency  of  our  tnriinrtrons ;


and  by  disposition  is  also  meant,  the  train  and  ha-
bit of  our  thoughts,  two  things  which  are  always
nearly  connected.  It  b  the  latter  sense,  however,
in  which!  use  the  Vford ;  and  the  particular  les-
son which  I  am  inculcating,  for  the  conduct  of
our  thoughts,  is  to  think  more  of  our  sins,  and
less  of  our  virtues.  In  a  former  discourse,  I  show-
ed, that  there  are  strong  and  positive  Scripture
precepts,  a  due  regard  to  which  accords  with  the
state  of  mind  of  him  who  fixes  his  attention  upon
his  sins  and  defects,  and  by  no  means  with  hk
state  of  mind,  who  hath  filed  his  attention  chiefly
Upon  his  virtues  :  Secondly,  That  Scripture  ex-
amples, that  of  Saint  Paul  most  particularly,  teach
us  to,  renounce  the  thoughts  of  our  virtues,  and  to
entertain  deeply  and  constantly  the  thoughts  of
our  sins :  Thirdly,  That  the  habit  here  reproved,
is  inconsistent  with  a  due  sense  of  the  love  of  God
in  the  redemption  of  the  world  I  am  now  to
offer  such  /urther  reasons  as  appear  to  support
the  rule  I  have  hud  down..

And,  first,  There  is  no  occasion  whatever  to
meditate  upon  our  virtues  and  good  qualities,
We  may  leave  them  to  themselves.  We  need
not  fear  that  they  will  either  be  forgotten  or  un-
dervalued. "God  is  not  unrighteous  to  forget
your  works  and  labour  of  love :"  Hebrews  vi  la
He  will  remember  them;  we  need  not.  They  are
set  down  in  his  book;  not  a  particle  will  be  fast
Blessed  are  they  who  have  much  there;  but  we
need  not  count  them  up  in  our  recollection ;  for,
whatever  our  virtues  are  or  were,  we  cannot  make
them  better  by  thinking  of  them  afterwards.  We
may  make  them  better  in  future  by  thinking  of
their  imperfections,  and  by  endeavouring  to  en-
counter, to  lessen,  or  remove  those  imperfeejnons
hereafter;  but  then  this  arto  think,  not  of
virtues,  but  upon  our  iinMrfections.  Tb
upon  our  virtue*,  as  such,  has  no  tendency  to
make  them  better,  be  they  what  they  wilL
it  is  not  the  same  with  our  sins.  Thinking  i
these  afterwards;  may  make  a  very  great  alteri
in  them,  because  it  may  lead  to  an  effectual  re-
pentance. As  to  the  act  itself,  what  is  past  can-
net  be  recalled ;  what  is  done  cannot  be  undone:
the  mischief  may  possibly  be  irrevocable  and  irre-
parable. But  as  to  the  sin,  it  it  different.  Deep,
true,  sincere  penitence  may,  through  the  mercim
of  God  in  Christ  Jesus,  do  away  that  And  each
penitence  may  be  the  fruit  of  meditation  upon  our
sins ;  cannot  possibly  come  without  it  Nay,  the
■act  itself  may  be  altered.  It  is  not  always  that  an
injury  is  irreparable.  Wrong  indeed  has  been  re-
ceived at  our  hands;  but  restitution  or  cosnpejaam
tfon  may  be  in  our  power.  When  they  are  so,
they  are  the  surest  proofr^of  penitence.  No  peni-
tence is  sincere  without  them,  if  they  be  rjtactssa-
ble.  -This  benefit  to  those  whom  we  have  injured,
and  an  infinitely  mater  benefit  to  ourselves  than
fcrthem,  may  be  the  effect  of  seeing  our  sins  in
thejr  true  light,  which -that  man  never  does,  who
thinks  only,  or  chiefly r  or  habitually,  upon  bis
virtues.  Can  a  better  reason  be  given  lor  medi-
tating more  upon  our  sins,'  and  less  upon  our  vir-
tues, than  this;  that  one  train  of  thought  may  be
profitable  to  salvation,  the  other  is  profitable  for
nothing  %

It  is  an  exceedingly  good  sbservstian,  that  we
may  safely  leave  our  virtues  and -good  quaataes  to
themselves. And,  besides  the  use  we  nay*  i

ring  the  s
danger  of  giving  in,  to


of  it  in  showing  the  superfluity,  «■  ***  **  the
the  contempt*!**  of  om


SERMONS  ON  SEVERAL  SUBJECTS.


663


virtues,  H  is  also  a  quirting  and  consoling  re-
flection for  V  different,  and,  in  some  degree,  an
opposite  description  of  character,  that  is  to  say,
fjpi  tender  and  timorous  consciences.  Such  are
sometimes  troubled  with  doubt*  dnd  scruples
about  even  their  good  actions.  Virtue  was  too
easy  for  them,  or  too  difficult;  too  easy  and  plea-
sant to  have  any  merit  in  it:  or  difficult  by  rea-
son of  fleshy,  selfish,  or  depraved  propensities,
still  existing  unsubdued,  still  struggling  in  their
unregeneratod  hearts.  These  are  natural,  and,  as
I  have  sometimes  known  them,  very  distressing
scruples.  I  think  that  observations  might  be  ot-
tered to  remove  the  ground  of  them  altogether:
but  what  I  have  at  present- to  suggest  is,  that  the
very  acj  of  reflection,  which  leads  to  them,  is  un-
necessary, provided  yon  will  proceed  by  our  rule,
«tr.  to  leave  your  virtues,  such  as  they  are,  to
themselves;  and  to  bend  the  whole  force  of  your
thought  towards  your  sins,  towards  the  conquest
•f  these.

But  it  will  be  said,  are  we  not  to  taste  the  com-
forts of  religion  1  Are  we  not  to  be  permitted,  or
rather  ought  we  not  to  be.  encouraged,  to  relish,
to  indulge,  to  enjoy  these  comforts!  And  can
this  be  done  without  meditating  upon  our  good
actions.

I  answer,  that  this  can  be  done  without  medi-
tating upon  our  good  actions.  We  need  not  seek
the  comforts  of  religion  in  this  way.  Much  we
need  not  stek them  at  all;  they. will  visit  us  of
their  own  accord,,  if  we  be  serious  and  hearty  in
our  religion.  A  well-spent  life  will  impart  its  sup-
port to  the  spirits,  without  any  endeavour,  on  our
part,  to  call  up  our  merits  to  our  view,  or  even  al-
lowing the  idea  of  merit  to  take  possession  of  our
minds.  There  will,  in  this  respect,  always  be  as
much  difference  as  there  ought  to  be,  between  the
righteous  man  and  the  sinner,  Tor,  to  speak  more
properly,  between  sinners  of  different  degrees,)
without  taking  pains  to  draw  forth  in  our  recol-
lection instances  of  our  virtue,  or  to  institute  a
comparison  between  ourselves  and  others,  or  cer-
tain others  of  our  acquaintance.  These  are  habits.
which  I  hold  to  be  unchristian  and  wrong;  ana
mat  the  true  way;  of  finding  and  feeling,  the  con-
aoJations  of  religion,  is  by  progressively  conquer-
ing our  sins.  Think  of  these;  contend  with
these,  and,  if  yon  contend  with  sincerity,  and
with  effect,  which  is  the  proof  indeed  of  sincerity,
I  will  answer  for  the  comforts  of  religion  being
your  portion.  What  is  it  that  disturbs  our  reh-
fpourf  tranquillity;  ?  What  is  it  that  embitters  or
impairs  our  religious  comfort,  damps  and  checks
oar  religious  hopes,  hinders  us  from  relishing
and  entertaining  these  ideas,  from  turning  to
them,  as  a  supply  of  consolation  under  all  circum-
stances 1  What  is  it  but  our  sins'?  Depend  upon
it,  that  it  is  sin,  and  nothing  else,  which  spoils  our
religious  comfort.  Cleanse  your  heart  from  sin.
and  religion  will  enter  in,  with  all  her  train  or
hopes  .and  consolations.  For  proof  of  this,  we
may.  as  before,  refer  to  the* examples  of  Scripture
Christiana.  They  rejoiced  in  the  Lord  continual-
ly. "  The  joy  of  faith,"  Phil.  i.  25.  "  Joy  in  the*
Holy  Ghost,"  Rom.  xiv\  17,  was  the  word  in
their  mouths,  the  sentiment  of  their  hearts.  They
•pake  of  their  religion  as  of  a  strong  consolation,
as  of  the  "  refuge  to  which  they  had  fled,  as  of
the  hops  of  which  they  had  laid  hold,  of  an  an-
chor of  the  soul  sure  and  steadfast :"  Heb.  vi.  18,
1&  Their  pianist  from  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ
4A  •


was,  "Your  heart  shall  rejoice,  and  year  joy  no
.  man  taketh  from  you :"  John  xvi.  22.  Was'  this
promise  fulfilled  to  them  1  Read  Acts  xiif.  52:
"  They  were  filled  with  joy  and  the  Holy  Ghost'1
"The  kingdom  of  God*  saith> Saint  Paul,  "is
ioy  in  the  fyly  Ghost :''  Rom.  xiv.  17.  So  that
St.  Paul,  you  hear,  takes  his  very  description  and
definition  of  Christianity  from  the  joy  which  is
diffused  bv§r  the  heart;  and  St.  Paul,  I  am  very
confident,  described  nothing  but  what  he  felt.
Yet  St.  Paul  did  not  meditate  upon  bis  virtues:
nay,  expressly  renounced  that  sort  of  meditation.
His  meditations,  on  the  contrary,  were  fixed  upon
his  own  unworthiness,  and  upon  the  exceeding,
stupendous  mercy  of  God  -towards  him,  through
Jeaus  Christ  his  Saviour.  At  least,  we  have  his
own  authority  for  saying,  that,  in*  his  Christian
progress,  he  never  looked  back;  he  forgot  that
which  was  behind,  whajtever  it  might  be,,  which
he  had  already  attained ;  he  refused  to  remember
it,  he  put  it  out  of  his  thoughts.  Yet,  upon  this
topic  of  religious  joy,  hear  him  again :  "  We  joy
in  God  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ :"  Ronr.  v.
H ;  and  once  more,  "  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit  is
love,  joy,  peace :"  Gal.  v.  22.  These  last  are
three  memorable  words,  and  they  describe,  not
the  effects  of  ruminating  upon  a  man's  own  vir-
tues, but  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit.

But  it  is  not  in  one  apostle  in  whom  we  find
this  temper  of  mind,  it  is  in  them  all.  Speaking
of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  St.  Peter  thus  addresses
his  converts :  "  Whom  having  not  seen,  ye  love;
in  whom,  though  now  ye  see  nim  not,  yet  believ-
ing ye  rejoice  with  joy  unspeakable  and  full  of
glory :"  1  Peter  L  8.  This  joy  covered  even,
their  persecutions  and  sufferings : "  Wherein  ye


greatly  rejoice,  though  now,  for  a  season  if  need
be,  ye  are  in  heaviness  through  manifold  tempta-
tions," 1  Peter  i.  6,  meaning  persecutions.  In
like  manner  St  James  saith,  u  Count  it  all  joy
when  ye  fall  into  divers  temptations,  that  is,  perse-
cutions ;"  and  why  1  "  knowing  this,  that  the  try-
ing of  your  faith  worketh  patience :"  James  i.  2,3.
Let  no  one,  after  these  quotations,  say,  that  it  is
necessary  to  fix  our  attention  upon  the  virtues-  of
our  character  in  order  to  taste  the  comforts  of  re-
ligion. No  persons  enjoyed  these  comforts  iaso
great  perfection  as  the  Christians  whom  we  read
of  in  Scripture,  yet  no  persons  thought  so  little
of  their  own  virtues.  What  they  continually
thought  upon  was.  the  abounding  love  of  Christ
towards  them,  "in  that,  whilst  they  were  yet
sinners,  he  died  for  them,"  and  the  tender  and  ex-
ceeding mercies  of  God  in  the  pardon  of  their  sins,
through  Christ.  From  this  they  drew  their  con-
solation ;  but  the  ground  and  origin  of  this  train
of  thought  ws82  not  the  Contemplation  of  virtue,
but  the  conviction  of  sin.

But  again :  The  custom  of  viewing  our  virtue,
has  a  strong  tendency  to  fill  us  with,  follactous
notions  of  our  own  state  and  condition.  One
almost  constant  deception  is  this,  viz.  that  in
whatever  quality  we  have  pretensions,  or  believe
that  we  have  pretensions  to  excel,  that  quality  we
place  at  the  head  of  all  other  virtues.  If  we  be
charitable,  then  "  charity  covereth  a  multitude  of
sins."  It  we  be  strictly  honest,  then  strict  honesty
is  no  less  than  the  bond  which"  keeps  society  to-
gether ;  and  conseauently,  is  .that  without  which
other  virtues  would  have  no  worth,  or  rather -no
existence.  If  we  be  temperate  and  chaste,  then
self-government  being  the  hardest  of  all  duties,  if


664


SERMONS  ON  SEVERAL  SUBJECTS.


the  rare*  test  of  obedience.  Now  every  one  of
these  proportions  is  true;  bat  the  misfortune  is,
that  only  one  of  them  is  thought  of  at  the  time,
and  that  the  one  which  favours  our  own  particu-
lar case  and  character.  The  comparison  of  dif-
ferent virtues,  aa  to  their  price  and  value,  may
give  occasion  to  many  nice  questions ;  and  some
rules  might  be  laid  down  upon  the  subject ;  but
I  contend  that  the  practice  itself  is  useless,  and
not  only  useless  but  delusive.  Let  us  leave,  as  I
have  already  said,  our  virtues  to  themselves,  not
engaging  our  minds  in  appreciating  either  their  in-
trinsic or  comparative  value  ;^  being  assured  that
they  will  be  weighed  in  unerring  scales.  Ourbu-
'  i  with  our


Again :  The  habit  of  contemplating  our  spirit-
ual acquirements,  our  religious  or  moral  excellen-
cies, has,  very  usually,  and,  I  think,  almost  una-
voidably, an  unfavourable  effect  upon  our  dispo-
sition towards  other  men.  A  man  who  is  con-
tinually computing  his  riches,  almost  in  spite,  of
himself,  grows  proud  of  his  wealth.  A  man  who
accustoms  himself  to  read  and  inquire,  and  think
a  great  deal  about  his  family,  becomes  vain  of  his
extraction :  he  can  hardly  neb  becoming  so.  A
man  who  has  his  titles  sounding  in  his  ears,  or
his  state  much  before  his  eyes,  is  lifted  up  by  bis
rank.  These  are  effects  which  every  one  observes;
and  no  inconsiderable  degree  of  the  same  effect
springs  from  the  habit  of  meditating  upon  our
virtues.  Now  humhle-mindedness  is  a  Christian
duty,  if  there  be  one.  It  is  more  than  a  duty ;  it
is  a  principle.  It  is  a  principle  of  the  religion  ;
ind  its  influence  is  exceedingly  great,  not  only
upon  our  religious,  but  our  social  character.  They
Who  are  truly  humble-minded,  have  no  quarrels,
give  no  offence,  contend  with  no  one  in  wrath  and
bitterness ;  still  more  impossible  is  it  for  them  to  in-
tuit any  man  under  any  circumstances.  But  the
way  to  be  humble-minded  is  the  way  I  am  pointing
out,  viz.  to  think  less  of  our  virtues,  and  more  of  our
sins.  In  reading  the  parable  of  the  Pharisee  and
the  publican,  if  we*  could  suppose  them  to  be  real
characters,  I  should  say  of  them,  that  the  one  had
just  come  from  ruminating  upon  his  virtues,  the
other  from  meditating  upon  his  sins.  And  mark
the  difference;  first,  m  their  behaviour;  next,  in
their  acceptance  with  God.  The  pharisee  all
loftiness,  and  conlemptqousness,  and  recital,  and
comparison,  full  of  ideas  of  merit,  views  the  poor
publican,  although  withdrawn  to  a  distance  from
him,  with  eyes  of  scorn.  The  publican,  on  the
contrary,  enters  not  into  competition  with  the
pharisee,  or  with  any  one.  So  far  from  looking
round,  he  durst  not  so  much  as  lift  up.  his  eyes ;
but  casts  himself,  hardly  indeed  presumes  to  cast
liimself,  not' upon  the  justice,  but  wjioUy  and
solely  upon  the  mercies'  of  his  Maker:  "  Gfod  be
merciful  to  me  a  sinner."  We  know  the  judg-
ment which  our  Lord  himself  pronounced  upon
the  case :  V I  tell  you,  this  man  went  down  to  his
house  justified  rather  than  the  other:"  Luke
xviii.  14.  The  more,  therefore,  we  are  like  the
publican,  and  the  less  we  are  like  the  pharisee,  the
more  we  come  up  to  the  genuine  temper  of
Christ's  religion.

Think,  then,  less  of  your  virtues:  more  of  your
ems.  Do  I  hear  any  one  answer,  I  have  no  sins
to  think  upon ;  1  have  no  crimes  which  lie  upon
my  conscience :  I  reply,  that  this  may  be  true  with
respect  to  some,  nay,  with  respect  to  many  per-
sons, according  to  the  idea  we  commonly  annex


to  the  words,  sins  and  crimes;
acts  of  gross  and  external  wickedness,
further;  enlarge  vour  views.  Is  your  obedience
-to  the  law  of  God  what  it  ought  to  be,  or  what  it
might  be  1  The  first  commandment  of  that  law
is,  "  Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God  with  all
thy  heart,  with  all  thy  mind,  and  with  all  thy
strength."  Is  there,  upon  the  subject  of  this  com-
mandment, no  matter  for  thought,  no  room  for
amendment  1  The  second  commandment  is,
"  Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself"  Is
all  with  us  as  it  should  be  here  1  Again,  there
is  a  spirituality  in  the  commands  of  Christ's  reli-
gion, which  will  cause  the  man  who  obeys  them
truly,  not  only  to  govern  his  actions,  but  his  words:
not  only  his  words,  but  his  inclinations  and  his
dispositions,  his  internal  habits,  as  well  as  ma  ex-
ternal life.  "  Ye  have  heard  that  it  hath  been
said  of  old  time,  Thou  shalt  not  commit  adultery:
But  I  say  unto  you,  He  that  looketh  on  a  woman
to  lust  after  her,"  that  is,  he  who  voluntarily  in-
dulges and  entertains  in  his  mind  an  unlawful
desire,  "  hath  committed  adultery  with  her  already
in  his  heart,"  is  by  the  very  entertainment  of  such
ideas,  instead  of  striving  honestly  and  resolutely  te
banish  them  from  bis  mind,  or  to  take  his  mind
off  from  them,  a  sinner  in  the  sight  of  God,
Much  the  same  kind  of  exposition  belongs  to
the  other  commandments ;  not  only  is.  murder  for-
bidden, but  all  unreasonable  intemperate  anger
and  passion ;  not  only  stealing,  but  all  hard  and
unfair  conduct,  either  in  transacting  business  with
those,  who  are  upon- a  level  with,  us,  or,  where  it
is  more  to  be  feared,  towards  those  who  are  in  our
power.  And  do  not  these  points  open  to  us  a
field  of  inquiry,  how  far  we  are  concerned  in  them?
There  may  not  be  what,  strictly  speaking,  can  be
called  an  act  or  deed,  which  is  scandalously  bad :
yet  the  current  of  our  imaginations,  the  bent  of
our  tempers,  the  stream  of  our  affections,  may
all,  or  any  of  them,  be  wrong,  and  may  be  requir-
ing, even  at  the  peril  of  our  salvation,  stronger
control,  a  better  direction.

A  gam:  There  may  not  be  any  action  which,
singly  and  separately  taken,  amounts  to  what
would  be  reckoned,  a  crime:  yet  there  may  bo
actions,  which  we  give  into,  which  even  oar  own
consciences  cannot  approve ;  and  these  may  be  so
frequent  with  us,  as  to  form  a  part  of  the  course
and  fashion  of  our  lives.

-  Again:  It  is  possible,  that  some  of  the  miscar-
riages in  conduct,  of  which  we  have  to  accusa
ourselves,  may  be  imputable  to  inadvertency  off
surprise.  But  could  these  miscarriages  happen
so  often  as  they  do,  if  we  exercised  that  vigilance
in  our  Christian  course,  which  not  only  forms  a
part  of  the  Christian  character,  but  is  a  sure  effect
of  a  sincere  faith  in  religion,  and  a  corresponding
solicitude  and  concern  about  it  1  Lastly,  uprafit-
ableness  itself  is  a  sin.  We  need  not  do  ™^bW
in  order  to  commit  sin;  uselessness,  when  wo
might  be  useful,  is  enoqgh  to  make  us  sinners  be-
fore God.  The  fig-tree  in  the  Gospel  was  cut
down,  not  because  it  bore  sour  fruit,  but  because
it  bore  none.  The  parable  of  the  talents  (Matt,
xxv.  14.)  is  pointed  expressly  against  the  simple
neglect  of  faculties  and  opportunities  of  doing
good,  as  contradistinguished  from  the  perpetra-
tion of  positive  crimes.  Are  not  all  these  topics
fit  matters  of  meditation,  in  the  review  of  our  limes  1
Upon  the  whole,  when  I  hear  a  person  say  he
luii  no  sins  to  think  4ipon,  I  oondudo  that  fe#


\


SERMONS  ON' SEVERAL  SUBJECTS.


566


*  has  not  thought  seriously  concerning  religion  at
aH  ^

Let  oar  sine,  then,  be  ever  before  .us ;  if  notour'
crimes,  of  which  it  is  possible  that,  according  to
the  common  acceptation  of  that  word,  we  may  not
have  many  to  remember;  let  our  omissions,  defi-
ciencies, failures,  our  irregularities  of  heart  and  af-
fection, our  vices  of  temper  and  disposition,  our
course  and  habit  of  giving  into  smaller  offences,
meaning,  as  I  do  mean,  by  offences,  ail  those
things  which  out  consciences  cannot  really/  ap-
prove; our  slips,  and  inadvertencies  and  surprises,
much  too  frequent  for  a  man  in  earnest  about  sal-
vation :  let  tpese  things  occupy  our  attention ;  let
this  be  the  bent  and  direction  of  our  thoughts :  for
they  are  the  thoughts  which  will  bring  us  to  God
evangelically;  because  they  are  the  thoughts
which  will  not  only  increase  our'  vigilance,  but
Which  must  inspire  us  with  that  humility  as  to
ourselves,  with  that  deep,  and  abiding,  and  opera-
tine  sense  of  God  Almighty's  love  and  kindness
auia  mercy  towards  us,  in  and  through  Jesus
Christ  our  Saviour,  which-it  was  one  great  aim
and  end  of  the  Gospel,  and  of  those  who  preached
it,  to  inculcate  upon  all  who  came  to  take  hold  of
the  offer  of  grace.


SERMON  XII.

SALTATION  FOR  PENITENT  SINNERS.

Wherefore  I  aay  unto  thee,  &sr  sins,  which  are
many,  are  forgiven ;  for  she  loved  much.—
Luke  vn.  47.

It  has  been  thought  an  extravagant  doctrine,
that  the  greatest  sinners  were  sometimes  nearer
to  the  kingdom  of  heaven  than  they  whose  offences
'were  less  exorbitant,  and  less  conspicuous:  yet
I  apprehend,  the  doctrine  wants  only  to  be  ration-
ally explained,  to  show  that  it  has  both  a


deal  of  truth,  and  a  great  deal  of  use  in  it ;  that  it
inay  be  an  awakening  religious*  proposition  to
some,  whilst  it  cannot,  without  being  wilfully
inisconstrued,  delude  or  deceive  any.

Of  all  conditions  in  the  world,  the  most  to  be
despaired  o^  is  the  condition  of  those  who  are
altogether  insensible  and  unconcerned  about  reli-
gion; and  yet  they  may  be,  in  the  mean  time,
tolerably  regular  m  their  outward  behaviour;
there  may  be  nothing  in  it  to  give  great  offence ;
their  character  may  be  iair;  they  may  pass  with
the  common  stream,  or  they  may  even  be  well
spoken  of;  nevertheless,  I  say,  that,  whilst  this
insensibility  .remains  upon  their  minds,  their  con-
dition is  more  to  be  despaired  of  than  that  of  any
other  person.  The  rehgion  of  Christ  does  not  in
any  way  apply  to  them :  they  do  not  belong  to  it;
for  are  they  to  be  saved  by  performing  God's  will  ?
God  is  not  in  their  thoughts ;  his  will  is  not  before
their  eyes.  They  may  do  good  things,  but  it  is
not  from  a  principle  of  obedience  to  God  that  they
do  them.  There  may  be  many  crimes  which  they
are  not  guilty  of;  but  it  is  not  out  of  regard  to  the
wifl  of  God  that  they  do  not  commit  them.  It
doss  not,  therefore,  appear,  what  lust  hopes  they
can  entertain  of  heaven,  upon  the  score  of  an
obedience  which  they  not  only  do  not  perform,
but  do  not  attempt  to  perform.  Then,  secondly,
if  they  are  to  hope  In  Christ  for  a:  forgiveness  or


their  imperfections^  for  acceptansB  through  him,
of  broken- and  deficient  services,  the  truth  is,  they
have  recourse  to  no  such  hope;  besides,  it  is  not
imperfection- with  which  they  are  charged,  but  a
total  absence  of  principle.  A  man*  who  never
strives  to  obey,  never  indeed  bears  that  thought
about  him,  must  not  talk  of  the  imperfection"  of*
his  obedience:  neither  the  word,  nor  the  idea.
pertains  to  him ;  nor  can  he  speak  of  broken  ana
deficient  services,  who  in  no  true  sense  of  the
term  hath  ever  served  God  at  all.  I  own,  there-
fore, I  do  not  perceive  what  rational  hopes  religion
can  hold  out  to  insensibility  and  nnconcernedness;
to  those  who  neither  obey  its  rules,  nor  seek  its
aid  :  neither  follow  after  its  rewards,  nor  sue,  I
mean,  in  spirit  and  sincerity,  sue,  for  its  pardon.
But  how,  it  will  be  asked,  can  a  man  be  of  regular
and  reputable  morals,  with  this  religious  insensibi-
lity :  in  other  words,  with  the  want  of  vital  reli-
gion in  his  heart  1  I  answer,  that  it  can  be.  A
general  regard  to  character,  knowing  that  it  is  an
advantageous  thing  to  possess  a  good  character ;
or  a  regard  generated  by  natural  and  early  habit;
a  disposition- to  follow  the  usages  of  life,  which  are
practised  around  us,  and  which  constitute  decen-
cy; calm  passions,  easy  circumstances,  orderly
companions,  may,  in  a  multitude  of  instances,
keep  men  within  rules  and  bounds,  without  the
operation  of  any  religious  principle  whatever.

There  is  likewise  another  cause,  which  has  a
tendency  to  shut  out  religion  from  the  mind,  and
vet  hath  at  the  same  time'  a  tendency  to  make
men  orderly  and  decent  in  their  conduct :  and  that
cause  is  business..  A  close  attention  to  business
is  very  apt  to  exclude  all  other  attentions ;  espe-
cially those  of  a  spiritual  nature,  which  appear  to
men  of  business  shadowy  and  unsubstantial,  and
to  want  that  present  reality  and  advantage  which
they  have  been  accustomed  to  look  for  and  to  find
in  their  temporal  concerns ;  and  yet  it  is  un-
doubtedly true,  that  attention  to  business  frequent-
ly and  naturally  produces  regular  manners.  Here,
therefore,-  is  a  case,  in  which  decency  of  behaviour
shall  subsist  along  with  religious  insensibility,  for-
asmuch as  one  cause  produces  both— -an  intense
application  to  business.

Decency,  order,  regularity,  industry,  applica-
tion to  our  calling,  are  all  good  things ;  but  then
they  are  accompanied  with  this  great  danger,  viz.
that  they  may  subsist  without  any  religious  influ-
ence whatever;  and  that,  when  they  do  so,  their
tendency  is  to  settle  and  confirm  men  in  religious
insensibility.  *Fof  finding  things  go  on  very
smoothly,  finding  themselves  received  and  re-
spected without  any  religious  principle,  they  are
kept  asleep,  as  to.  their  spiritual  concerns,  by  the
very  quietness  and  prosperity  of  thingfc  around
them.  "  There  is  a  way  that  seemeth  right  unto
a  man,  but  the  end  thereof  are  the  ways  t>7  death."
It  is  possible  to  slumber  in  a  fancied  security,  or
rather  in  an  unconsciousness  of  danger,  a  blind-
ness to  our  true  situation,  a  thoughtlessness  or
stupefaction  concerning  it,  even  at  the  time  when
we  are  in  the  utmost  peril  of  salvation :  when  we
are  descending  fast  towards  a  slate  or  perdition.
It  is  not  the  judgment  of  an  erroneous  conscience :'
that  is  not  the  case  I  mean.  It  is  rather  a  want
of  conscience,  or  a  conscience  which  is  never
exerted ;  in  a  word,  it  is  an  indifference  and  in-
sensibility concerning  religion,  even  in  the  midst
of  seeming  and  external  decency  of  behaviour,
and  soothed  and  lulled  by  this  very  qicnmstanne.


6M


SERMONS  ON  SEVERAL  SUBJECTS.


Now  it  If  not  esJy  within  the  compass  of  possibi-
Ifttj,  baft  it  frequently,  nay,  I  hope,  it  very  fre-
quently comes  to  pass,  that  open,  confessed,
acknowledged  sins,  sting  the  sinner's  conscience :
.  that  the  upjsraidings  of  mankind,  the  cry,  the  cla-
mour, the  indignation,  which  his  wicked  neaa  has
excited,  may  at  length  come  home  to  hi*  own  soul ;
may  compel  him  to  reflect,  may  bring  him,  though
by  farce  and  violence,  to  a  sense  of  his  guilt,  and
a  knowledge  of  bis  situation.  Now  1  amy,  that
this  tense  of  sin,  by  whatever  cause  it  be  produced,
ia  better  than  religious  insensibility.  The  sinner*
penitence  is  more  to  be  trusted  to  than  the  seem-
ingly righteous  man's  security.  The  one  is
roused ;  ia  roused  from  the  deep  forgetfumess  of
religion  in  which  he  had  hitherto  lived.  Good
fruit,  even  fruit  unto  life  everlasting,  may  spring
from  the  motion  which  is  stirred  in  his  heart.
The  other  remains,  as  to  religion,  in  a  state  of
torpor.  The  thing  wanted,  as  the  quickening
principle,  as  the  seed  and  germ  of  religion  in  the
heart,  ia  compunction,  convincement  of  sin,  of
danger,  of  the  necessity  of  flying  to  the  Redeemer
aad  to  hia  religion  in  good  earnest.-  "  They  were
pricked  in  their  heart,  and  aaid  to  Peter  and  to  the
feat  of  the  apostles,  Men  and  brethren,  what  shall
we  do  V*  This  was  the  state  of  mind  of  those
who  first  heard  the  Gospel :  and  this  is  the  state
of  mind  still  to  be  brought  about  before  the  Gos-
pel be  heard  with  effect  And  sin  will  sometimes
do  it,  when  outward  righteousness  will  not;  1
mean  by  outward  righteousness  external  decency
of  manners,  without  any  inward  principle  of  reli-
gion whatever.  The  sinner  may  return  and  fty
to  God,  even  because  die  world  is  against  him.
The  visibly  righteous  man  ia  in  friendship  with
the  world :  ana  the  "  friendship  ef  the  world  is
enmity  with  God,"  whensoever,  as  I  have  before
expressed  it,  it  soothes  and  lulls  men  in  religious
insensibility;

But  bow,  it  will  be  said,  is  this!  Is  it  not  to
encourage  ami  Is  it  not  to  put  the  sinner  in  a
mora  hopeful  condition  than  the  righteous  ?  Is  it
not,  in  some  measure,  giving  the  greatest  sinner
the  greatest  chance  of  being  saved  1  This  may
be  objected ;  and  the  objection  brings  me  to  sup-
port the  assertion  in  the  beginning  of  my  dis-
course, that  the  doctrine  proposed  cannot,  without
being  wilfully  misconstrued,  deceive,  or  delude
any.  Firs^  you  ask,  is  not  this  to  encourage  sin  1
I  answer,  it  is  to  encourage  the  sinner  who
repents;  and,  if  the  sinner  repent,  why  should  he
not  be  encouraged  1  But  some,  «ydb  say,  will  take
occasion,  from  this  encouragement,  to  plunge  into
sin.  I  ^  answer,  that  then  they  wilfully  misapply
ft :  for  if  they  enter  upon  sin  intending  to  repent
afterwards,  I  take  upon  me  to  teirthem,  that  no
true  repentance  can  come  of  such  intention.  The
very  intention  is  a  fraud :  instead  of  being  the
parent  of  true  repentance,  it  is  itself  to  be  repented
of  bitterly.  Whether  such  a  man  ever  repent  or
not  ia  another  question,  but  no  sincere  repentance
can  issue  or  proceed  from  this  intention.  It  must
come  altogether  from  another  quarter.  It  will
look  back,  when  it  does  come,  upon  that  previous
Intention  with  hatred  and  horror,  as  upon  a  plan,
ana*  scheme,  and  design  to  impose  upon  and  abuse
the  mercy  of  God.  The  moment  a  plan  is  formed
of  sinning  with  an  intention  afterwards  to  repent,
at  that  moment  the  whole  doctrine  of  grace,  of
repentance,  and  of  course  this  part  of  it  amongst
the  rest,  is  wilfufly  misconstrued. Tbegrace  of


God  is  turned  into  laachmoaneaw  At  the  time
this  design  is  formed,  the  person  tbrminjg  it  is  in
the  bond  of  iniquity,  aa  St  Peter  told  Simon  he
was ;  in  a  state  of  eminent  perdition:  and  this
design  will  not  help  him  out  of  it  We  say  that
repentance  is  sometimes  more  likely  to  be  brought
about  in  a  confessed,  nay,  notorious  and  convicted
sinner,  than  in  a  seemingly  regular  life:  but  it  is
of  true  repentance  that  we  apeak,  and  no  true
repentance  can  proceed  from  a  previous  intention
to  repent,  I  mean  an  intention  previous  to  the  sin.
Therefore  no  advantage  can  be  taken  of  this  doe-
trine  to  the  encouragement  of  am,  without  wilfully
misconstruing  it

But  then  you  mjl  we  place  the  sinner  in  a
more  hopefu)  condition  than  the  righteous.  But
who,  let  us  inquire,  are  the  righteous  we  apeak
of?  Not  they,  who  are  endeavouring,  however
imperfectly,  to  perform  the  will  of  God;  not
they,  who  are  actuated  by  a  principle  of  obe-
dience to  him;  but  men  who  are  orderly  and
regular  in  their  visible  behaviour  without  an  in-
ternal religion.  To  the  eye  of  man  they  appear
righteous.  But  if  they  do  good,  it  is  not  from  the
lovg  or  fear  of  God,  or  out  of  regard  to  religion
that  they  do  it,  but  from  other  consideration*.  If
they  abstain  from  sin,  tbey  abstain  from  it  out  of
different  motives  from  what  religion  oners ;  and
so  long  as  they  have  the  acquiescence  and  appro-
bation of  the  world,  they  are  kept  in  a  state  of
sleep ;  in  a  state,  as  to  religion,  of  total  negligence
and  unconcern.  Of  these  righteous  •  men  there
are  many ;  and,  when  wecompare  their  condition
with  that  of  the  open  sinner,  it  ia  to  rouse  them,
if  possible,  to  a.  sense  of  religion.  A  wounded
conscience  ia  better  than  a  conscience  which  is
torpid.  When  conscience  begins  to  do  its  office,
they  will  feel  things  changed  within  them  mighti-
ly. It  will  no  longer  be  their  concern  to  keep  fair
with  the  world,  to  preserve  appearances,  to  main-
tain a  character,  to  uphold  decency,  order,  and
regularity  in  their  behavkJfcr;  but  it  will  be  their
concern,  to  obey  God,  to  think  of  him,  to  love  him,
to  fear  mm ;  nay,  to  love  him  with  all  their  heart,
with  all  their  mind,  with  all  their  aool,  with  all
their  strength ;  that  ia,  to  direct  their  cares  and
endeavours  to  one  single  point,  his  will ;  yet  their
visible  conduct  may  not  be  much  altered;  but
their  internal  motives  and  principle  will  he  altered
altogether.

This  alteration  must  take  place  in  the  heart,
even  of  the  seemingly  righteous.  It  may  tak«
place  also  in  the  heart  of  the  sinner ;  and,  we  say,
(and  this  is,  in  truth,  the  whole  which  we  say f )
that  a  conscience  pricked  by  sin  is  sometimes,
nay  oftentimes,  more  susceptible  of  the  impres-
sions of  religion,  of  true  and  deep  impteanons,
than  a  mind  which  has  been  accustomed  to  look
only  to  the  laws  and  customs  of  the  world,  to  con-
form itself  to  those  laws,  and  to  find  rest  and  satis*
faction  in  that  peace,  which  not  God,  but  the
world  gives.


SERMON  XIII.

SINS  OF  THE  FATHERS  UPON  THE  CHILDREN.

Thou  thalt  not  how  down  Oiysetf  to  thtmt  nm
oerve  them;  for  I  the  Lord  thy  God  am  ajoth
low  God,  visiting  the  iniquity  of  the  father


SERMONS  ON  SEVERAL  SUBJECTS.


W7


upon  the  children  unto'  the  third  and  fourth
generation  of  them  that  hate  me.-Exodus  zz.  5.

-  Tg^sc  words  form  part  of  the  second  com-,
mandment.  It  need  not  be  denied,  that  .there  is
an  apparent  harshness  in  this  declaration^  with
which  the  minds  even  of  good  and  pious  men  have
been  sometimes  sensibly  affected.  To  visit  the
sins  of  the  lathers'  upon  the  children,  even  to  the
third  and  fourth  generation,  is  not,  at  first  sight,
at  least,  so  reconcileable  to  our  apprehensions  of
justice  and  equity %  as  that  We  should  expect  to
find  it  in  a  solemn  publication  of  the  will  of  God.

-  1  think,  however,  that  a  fiur  and  candid  inter-
pretation of  the  words  before  us  will  remove  a  great
deal  of  the  difficulty,'  and  of  the  objection  which
lies  against  them.  My  exposition  of  the  passage
Is  contained  in  these  four  articles:— First,  that
the  denunciation  and  sentence  relate  to  the  sin  Of
idolatry  in  particular,  if  not  to  that  alone.  Se-
condly, That  it  relates  to  temporal,  or,  more  pro-
perly speaking,  to  family  prosperity  and  adversity.
Thirdly,  That  it  relates  to  the  Jewish  economy,
in  that  particular  administration  of  a  visible  pro-
vidence, under  which  they  lived. Fourthly,  that

^  at  no  rate  does  it  affect,  or  was  ever  meant  to  af-
fect, the  acceptance  or  salvation  of  individuals  in  a
future  life.

First,  I  say,  that  the  denunciation  and  sentence
relate  to  the  sin  of  idolatry  in  particular,  if  not  to
that  alone.  The  prohibition  of  the  commandment
is  pointed  against  that  particular  offence,  and  no
other.  The  first  and  second  commandment  may
be  considered  as  one.  inasmuch  as  they  relate  to
one  subject,  or  nearly  so.  For  many  ages,  and
by  many  churches,  they  were  put  together,  and
considered  as  one  commandment  The  subject  to
which  they  both  relate,  is  false  worship,  or  the
worship  of  false  gods.  This  is  the  single  subject,
to  which  the  prohibition  of  both  commandments
relates;  the  single  class  of  sins  which  is  guarded
against.  Although,  therefore,  the  expression  be,
"the  sins  of  the  fothers,"  without  specifying  in
that  clause  what  sins*  yet  in  fair  construction,  and
indeed  in  common  construction,  we  may  well  sup-
pose it  to  be  that  kind  and  class  of  sins,  for  the
restraint  of  which  the  command  was  given,  and
against  which  its  force  was  directed.  The  pu-
nishment threatened  by  any  law,  must  naturally
be  applied  to  the  offence  particularly  forbidden  \jy
that  law,  and  not  to  offences  in  general.

One  reason  why  you  may  not, probably  per-
ceive the  full  weight  of  what  I  am  saying,  is,  that
we  do  not  at  this  day  understand,  or  think  much
^concerning  the  sin  of  idolatry,  or  the  necessity,  or
importance  of  God's  delivering  a  specific,  a  solemn,
a  terrifying  sentence  against  it.  The  sin  itself
hath  in  a  manner  ceased  from  among  us :  other
sins,  God  knows,  have  come  in  its  place ;  but  this,
in  a  great  measure,  is  withdrawn  from  our  obser-
vation r  whereas  invfhe  age  of  the  world,  and
among  those  people,  when  and  to  whom  the  ten
commandments  were  promulgated,  fake  worship,
or  the  worship  of  false  gods,  was  the  sin,  which
lay  at  the  root  and  foundation  of  every  other.  The
worship  of  the  one  true  God,  in  opposition  to  the
vain,  and  false,  and  wicked  religions,  which  had
then  obtained  amongst  mankind,  was  the  grand
point  to  be  inculcated.  It  was  the  contest  then
earned  on;  and  the  then  world,  as  well  as  future
ages,  were  deeply  interested  in  it  History  testi-
fies, experience  testifies,  that  there  cannot  be  true


morality,  or  true  virtue,  where  there  is  false  reft,
gion,  false  worship,  false  gods;  for  which  reason
you  find,  that  this  great  article  (for  such  it  then
was)  was  not  only  made  the  subject  of  a.  command,
but  placed  at  the  head  o/  all  the  rest.  Kay,  more;
from  the  whole  strain  and  tenor  of  the  Old  Tes-
tament, there  is  good  reason  to  believe,  that  the
maintaining  in  toe  world  the  knowledge  and  wor-
ship of  the  one  true  God,  holy,  just,  and  good,  in
contradiction  to  the  idolatrous  worship  which  pre-
vailed, was  the  great  and  principal  scheme  and
end  of  the  Jewish  polity  and  most  singular  con-
stitution. As  the  Jewish  nation,  therefore,  was
to  be  the  depository  of,  and  the  means  of  |


ing  in  the  world,  the  knowledge  and  worship  of
the  one  true  Goa,  when  it  was  lost  and  darkened
in  other  countries,  it  became  of  the  last  importance
to  the  execution,  of  this  purpose,  that  this  nation
should  be  warned  and  deterred,  by  every  moral
means,  from  sliding  themselves  into  those. prac-
tices, those  errors,  and  that  crime,  against  which
it  was  the  very  design  of  their  institution  that  they
should  strive  and  contend.

The  form  t>f  expression  used  in  the  second  com-
mandment, and  in  this  very  part  of  it,  much  fa-
vours the  interpretation  for  which  I  argue,  name-
ly, that  the  sentence-  or  threatening  was  aimed
against  the  sin  of  idolatry  alone.  The  words  are.
"For  I  the  Lord  thy  God  am  a  jealous  God,  ami
visit  the  sins  of  the  fathers  upon  the  children."
These  two  things,  of  being  jealous,  and  of  visiting
the  sins  of  the  fathers  upon  the  children,  are  spo-
ken of  God  in  conjunction ;  and  in  such  a  manner,
as  to  show  that  they  refer  to  one  subject.  _  Now
jealousy  implies  a  rival.  God's  being  jealous
means,  that  he  would  not  allow  any  other  god  to
share  with  himself  in  the  worship  or  his  creatures:
that  is  what  is  imported  in  the  word  jealous ;  and,
therefore,  that  is  the  subject  to  which  the  threat
of  visiting  the  sins  of  the  fathers  upon  the  children
is  applied!  According  to  this  interpretation,  thejbl-
lowing  expressions  of  the  commandment,  "  Them
that  hate  me,  and  them  -that  love  me2"  signify
them  that  forsake  and  desert  my  worship  and  re-
ligion for  the  worship  and  religion  of  other  gods,
and  them  who  adhere  firoily  and  faithfully  to  my
worship,  in  opposition  to  every  other  worship.

My  second  proposition  is,  that  the  threat  re-
lates to  temporal,  or,  more  properly  speaking,' to
family  prosperity  and  adversity,  in  the  history
of  the  Jews,  most  particularly  of  their  bines,  of
to  be  expected,  vce  read  and  Know


the  most,  we  meet  with  repeated  instances  of  this
same  threat  being  both  pronounced  and  executed
against  their  family  prosperity ;  and  for  this  very
same  cause,  their  desertion  of  the  true  God,  ana
ffoing  over,  after  the  example  of  the  nations  around
them  to  the  worship  of  false  gods.  Amongst  va-
rious other  instances,  one  is  very  memorable  and
very  direct  to  our  present  argument;  and  that  is
the  instance  of  Anab,  who  of  all  the  idolatrous
kings  of  Israel  was  the  worst  The  punishment
threatened  and  denounced  against  his  crime  was
this:  "Behold  I  will'  bring  evil  upon  thee,  and
will- take  away  thy  posterity,  and  will  make  thine
house  like  the  house  of  Jeroboam,  the  son  of  Ne-
bat,  and  like  the  house  of  Baasha,  the  son  of  Ahi-
jah,  for  the  provocation  wherewith  thou  hast  pro-
voked me  to  anger  and  made  Israel  to  sin."  The
provocation,  you  will  observe,  was  the  introduc-
tion of  false  sods  into  his  kingdom ;  and  the  prophet
hen  not  only  threatens  Ahah  with  the  ruin  and
47*


568


SERMONS  ON  SEVERAL  SUBJECT*


deetjuUfcjn  of  his  family,  as  the  punishment  of  hk
sin,  but  point!  out  to  bun  two  instances  of  great
Bunibes  having  been  destroyed  for  the  very  same
reason.  You  afterwards  read  the  lull  accomplish-
ment of  this  sentence  by  the  hand  of  Jeho.  Now
I  consider  these  instances  as  in  tact  the  execution
of  the  second  commandment,  and  as  showing  what
sense  that  commandment  bore.  But  if  it  Were  so;
if  the  force  of  the  threat  was,  that  in  the  distribu-
tion and  assignment  of  temporal  prosperity  and
adversity,  upon  a  man's  family  ana  race,  respect
would  be  had  to  his  fidelity  to  God,  or  bis  rebel-
lion against  him  in  this. article  of  false  and  idola-
trous worship;  then  is  the  punishment,  as  to  the
nature  and  justice  of  it,  agreeably  to  what  we  see
in  the  constant  and  ordinary  course  of  God's  pro-
vidence. The  wealth  and  grandeur  of  families
are  commonly  owing,  not  to  the  present  genera-
tion, but  to  the  industry,  wisdom,  or  good  eon-
duct  of  a  former  ancestor.  The  poverty  and  de-
pression of  a  family  are  not  impotable  tothe  present
representatives  of  the  family,  but  to  the  fault,  the
extravagance,  or  mismanagement,  of  those  who
went  before  them:  of  which  nevertheless  they
feel  the  effects.  All  this  we  see  every  day ;  and
we  see  it  without  surprise  ot  complaint.  What,
therefore,  accords  with  the  state  of  things  under
the  ordinary  dispensations  of  Providence  as  to
temporal  prosperity  and  adversity,  was  by  a  spe-
t  dal  providence,  and  by  a  particular  sentence,  or-
'  dainsd  to  be  the  mode,  and  probably  a  most  effica-
cious mode,  of  restraining  and  correcting  an  of-
fence, from  which  it  was  of  the  utmost  importance
to  deter  the  Jewish  nation.

My  third  proposition  is,  that  this  commandment
related  particularly  to  the  Jewish  economy.  In
the  28th  chapter  of  Deuteronomy,  you  find  Moses,
with  prodigious  solemnity,  pronouncing  the  bless-
ings and  cursings  which  awaited  the  children  of
Israel  under  the  dispensation  to  which  they  Were
called;  and  you  will  observe,  that  these  blessings
consisted  altogether  of  worldly  benefits;  and  these
curses  of  worldly  punishments  Moses  in  effect
declared,  that  with  respect  to  this  peculiar  people,
when  they  came  into  weir  own  land,  there  should
be  amongst  them  such  a  signal  and  extraordinary
and  visiBle  interposition  of  Providence,  as  to
shower  down  blessings,  and  happiness,  and  pros-
perity, upon  those  who  adhered  faithfully  to  the
God  of  their  fathers,  and  to  punish,  with  exem-
plary misfortunes,  those  who  disobeyed  and  de-
serted him.  Such,  Moses  told  them,  would  be
the  order  of  God's  government  over  them.  This
dispensation  dealt  in  temporal  rewards  and  pu-
nisnments.  And  the  second  commandment,  which
made  the  temporal  prosperity  and  adversity  of  fa-
milies depend,  in  many  instances,  upon  the  reli-
gious behaviour  pf  the  ancestor  of  such  families,
was  a  branch  and  consistent  part  of  that  dispen-
sation.

But,  lastly  and  principally,  my  fourth  proposi-
tion is,  that  at  no  rate  docs  it  affect,  or  was  ever
meant  to  affect,  the  acceptance  or  salvation  of  in-
dividuals in  a  future  life.  My  proof  of  this  pro-
position 1  draw  from  the  18th  chapter  of  Ezekiei.
It  should  seem  from  this  chapter,  that  some  of  the
Jews,  at  that  time,  had  put  too  large  an  interpre-
tation upon  the  second  commandment;  for  the
prophet  puts  this  question  into  the  mouth  of  bis
countrymen;  he  supposes  them  to  be  thus,  as  it
were,  expostulating  with  God:  "  Ye  say,  Why?
Doth  not  the  sou  bear  the  iniquity  of  the&ther  1"


that  k  the  question  be  makes  them  ask.  Now
take  notice  of  the  answer;  the  answer  which  the
prophet  delivers  in  the  name  of  God,  is  this:
"When  the  son  bath  done  that  which  is  lawful
and  rich*,  and  hath  kept  all  my  statute*  and  hath
done  tnem,  he  shall  surely  live.  The  soul  that
sinneth,  U  shall  die.  The  son  shall  not  bear  the
iniquity  of  the  father;  neither  shall  theiather  bear
the  iniquity  of  the  son :  the  righteousness  of  the
righteous  shall  be  upon,  him,  and  the  wickedness
of  the  wicked  shall  be  upon  him:"  ver.  19,  20.

In  the  preceding  part  of  the  chapter,  the  pro-
phet has  dilated  a  good  deal,  and  very  expressly
indeed,  upon  the  same  subject ;  all  to  confirm  the
great  truth  which  he  lays  down.  "Behold  all
souls  are  mine,  as  the  soul  of  the  father,  so  also
the  soul  of  the  son  is  mine;  the  soul  that  sinneth
it  shall  die."  Now  apply  this  to  the  second  com-
mandment :  and  the  only  way  of  reconciling  them
together,  is  by  supposing  that  the  second  com-
mandment related  solely  to  temporal,  or  rather
family  adversity  and  prosperity,  and  Ezekiei  a
chapter  to  the  rewards  and  punishments  of  a  fu-
ture state.  When  to  this  is  added  what  hath
been  observed,  that  the  threat  in  the  second  com-
mandment belongs  to  the  crime  forbidden  in  that
commandment,  namely,  the  going  over  to  false
gods,  and  deserting  the  one  true  God  -and  that  it
also  formed  a  part  or  branch  of  the  Mosaic  sys-
tem which  dealt  throughout  in  temporal  rewards
and  punishments,  at  that  time  dispensed  by  a  par-
ticular providence:  when  these  considerations  are
laid  together,  much  of  the  difficulty,  and  much  of
the  objection,  which  our  own  minds  may  have
raised  against  this  commandment,  will,  I  hope,  be


SERMON  XIV.

BOW  VIRTU*  PRODUCES  BELIEF,  AND  TICS
. UNBELIEF.

If  any  man  will  do  Bu  vill,  he  shall  know  of  the
'"  doctrine,  whether  it  be  qfGod.—rJahii  vii.  17.

It  does  not,  I  think,  at  first  sight  appear,  why
our  behaviour  should  influence  our  belief,  or  how
any  particular  course  of  action,  good  or  bad,  should
affect  our  assent  to  any  particular  propositions
which  are  offered  to  us:  for  truth  or  probability
can  never  depend  upon  our  conduct ;  the  credibility
or  incredibility  of  religion  is  the  same,  whether
we  act  well  or  ill,  whether  we  obey  its  laws  or
disobey  them.  Nor  is  it  very  manifest,  how  even
our  perception  of  evidence  or  credibility  should  be
affected  by  pur  virtues  or  vices:  because  conduct
j«  immediately  voluntary,  belief  is  not :  one  k  an
act  of  the  will,  under  the  power  of  motives;  the
other  Is  an  act  of  the  understanding,  upon  which
motives  do  hot,  primarily  at  least,  operate,  nor
ought  to  operate  at  all.  Yet  our  Lord,  in  the  text,
affirms  this  to  be  the  case,  namely,  that  our  beha-
viour does  influence  our  belief,  and  to  have  been
the  case  from  the  beginning,  that  is,  even  during
his  own  ministry  upon  earth.  "  If  any  man  wffl
do  His  will,  he  shall  know  of  the  doctrine,  whe-
ther it  be  of  God."  It  becomes,  therefore,  a  sub-
ject of  serious  and  religious  inquiry,  how,  why,  and
to  what  extent,  the  declaration  of  the  text  may  be


BERMONS  ON  SEVERAL  SUBJECTS.


we


Nowthe  first-and  most  striking  observation  is,
that  it  corresponds  with  experience.  The  fact,  so
far  as  can  be  observed,  is  as  the  text  represents  it
to  be.  I  speak  of  the  general  course  of  human
conduct,  which  is  the  thing  to  be  considered.
Good  men  are  generally  believers ;  bad  men  are
generally  unbelievers.  This  is  the  general  state
of  the  case,  not  without  exceptions ;  for,  on  the
one' hand,  there  may  be  men  of  regular  external
morals,  who  are  yet  unbelievers,  because  though
immorality  be  one  cause  of  unbelief,  it  is  not  the
only  cause :  and,  on  the  other  hand,  there  are  un-
doubtedly many,  who,  although  they  believe  and
tremble,  yet  go  on  in  their  sins,  because  their  faith
doth  not  regulate  theirjpractace.  But,  having  re-
spect to  the  ordinary  course  and  state  of  human
conduct,  what  our  Saviour  hath  declared  is  veri-
fied fey  experience.  He  that  doeth  the  will  of
God,  cometh  to  believe  that  Jesus  Christ  is  of
God,  namely,  a  messenger  from  God.  A  process
•eome  how  or  other  takes  place  in  the  understand-
ing, which  brings  the  mind  of  him  who  acts
rightly  to  this  conclusion.  A  conviction  is  formed,
and  every  day  made  stronger  and  stronger.  No
nan'  ever  comprehended  the  value  of  Christian
precepts,  but  by  conducting  his  life  according  to
them.  When,  by  so  doing,  he  is  brought  to  know
their  excellency,  their  perfection,  I  had  almost
said,  their^divinity,  he  is  necessarily  also  brought
to  think  well  of  the  religion  itself.  Hear  St  Paul :
— "  The  night  is  far  spent :  the  day  is  at  hand :
let  us,  therefore  cast  off  the  works  of  darkness,
and  let  us  put  on  the  armour  of  light;  let  us  walk-
honestly  as  in  the  day,  not  in  rioting  and  drunk-
enness, not  in  chambering  and  wantonness,  not
in  strife  and  envying;  but  put  ye  on  the  Lord  Je-
sus Christ;  and  make  not  provision  for  the  flesh
to  fulfil  the  lusts  thereof:*  Rom.  xiii.  11.  It  is
recorded  of  thai  text,  that  it  was  the  means  of  the
conversion  of  a  very  eminent  father  of  the  church,
St  Austin ;  for  which  reason  I  quote  it,  as  an  in-
stance to  my  present  purpose,  since  I  apprehend.
it  must  have  wrought  with  him  in  the  manner
here  represented.  I  have  no  doubt  but  that  others
have  been  affected  in  like  manner  by  this  or  other
particular  portions  of  Scripture;  and  that  still
greater  numbers  have  been  drawn  to  Christianity
by  the  general  impression  which  our  Lord's  dis-
courses, and  the  speeches  and  letters  of  his  apos-
tles, have  left  upon  their  minds.  This  is  some-
times called  the  internal  evidence  of  our-  religion ;
and  it  is  very  strong. But  inasmuch  as  it  is  a


late  most  powerfully  where  it  finds  these  qualities,
or  even  these  tendencies  and  dispositions  subsist-
ing. If  this  be  the  effect  of  virtuous  conduct,  and,
in  some  proportion,  the  effect  also  of  each  sepa-
rate act  of  virtue,  the  contrary  effect  must  necessa-
rily follow  from  a  contrary  course  of  behaviour.
And  perhaps  it  may  assist  us  in  unfolding  the.
subject,  to  take  up  the  inquiry  in  this  order ;  be-
cause if  it  can  be  shown  why,  and  in  what  man-
ner, Vice  tends  to  obstruct,  impair, 'and  at  length
destroy  our  faith,  it  will  not  be  difficult  to  allow,
that  virtue  must  facilitate,  support,  and  confirm


upon  an  act  of  known  transgression,  do  expressly
state  to  themselves  the  question,  whether  religion
be  true  or  not ;  and  in  order  to  get  at  the  object
of  their  desire,  (for  the  real  matter  to  be  determin-
ed is,  whether  they  Hhal)  have  their  desire  gratified
or  not,)  in  order,  I  say,  to  get  at  the  pleasure  in
some  cases,  or  in  other  cases,  the  point  of  interest,
upon  which  they  have  set  their  hearts,  the*  choose
to  decide,  and  they  do  in  fact  decide  with  them-
selves, that  these  things  are  not  so  certain,  as  to
be  a  reason  for  them  to  give  up  the  pleasure  which
lies  before  them,  or  the  advantage  which  is  now,
and  which  may  never  &e  again  in  their  power  to
compass.  This"  conclusion  does  actually  take
place,  and,  at  various  times,  must  almost  necessa-
rily take  place,  in  the  minds  of  men  of  bad  morals.
And  now  remark  the  effect  which  "it  has  upon
their  thoughts  afterwards.  When  they  come  at
another  future  time  to  reflect  upon  religion,  they
reflect-upon  it  as  upon  what  they  had  before  ad-
judged  to  be  unfounded,  and  too  uncertain  to*  be
acted  upon,  or  to.  be  depended  upon ;  and  reflec-
tions, accompanied  with  this  -adverse  and  unfc
vourable  impression,  naturally  lead  to  infidelity.
Herein,  therefore,  is  seen  the  Fallacious  operation
of  sin ;  first,  in  the  circumstances  under  which
men  form  their  opinion  and  their  conclusions  con-
cerning religion ;  and,  secondly,  in  the  effect;
which  conclusions,  which  doubts  so  formed,  have
upon  their  judgment  afterwards.  First,  what  is
the  situation  of  mind  in  which  they  decide  con-
cerning religion  1  and  what  can  be  expected  from
such  a  situation  1  Some  magnified  and  alluring
pleasure  has  stirred  their  desires  and  passions.  It
cannot  be  enjoyed  without  sin.  Here  is  religion,
denouncing  and  forbidding  it  on  one  side:  there  is
opportunity  drawing  and  pulling  on  the  other.
With  this  drag  and  bias  upon  then*  thoughts,  they
pronounce  and  decide  concerning  the  most  im-
portant of  all  subjects,  and  of  all  questions.  If
they  should  determine  for  the  truth  and  reality  of
religion,  they  must  sit  down  disappointed  of  a
gratification  upon  which  they  had  set  their  hearts,
and  of  using  an  opportunity,  which  .may  never
come  again.  Nevertheless  they  must  determine
one  way  or  other.  And  this  process,'  viz.  a  simi-
lar deliberation  and  a  similar  conclusion,  is  re-
newed and  repeated,  as^often  as  occasions  of  sin
offer.  The  effect,  at  length,  is  a  settled  persua-
sion against  religion.  .  For  what  is  it,  in  persons
who  proceed  in  this  manner,  which  rests  and
dwells  upon  their  memories  1 What  is*  it  which


species  of  evidence  which  applies  itself  to  the gives  to  their  judgment  its  turn  and  bias  7 It  is
knowledge,  love,  and  practice  of  virtue,  it  will  oj»~ these  occasional  decisions  often  repeated ;  which


is  produced  in  the  mind  by  vice,  and  which  acjs
against  the  reception  of  religious  truth.

Now  the  case  appears  to  me  to  be  no  other  than
.this:  A  gnat  many  persons!  before  they  pnceed


decisions  have  the  same  power  and  influence  over
the  man's  after-opinion,  as  if, they  had  been  made
ever  so  impartially,  or  ever  so  correctly ;  whereas,
in  feet,  they  are  made  under  circumstances  which
exclude,  almost  the  possibility  of  their  being  made
with  fairness  and  with  sufficient  inquiry.  Men
decide  under  the  power  anq  influence  of  sinful
temptation ;  but,  having  decided,  the  decision  is  _
afterwards  remembered  bythem,  and  grows  into"
a  settled  and  habitual  opinion,  as  much  as  if -.they
had  proceeded  in  it  without  any  bias  or  prejudice
whatever.


it :  that,  at  least  it  will  deliver  us,  or  keep  us  free, The  extent  to  which  this  cause  acts,  that  is,  the
from  that  weight  of  prejudice  and  resistance  which  '  *  ?  * "  *~~*"


numbers  who  are  included  in  its  influence,  will
be  further  known  by  the  following  observation.
I  have  said,  that  sinners  oftentimes  expressly  state
to  themselves  the  question,  whether  religion  be
true  or  not;  and  that  they  state  to  themselves  this


500


SERMONS  ON  SEVERAL  SUBJECTS.


question,  al  the  time  when  they  are*  About  to  enter
upon  Hoe  act  of  rin  which  religion  condemns ;
and  I  believe  the  case  so  to  be.  I  believe  that
this  statement  is  often  expressly  made,  and  in  the
manner  which  I  have  represented.  But  there  is
also  a  tacit  rejection  of  religion,  which  has  nearly
the  same  effect  Whenever  a  man  deliberately
ventures  upon  an  action  which  he  knows  that  re-
ligion prohibits,  he  tacitly  rejects  religion.  There
may  not  pass  in  his  thoughts  every  step  whkh  we
have  described,  nor  may  he  come  expressly  to  the
conclusion :  but  he  acts  unon  the  conclusion  j  he
practically  adopts  it.  And  the  doing  so  will  ahen-
ate  his  mind  from  religion,  as  surely,  almost,  as  if
he  had  formally  argued  himself  into  an  opinion  of
its  untruth.  The  effect  of  sin  is  necessarily,  and
highly, -and  in  all  cases,  adverse  to  the  production
and  existence  of  religious  faith.  Real  difficulties
are  doubled  and  trebled,  when  they  fall  in  with
vicious  propensities  ;  imaginary  difficulties  are
readily  started.  Vice  is  wonderfully  acute  in  dis-
oovenng  reasons  on  its  own  side.  This  may  be
said  of  all  kinds  of  vice ;  but,  I  think,  it  more  par-
ticularly holds  good  of  what  are  called  licentious
vices,  that  is,  of  vices  of  debauchery ;  for  sins  of
debauchery  have  a  tendency,  which  other  species
of  sin  have  not  so  directly,  to  unsettle  and  weaken
the  powers  of  the  understanding,  as  well  as,  in  a
greater  degree,  I  think,  than  other  vices,  to  render
the  heart  thoroughly  corrupt  In  a  mind  so  wholly
depraved,  the  impression  of  any  argument,  relat-
ing to  a  moral  or  religious^  subject,  is  faint,  and
slight,  and  transitory.  To  a  vitiated  palate  no
meat  has  its  fight  taste ;  with  a  debauched  mind,
tip  reasoning  has  its  proper  influence.

But,  secondly :  Have  we  not  also  from  Scrip-
ture, reason  to  believe,  that  God's  hojy  Spirit  will
be  assisting  to  those  who  earnestly  pray  for  it,  and
who  sincerely  prepare  themselves  for  its  recep-
tion ;  and  that  it  will  be  assisting  to  them  in  this
matter  of  faith  in  religion. — The  language  of
Scripture  is.  that  God  gives  his  holy  Spirit  to
them  that  ask  it  ^  and  moreover,  that  to  them  who
use  and  improve  it  as  they  ought,  it  is  given"  in
more  and  more  abundance.  "He  that  bath,  to
him  shall  be  given  more.  He  that  hath  not,  from
him  shall  be -taken  away  even  that  which  he
hath :"  Mat  xiii.  12.  He  who  is  studious  to  im-
prove his  measure  of  grace,  shall  find  that  mea-
sure Increased  upon  him.  He  who  neglects  or
stifles,  neglects  through  irreligion,  carelessness,
and  heedlessness,  buries  in-  sensuality,  or  stifles  by
the  opposition-  of  sin,  the  portion  of  grace,  and
assistance  which  is  vouchsafed  to  him,  he,  the
Scripture  says,  will  find  that  portion  withdrawn
from  him.  Now,  this  being  the  general  nature
and  economy  of  God's  assisting  grace,  there  is  no
reason  why  it  should  not  extend  to  our  faith,  as
well  as  to  our  practice ;  our  perceiving  the  truth,
as  well  as  our  obeying  the  truth,  may  l*  helped
and  succoured  by  it.  God's  Spirit  can  have  access
*  to  our  understandings,  -as  well  as  our  affections.
He  can  render  the  mind  sensible  to  the  impres-
sions of  evidence,  and  the  power  of  truth,  if
creatures,  like  us,  might  take  upon  themselves  to
judge  what  is  a  proper  object  of  divine  help,  it
should  seem  to  be  a  serious,  devout,  humble,  and
apprehensive  mind,  anxiously  desiring  to  learn
-and  know  the  truth :  and,  in  order  to  know  it,
keeping  the  heart  and  understanding  pure  and
prepared  for  that  purpose ;  that  is  to  say,  carefully
abstaining  from  the  indulgence  of  passions,  and


from  practices  which  harden  and  tafiam  the
mind  against  religion.  I  say,  a  mind  so  guarding
and  qualifying  itself,  and  imploring  with  devout
earnestness  knd  solicitude,  the  aid  of  God's  bory
Spirit  in  its  meditations  and  inquiries,  seems,  so
far  as  we  can  presume  to  judge,  as  meet  an  object
of  divine  help  and  favour  as  any  of  which  we  can
form  an  idea ;  and.it  is  not  for  us  to  narrow  the
promises  of  God,  concerning  his  assisting  grace,
so  as,  without  authority,  to  exclude  auch  an  ob-
ject from  it.

From  the  doctrine  which  has  been  thus  con-
cisely propose/),  various  important  rules  and  reflec-
tions arise.

First :  Let  toot  men,  involved  in  sinful  courses,
wonder  at  the  difficulties  whkh  they  meet  with
in  religion.  It  is  an  effect  of  sin,  which  is  almost
sure  to  follow.  Sin  never  fails,  both  to  magnify
real  difficulties,  and  to  suggest  imaginary  ones.
It  rests  and  dwells  upon  objections,  because  they
help  the  sinner,  in  some  measure,  to  excuse  ha
conduct  to  himself. — They  cause  him  to  come  to
a  conclusion,  which  permits  the  gratification  of
his  passions,  or  the  compassing  of  his  purpose.
Deep-  and  various  is  the  deceillulness  of  sin,  of
licentious  sins-  most  particularly ;  for  they  cloud
the  understanding ;  they  disqualify  men  for  serious
meditation  of  any  kind ;  above  all,  for  the  medita-
tion of  religion.

Secondly :  Let  them,  who  ask  for  more  Bent,
first  take  care  to  act  up  to  the  light  which  they
have.  Scripture  and  experience  loin  their  testi-
mony to  this  point,  namely,  that  they,  who  faith-
fully practise  what  they  do  know,  and  live  agree-
ably to  the  belief  which  they  have,  and  to  the  just
and  rational  conseouences  of  that  belief,  seldom
fail  to  proceed  further,  and  to  acquire  more  and
more  confidence  in  the  truth  of  religion  ;  whereas,
if  they  live  in  opposition  to  the  degree  of  belief
which  they  have,  be  it  what  it  may,  even  it  will
gradually  grow  weaker  and  weaker,  and,  at  length,
die  away  in  the  soul.

Thirdly :  Let  them  who  are'  anxious  to  arrive
at  just  sentiments  of  religion,  keep  their  minds  in
a  capable  state ;  that  is,  free  from  the  bias  of
former  doubts,  conceived  at  a  time  when  the
power  and  influence  of  sinful  temptation  was
upon  them ;  suggested,  in  feet,  lest  they  shook!
find  themselves  obliged  to  give  up  some  gratifica-
tion upon  which  they  had  set  tneir  hearts;  and
which  decisions,  nevertheless,  and  doubts,  have
.the  same  operation  upon  their  judgments,  as  if
they  had  been  the  result  of  the  most  pure  and  im-
partial reasoning.  It  is  not  peculiar  to  religion ;
it  is  true- of  all  subjects,  that  the  mind  is  snse
almost  to  be  misled,  which  lies  under  a  load  of
prejudice  contracted  from  circumstances,  in  which
it  is  next  to  impossible  to  weigh  arguments  justly,
or  to  see  clearly.

Fourthly:  Let  them,  let  all,  especially  those
who  find  themselves  in  a  dissatisfied  state  of  mkai
fly  to  prayer.  Let  them  pray,  earnestly  and  in-
cessantly for  God's  assisting  grace  and  influence:
assisting,,  if  H  be  his  good  pleasure,  as  weH  our
minds  and  understandings  in  searching  after  troth,
as  our  hearts,  and  affections  in  obeying  h.  1  say
again,  let  us  pray  unceasingly  for  grace  and  help
from  the  Spirit  of  God.  When  we  pray  lor  any
worldly  object,  we  may  pray  mistakenly-  "We
may  be  ignorant  of  our  own  good ;  we  may  err
egregibusly  concerning  it.  But  when  we  prmj  for
spiritual  aid  and  grace,  we  are  sure  that  we  JW


SERMONS  ON  SEVERAL  SUBJECTS.


561


for  what  we  want:  for  what,  if  granted,,  will  be
the  greatest  of  all  blessings.  And  we  pray  with
hope,  because  we  have  this  gracious  assurance
given  us  by  the  Lord  himself  of  grace  and  mercy  :
"If  ye,  being  evil,  know  how  to  give  good  gifts
-  unto  your  children,  how  much  more  shall  your
Heavenly  Father  give  the  Holy  Spirit  to  them
that  ask  him  V'—Matt.  vii.  11.


SERMON  XV.

John's  message  to  jesus.

jSfott  when  John  had  heard  in  prison  the  works
of  Christ,  he  sent  two  of  his  disciples,  and  said
unto  hint,  Art  thou  he  that  should  come,  or  do
we  look  for  another  ?— Matt.  xL  2>  3.

These  words  state  a  transaction,  to  say  the
least  of  it,  of  a  singular  kind,  and  well  entitled  Jo
observation.  Some  time  before  our  Lord's  ap-
pearance, John  the  Baptist  had  produced  himself
to  the  country,  as  a  messenger  from  God,  and  as
a  public  preacher.  The  principal  thing  which
he  preached  was,  that  a  greater  and  store  extra-
ordinary person  than  himself,  that  is  to  say,  no
other  than  the  long-foretold  and  long-expected
Messiah,  was  about  shortly  to  appear  in  the  world ;
that  for  the  appearance  of  this  person,  which
would  be  the  setting  up  of  the  kingdom  of  God
npon-earth,  all  men  were  to  prepare  themselves
by  repentance  and  reformation.  Thus  did  John
preach,  before  it  was  known  or  declared,  and  be-
fore he  (John  himself)  knew  or  declared  who  this
extraordinary  person  was.  It  was,  as  it  should
seem;  upon  our  Lord's  offering  himself  to  John  to
be  baptised  of  him  in  Jordan,  that  John,  for  the
first  tune,  knew  arid  published  him  to  be  that  per-
son. This  testimony  and  record  John  afterwards
repeated  concerning  him  in  this  manner,  and  it  is  re-
markable : "  The  next  day  John  seeth  Jesus  coming
unto  him,  and  saith,  Behold  the  Lamb  of  God,
which  taketh  away  the  sin  of  the  world.  This  is  he
of  whom  I  said,  After  me  cdmeth  a  man,  which  is
preferred  before  me,  for  he  was  before  me,  and  /
knew  him  Hot ;  but  that  he  should  be  made  manifest
to  Israel,  therefore  am  1  come  baptising  with  water.
And  John  bare  record,  saying,  I  saw  the  Spirit
descending  from  heaven  like  a  dove,  and  it  abode
upon  him;  and  I  knew  him  not;  but  he  tha^  sent
me  to  peptize  with  water,  the  same  said  unto  me,
Upon  whom  thou  shah  see  the  Spirit  descending
ano  retraining  on  him,  the  same  is  he  which  bap-
tixeth  with  the  Holy  Ghost.  And  I  saw,  and
bare  record,  that  this  is  the  Son  of  God."

It  came  to  pass,  that  soon  after  our  Lord's
public  appearance,  John  was  cast  into  prison,  and
there  remained,  till,  by  a  barbarous  order  from
Herod,  in  wicked  compliance  with  a  wicked  vow,
this  good  and  courageous  servant  of  God  was  be-
headed. It  does  not  seem  quite  certain,  whether
he  was  not  imprisoned  twice.  In  prison,  how-
ever, his  disciples,  as  was  natural,  came  to  him,
and  related  to  him  the  great  things  which  Jesus
had  lately  been  doing ;  and  it  appears,  from  the
accounts  of  the  different  evangelists,  and  by  laying
theme  accounts  together  ra  order  of  time,  that
JesuM,  a  little  before  this,  amongst  other  miracles,
had  coxed  the  centurion's  servant  without  coming
near  him.  and  had  also  raised  the  young  man  at
4B


Nain  to  life,  when  they  were  carrying  him  put  to
his  funeral ;  miracles,  which,  it  may  Be  apposed,
were  much  noised  abroad  in  the  country.  What
then  did  John  the  Baptist  do,  upon  receiving  this
intelligence  1  He  sent  to  Jesus  two  of  his  disci-
ples, saying,  "  Art  thou  he  that  should  come,  or
look  we  for  another  V

r  It  will  appear  odd  that  John  should  entertain
any  doubt,  or  Tequire  any  satisfaction  about  this
matter;  he,  who  had  himself  publicly  announced
Jesus  to  be  the  Messiah  looked  for,  and  that  also
upon  the  most,  undeniable  grounds,  because  he
saw  the  Spirit  descending  and  remaining  upon
him;  the  token  which  had  been  given  him,
whereby  this  person  was  to  be  distinguished  by
him.

This  wae  a  difficulty  which  interpreters  .of
Scripture,  in  very  early  times  saw ;  and  the  an-
swer which  they  gave  to  it  I  believe  to  be  the
true  one;  namely,  that  John  sent  this  message-
not  from  any  doubt  which  he  himself  entertained
of  the  matter,  but  in  order  that  the  doubts  which,
his  disciples'  had  conceived  about  it,  might  receise
an  answer,  and  satisfaction  at  the  fountain  head ;
from  Jesus  himself,  who  was  best  able  to  give  it.

You  Will,  therefore,  now  observe  what  tins  an-
swer was,  and  how,  and  under  what  circumstances
it  was  given.  If  you  turn  to  St.  Luke's  statement
of  the  transaction,  chap.  vii.  verse  20th,.  you  will
there  find  it  expressly  asserted,  what  is  only  im-
plied and  tacitly  referred  to  bySt.  Matthew;  (and
this  is  one  instance,  amongst  many,  of  the  advan-
tage of  bringing  the  accounts  of  the  different
evangelists  together;)  you  Will  find;  I  say,  thai  it
so  happened,  Fought  to  have  said  that  it  was  .so
ordered  by  Providence,  that  at  the  time,  the  pre-
cise hour,  when  these  messengers  from  John  ar-
rived, our  Lord  waa  in  the  very  act  of  working
miracles.  In  that  same  hour,  says  Luke,  he  cured
many  of  infirmities  and  plagues,  and  of  evil  spirits,
and  unto  many  that  were  Blind  he  gave  sight :  so
that  the  messengers  themselves  were  eye-witnesses
of  his  powers,  and  of  his  gifts,  and  of  his  mighty
works  f  and  to  this  evidence  he  refers  them ;  and
a  more  decisive  or  dignified  answer  could  not  pos-
sibly have  been  given.  He  neither  says  he  was,
norhe  was  not  the  person  they  inquired  after,  but
bids  them  take  notice  and  tell  John  of  what  the/  .
saw,  and  make  their  own  conclusion  from  it.
"  Go  your  way,  and  tell  John  what  things  ye  have
seen  and  heard,  how  that  the  blind  see,  the  lame
walk,  the  lepers  are  cleansed,  the  deaf  hear,-  the
dead  are  raised,  to  the  poor  the  gospel  is  preached."
It  does  not,  I  think,  appear,'  nor  is  it  necessary  to
suppose,  that  all  these  species  of  miracles  Were
performed  then,  or  before  theireyes.  It  is  speci-
fically mentioned,  that  he  then  cured  many  of
plagues  and  infirmities,  cast  out  evil  spirits,  and
restored  sight  to  the  blind :  but  it  is  not  mentioned, -
for  instance,  that  he  then  raised  the  dead,  though
that  miracle  be  referred  to  in  his  answer.  After
having  wrought,  whilst  they  were  present  many
and  various  species  of  decisive  miracles,  he  was
well  entitled  to  demand  their  credit  and  assent  to
others  upon  his  own  testimony  and  assertion.
•  Now  from  this  answer  of  our  Lord's,  we  are
entitled  to  infer,  (and  this  1  think  is  the  useful  in-
ference to  be  drawn  from  it,)  that  the  faith  which
he  required,  the  assent  which  he  demanded,  was  a
rational  assent  and  faith  founded  upon  proof  and
evidence.  His  exhortation  was,  "  believe  me  for
the  very  works1  sake." He  did  not  bid  Philip,


662


SERMONS  ON  SEVERAL  SUBJECTS.


upon  that  occasion,  or  the  disciple*  of  John  upon
this,  believe  him,  because  he-  was  the  Son  of  God,
oecauee  he  came  down  from*  heaven,  because  he
was  in  the  Father  and  the  Father  in  him,  because
he  was  with  God  and  from  God,  "because  the
Father  had  given  onto  him  the  Spirit. without
measure,  because  he  was  inspired  in  the  fullest
and -largest  sense  of  the  word;  for  all  these  cha-s
meters  and  pretensions,  though  the  highest  that
could  belong  to  any  being  whatsoever,  to  a  prophet,
or  to  more  than  a  prophet,  were  nevertheless  to  be
ascertained  by  facts.  „  When  ascertained,  they
Were  grounds  of  the  most  absolute  confidence  in
•his  word,  of  the  meet  implicit  and  unlimited  reli-
ance upon  his  authority ;  but  they  were  to  be  as-
certained by  facts.  To  facts,  therefore,  our  Lord
appeals ;  to  facta  he  refers  them,  and  to  the  de-
monstration which  they  afforded  of  his  power  and
truth.  -For  shutting  their  eyes  against  faith,  or,
more  properly  speaking,  for  shutting  their  hearts
and  understandings  against  the  proof  and  conclu-
sion which  facta  afforded,  he  pronounces  them  lia-
ble to  condemnation.  They  were  to  believe  his
word,  because  of  his  works:  that  was  exactly  what
he  required.  "  The  works  which  the  Father  hath
given  me  to  finish,1  the  same  works  that  Ldo,  bear
witness  of  me,  that  the  Father  hath  sent  me;  and
the  Father  himself  who  hath  sent  me  bearetn  wit-
ness of  me:"  John  v.  36.  It  is  remarkable  that
John  the  Baptist  wrought  no  miracle ;  therefore
the  authority  and  confirming  proof  of  his  mission
rested  very  -much  upon  the  evidences  which  were
exhibited,  not  by  himself,  but  by  the  person  whose
appearance  he  professed  to  foretel.  And  undoubt-
edly the  miracles  of  our  Lord  did,  by  a  reflected
ot)cration,  establish  the  preaching  of  John.  For
it  a  person  in  these  days  should  appear,  not  work-
ing any  miracle  himself,  but  declaring  that  ano-
ther and  greater  person  was  soon  to  follow,  and  if
that  other  and  greater  person  did  accordingly  soon
follow,  and  show  forth  mighty  deeds,  the  authority
of  the  first  person's  mission  would  be  ratified  by
the  second  person's  works.  They  who  might
doubt,  nay  reasonably  doubt,  concerning  the  first
person's  truth  and  pretensions  before,  would  be
fully  satisfied  of  them  afterwards.  And  this  was
exactly  the  turn  which  some  rational  and  consi-
derate Jews  gave  to  the  matter ;  "  And  many  re-
sorted to  him,  and  said,  John  did  no  miracle ;  but
all  things  that  John  spake  of  this  man  were  true."
The  effect  of  this  observation-  was,  what  it  ought
to  be,  "  many  believed,  on  him  there : "  John  x.
41,42.  <  .  .

This  distinction  between  our  Lord  and  his  fore-
runner, in  one  working  miracles,  and  the  other
not,  furnishes  an  account  for  two  things  which  we
meet  with  in  the  Gospels;  one  is,  John's  declaring
that  when  the,  person  of  whom  he  spoke  should
appear,  his  own  ministry,  which  was  then  much
followed  and  attended,  would  sink  in  importance
and  esteem.  "  He  must  increase,  I  must  decrease
— He  that  cometh  after  me  is  preferred  before  me
—He  that  was  with  thee  beyond  Jordan,  to  whom
thou  barest  witness,  behold,  the  same  baptizeth,
and  all  men  come  to  him''  The  other  is  our  Lord's
own  reflection  upon  John's,  testimony  in  his  fa-
vour, which  was  exactly  agreeable  to  the  truth
of  the  oase.  "Ye  sent  unto  John,  and  he  bare
witness  unto  the  truth ;  but  I  receive  not  testimo-
ny from  man.  He  was  a  burning  and  a  shining
light ;  and  ye  were  willing  for  a  season  to  rejoice
In  his  fight But /have  greater  witness  than  that


of  John—the  works  which  the  Fatlur  hath  given
me  to  finish,  the  same  works  that  ldo,  bear  wit-
ness of  me."  As  if  he  had  said :  "  My  own  per-
formance of  miracles  is  a  higher  and  surer  proof
of  my  mission,  than  any.  testimony,  which  could
be  given  to  me  by  another  who  did  not  perform
miracles,  however  great,  or  praiseworthy,  or  ex-
cellent his  character-and  his  preaching  were  in  si]
respects,  or  however  much  his  followers  confided,
in  nim:  the  one  was  the  testimony  of  men,  the
other  of  God."  "I  receive  not  testimony  of
man;"  the  proofs  which  1  myself  exhibit  before
your  eyes  of  divine  power,  supersede  human  tes-
timony.

Again :  Our  Lord  pat  the  truth  of  his  preten-
sions, precisely  slid  specifically  upon  the  evidence
of  bis  miracles:  "  If  I  do  not  the  works  of  my  Fa-
ther, believe  me  not :  but  if  I  do,  though  ye  believe
me  not,  believe  the  works:"  John  x.  37.  What
fairer  appeal  could  be  made-1  Could  more  be  done
to  challenge  inauiry,  or  place  the  question  upon
the  right  ground  1

Lastly :  In  the  xvth  chapter  and  24th  verse,  our
Lord  fixes  the  guilt  of  the  unbelieving  Jaws  upon
this  article,  that  they  rejected  unraculous  proof,
which  ought  to  have  convinced  them:  andtnatif
they  had  not  had  such  proof  they  might  have  been
excusable,  or,  comparatively  speaking,  they  would
not  have  nad  sin.  His  words  are  very  memora-
ble. <«lf  I  had  not  done  among  them  the  works
which  none  other  man  did,  they  bad  not  had
sin."

It  appears,  therefore,  that  as  well  in  the  answer
to  John  s  messengers,  as  in  the  other  passages  of
his  history  and  discourses  which  resemble  this,  our
Lord  acted  a  part  the  most  foreign  and  distant
from  the  part  of  an  impostor  or  enthusiast  that
can  possibly  be  conceived.  Was  it  for  an  impos-
tor or  enthusiast  to  refer  messengers  who  came  to
him,  to  miraculous  works  performed  before  their
eyes,  to'  things  done  upon  the  spot:  to  the  testi-
mony of  their  own  senses.  "  Show  John  those
things  which  ye  do  sea  and  hear."  Would,  could
any  other  than  a  prophet  come  from  God  do  this  1
In  like  manner,  was  it  for  any  other  than  a  divine
messenger  to  bid  his  very  disciples  not  believe  in
him,  if  lie.  did  not  these  works  ;v  or  to  tell  unbe-
liever^ that  if  he  had  not  done  among  them  works
which  none  mother. man  did,  their  unbelief  might
have  been  excusable?  In  all  this  we  discern
conviction  and  sincerity,  fairness,  truth,  and  evi-
dence.


SERMON  XVI.

ON INSENSIBILITY-  TO  OFFENCES.

Wliocantellhovyqflheqffendeth?  O  cleanse  thou
me  from  my  secret  faults.  Keep  thy  servant
also  from  presumptuous  nr»,  lest  they  get  the
dominion  over  m£.— Psalm  xix.  12,  13.

These  words  express  a  rational  and  affixing
prayer,  according  to  the  sense  which  they  carry
with  them  at  first  sight  and  without  entering  into
any  Interpretation  of  them  whatsoever.  Woo  is
thert  that  will  not  join  heartily  in  this  prayer)
for  who  is  there  that  has  not  occasion  to  pray

against  his  sins  1 We  are  laden  with  the  t ^

of  our  aios, "  The  remembrance  of


SERMONS  ON  SEVERAL  SUBJECTS.


grievous  to  ns,  the- burden  of  them  is  intolerable."
But  beyond  this,  these  same  words,  when  they
come  to  be  fully  understood,  have1  a  still  stronger
meaning,  and  still  more  applicable  to  the  state  and
condition  of  our  souk ;  which  I  will  endeavour  to
set  before  you.

You  will  observe  the  expression,  "my  secret
faulty  O  cleanse  thou  me  from  my  secret  faults."
Now  the  question  is,  to  whom  are  these  feulta  a  se-
cret 1  to  myself,  or  to  others  1  whether  the  prayer
relates  to  faults  which  are  concealed  from  mankind,
and  are  in  that  sense  secret;  or  to  .faults  which  are
concealed  from  the  offender  himself,  and  are  there-
fore secretin  the  most  full  and  strict  sense  of  which
the  term  is  capable  ?  Now,  I  say,  that  the  context,
or  whole  passage  taken  together,  obliges  us  to  un-
derstand the  word  secretin  this  latter  .sense.  For
observe  two  particulars.  The  first  verse  of  the  text
runs  thus:  u  Who  can  tell  how  oft  he  offendeth?
O  cleanse  thou  me  from  my  secret  faults."  Now,
to  give  a  connexion  to  the  two  parts  of  this  verse,
it  u  necessary  to  suppose,  that  one  reason,  for
which  it  was  so  difficult  for  any  man  to  know  how
oft  he  offended  was,  that  many  of  hie  faults  were
secret;  but  in  what  way  and  to  whom  secret?  to
himself  undoubtedly:  otherwise  the  secrecy  could
iiave  been  no  reason  or  cause  of  that  difficulty.
The  merely  being  concealed  from  others  would  be
nothing  to  the  present  purpose ;  because  the  most
concealed  sins,  in  that  sense,  are  as  well  known
to  the  sinner  himself,  as  those  which  are  detected
or  most  open;-  and  therefore-  such  concealment

.  would  not  account  for  the  sinner's  difficulty  in  un-
derstanding the  state  of  his  soul  and  of  his  con-
science. To  me  it  appears  very  plain,  that  the
train  of  the  Psalmist's  thoughts  went  thus : — He  ■
is  led  to  cast  back  his  recollection  upon  the  sins  of
his  hfe ;  he  finds  bimsejf,  as  many  of  us  must  do,  lost
and  bewildered  in  their  number  and  frequency ;
because,  beside  all  other  reasons  of  confusion,  there
were  many  which  were  unnoticed,  unreckoned,
and  unobserved.  Against  this  class  of  sins,  which,
ibr  this  reason,  he  calls  his  secret  faults,  he  raises
op  his  voice  to  God  in  prayer.  This  is  evidently,
as  I  think,  the  train  and  connexion  of  thought ;
and  this  requires,  that  the  secret  faults  here  spoken
of.be  explained  of  such  faults  as  were  secret  to
the-  person  himself. ,  It  makes  no  connexion,  it
carries  with  it  no  consistent  meaning,  to  interpret
tfiem  of  those  faults  which  were  concealed  from
others.  This  is  one  argument  for  the  exposition
contended  for;  another  is  the  following.  You
will  observe  in  the  text  that  two  kinds  of  sins  are
distinctly  spoken  of  under  the  name  of  "  secret
faults,  and  presumptuous  sins." .  The  words  are,
"  O  cleanse  thou  me  from  my  secret  faults ;  keep
thy  servant  also'  from  presumptuous  sins."  Now,
it  will  not  do  to  consider  these  secret  faults  as
merely  concealed  faults :  because  they  are  not  ne-

.  esssarily  distinguished  from,  nor  can  be  placed  in
opposition  to,  presumptuous  sins.  The  Psalmist
is  here  addressing  God;  he  is  deeply  affected  with
the  state  of  his  soul,  and  with  his  sins,  considered
in  relation  to  GojJ.  Now,  with  respect  to  God,
there  may  be,  and  there  often  is,  as  much-  pre-
sumption, as  much  daring  in  'committing  a  con-
cealed sin,  as  in  committing  a  sin  which  is  open
to  the  world.  The  circumstance  of  concealment,
or  detection,  makes  no  difference  at  all  in  this  re-
spect ;  and  therefore  they  could  not  properly  be
placed  in  different  classes ;  nor  would  it  be  natural
so  to  place  them;  but  offences  which  escape  the


sinner's  own  notice  at  the  time,  may  certainly  be
distinguished  from  those  which  are  committed
with  a  high  hand, 'with  a  full  knowledge  of  the
guilt,  and  defiance  of  the  consequences;  and  that
is,  as  I  believe,  the  distinction  here  intended :  and
the  one  the  Psalmist  called  his  secret  faults,  the
other  his  presumptuous  sins.  Upon  the  whole,
therefore,  I  conclude,  that  the  secret  sins  against
which  the  Psalmist  prayed,  were  sins  secret  to
himself.  7

-  But  here,  therefore,  comes  the  priribipeJ  ques-
tion— How  there 'can  be  any  sins  of  this  sort?
how  that  can  be  a  sin,  which  is  neither  observed,
nor  .known  to  be  so,  by  the  person  who  commits
it?  And  then  there  comes  also  a  second  consi-
deration, which  is;  if  there  be  such,  what  ought  to
1»  done  with  respect  to  them 7  .Now,  as  well

rn  the  authority  of  the  text,  as  upon  what  is
real  case  with  numan  nature,  when  that  case
is  rightly  Understood,  I  contend,  first,  that  there
are  many  violations  of  God's  laws,  which  the  men
who  are  guilty  of  them,  are  not  sensible  of  at  the
time  j  and  yet,  secondly,  such,  as  that  their  want
of  being  sfBsible  of  them,  does  not  excuse,  or  make
them  cease  to  be  sins.  All  this,  in  truth,  is  ho
other  than  the-  regular  effect  of  sinful  habits;
Such  is  the  power  of  custom  over  our  consciences,
that  there  is,  perhaps,  hardly  any  bad  action
which  a  man  is  capable  of  committing,  that  he
may  not  commit  so  often ;  as  to  become  uncon-.
scious  of  its.  guilt,  si  much  as  of  the  most  indiffer-
ent thing  which  ne  does.  If  some  very  great  and
atrocious  crimes  may  be  thought  exceptions  to
this  observation,  and  that  no  habit  or  custom  can
by  any  possibility  reconcile  them  to  the  human
conscience ;.  it  is.  only  because  they  are  such  as
cannot,  from  their  very  nature,  be  repeated  so  of-
ten by  the  same  person,  as  to  become  familiar  and
habitual :  if  they  could,  the  consequence  would  be
the  same ;  they  would  be  no  more  thought  of  by
the  sinner  himself,  than  other  habitual  sins  are.
But  great  outrageous  crimes  against  life,  for  in-
stance, and  property;  and  public  safety,  may  be
laid  out  of  the  question,  as  not  felling,  1  trust  and
believe,  within  the  case  of  any  one  who  hears  me ;
and  as  in  no  case  whatever  capable  of  being  so
common,  as  to  be  fair  experiments  of  the  strength
of  our  observation.  These  are  not  what  compose
our  account  with  God.  A  man  may  be.  (as  in-
deed most  men  are)  quite  free  from  the  crimes  of
murder,  robbery,  ana  the  like,  and  yet  be  far.
from  the  kingdom  of  God.  1  fear  it  may  be  said
of  most  of  us,  that  the  class  of  sins  which  com-
pose our  account  with  God,  are  habitual  sins;
habitual  omissions,  and  habitual  commissions.
Now  it  is  true  of  both  these,  that  we  may  have
continued  in  them  so  long,  they  may  have  become
so  familiar  to  us  by  repetition,  that  we  think  no-
thing at  all  of  them.  <  We  may  neglect  any  duty,
till  we  forget  that  it  is  one ;  we  may  neglect  our
prayers ;  we  may  neglect  our  devotion ;  we  may;
neglect  every  duty  towards  God,  till  we  become  so
unaccustomed  and  unused  to  them,  as  to  be  in-
sensible that  we  are  incurring  any  omission,  or
contracting,  from  that  omission,  any  guift  which
can  hurt ;  and  yet  we  may  be,  in  truth,  all  the
while  "treasuring  up  wrath,  against  the  day  of
wrath."  How  many  thousands,  for  instance,  by
omitting  to  attend  the  sacrament,  have'  come  not
to,  know  that  it  forms  any  part  of  Christian  obli-

Ktion ;  and  long  ditfuse  and  discontinuance  would
,v$  the  same  effect  upon'  any. other  duty,  how-


564


SERMONS  ON  SEVERAL  SUBJECTS.


ever  plain  might  be  the  proof  of  it,  when  the  nut-
ter came  to  be  considered.

It  is  not  leu  so  with  sins  of  commission.,  Se-
rious minds  are  shocked  with  observing  with
what  complete  unconcern  and  indifference  many
forbidden  things  are  practised.  The  persons  who
are  guilty  of  them,  do  not.  by  any  mark  or  symp-
tom whatever,  appear  to  feel  the  smallest  rebuke
of  conscience,  or  to  have  the  least  sense  of  either
guilt,  or  danger,  or  shame,  in  what  they  do:  and
it  not  only  appears  to  be  so,  but  it  is  so.  They
are,  in  fact,  without  any  notice,  consciousness,  or
compunction  upon  the  subject  These  sins,
therefore,  if  they  be  such,  are  secret  sins  to  them.
But  are  they  not  therefore  sins  1  That  becomes
the  next  great  question.  We  must  allow,  be-
cause fact  proves  it,  that  habit  and  custom  can
destroy  the  sense  and  perception  of  sin.  Does
the  act  then,  in  that  person,  cease  to  be  any
longer  a  sinl  This  must  be  asserted  by  those
who  argue,  that  nothing  can  be  a  sin,  but  what  is
known  and  understood,  and  also  felt  and  perceiv-
ed to  be  10  by  the  sinner  himself  at  the  time ;  and
who,  consequently,  deny  that  there  afe  any  se-
cret sins  in  our  sense  of  that  expression.  Now
mark  the  consequences  which  would  follow  such
an  opinion.  -  It  is  then  the  timorous  beginner  in
wicked  courses  who  alone  is  to  be  brought  to  ac-
count. Can  such  a  doctrine  be  maintained  1  Sin-
ners are  called  upon  by  preachers  of  the  Gospel,
and  over  and  over  again  called  upon,  to  compare
themselves  with  themselves;  themselves  at  one
time  with  themselves  at  another;  their  former
■elves,  when  they  first  entered  upon  sinful  allow-
ances, and  their  present  selves,  since  they  have
been-  confirmed  in  them.  With  what  fear  and
scruple,  and  reluctance,  what  sense  and  acknow-
.  lodgment  of  wrong,  what  apprehension  of  danger,
against  what  remonstrance  of  reason,  and  with
what  opposition  and  violence  to  their  religious
principle,  they  first  gave  way  to  temptation!
With  what  ease,  if  ease  it  may  be  called,  at  least
with  what  hardness  and  unconcern,  they  now
continue  in  practices  which  they  once  dreaded !  in
a  word,  what  a  chance,  as  to  the  particular  article
in  question  at  least,  has  taken  place  in  their  moral
sentiments !  Yet,  notwithstanding  this  change  in
them,  the  reason,  which  made  what  they  are  doing
a  sin,  remains  the-  same  that  it  was  at  first :  at
first  they  saw  great ,  force  and  strength-  in  that
reason ;  at  present  they  see  none ;  but,  in  truth,  it
is  all  the  while  the  same.  Unless,  therefore,  we
will  choose  to  say,  that  a  man  has  only  to  harden
himself  in  his  sins,  (which  thing  perseverance"
will  always  do  for  him,  J  and.  that  with  the  sense
he  takes  away  the  guilt  of  them,  and  that  the
only  sinner  is  the  conscious,  trembling,  affrighten-
ed,  reluctant  sinner;  that  the  confirmed  sinner  is
not  a  sinner  at  all ;  unless  we  will  advance  this,
which  affronts  all  principles  of  justice. and  sense,
we  must  confess,  that  secret  sins  are  both  possible
and  frequent  things :  that  with  the  habitual  sinner,
and  with  every  man.  in  so  far  as  he  is,  and  in
that  article  in  which  he  is,  an  habitual  sinner,
this  is  almost  sure  to  be  the  case.

What  then  are  the  reflections  suitable  to  such
a  case-?  First,  to  join  most  sincerely  with  the
Psalmist  in  his  prayer  to  God,  "  O  cleanse  thou  me
from  my  secret  faults."  Secondly,  to  see,  in  this
consideration,  the  exceedingly  great  danger  of
evil  habits  of  all  kinds.  It  is  a  dreadful  thing  to
commit  sins  without  knowing  it,  and  yet  to  have


those  sins  to  answer  for.  That  is  dreadful;  and
yet  it  is  no  other  than  the  just  consequence  and
effect  of  sinful  habits.  They  destroy  in  as  the
perception  of  guilt:  that  experience  proves.—
They  do  not  destroy  the  guilt  itself:  that  no  mab
can  argue,  because  it  leads  to  injustice  and  ab-
surdity.

How  well  dees  the  Scripture  express  the  state
of  an  habitual  sinner,  when  he  calls  him  "dead
in  trespasses  and  sins!"  His  conscience  is  dead:
that,  which  otaht  to  be  the  living,  actuating,  go-
verning principle  of  the  whole  man,  is  dead  within
him;  is  extinguished  by  the  power  of  sin  reigning
in  his  heart.  He  is  incapable  of  perceiving  his
sins,  whilst  he  commits  them  with,  greediness.  It
is  evident,  that  a  vast  alteration  must  take  place
-in  such  a  man,  before  he  be  brought  into  the  way
of  salvation.  It  is  a  great  change  from  innocence
to  guilt,  when  a  man  falls  from  a  life  of  virtue  te
a  life  of  sin.  But  the  recovery  from  it  is  much
greater;  because  the  very  secrecy  of  our  sins  to
ourselves,  the  unconsciousness  of  them,  which
practice  and  custom,  and  repetition  and  habit,  have
produced  m  us,  is  an  almost  unsunnountajUe  hin-
derance  to  an  effectual  reformation.


SERMON  XVH.

SERIOUSNESS  OF  HEART  AS  TO  RELIGION.

But  that  on  the  good  ground  are  they,  <wha  vi  an
honest  and  good  heart ,  having  heard  the  word,
keen  it,  and-bring  forth  fruit  with  patience. —
Luke  viii.  15.  l

It  may  be  true,  that  a  right  religions  pilaciple
produces  corresponding  external  actions,  and  yet  it
may  not  be  true,  that  external  actions  are  what
we  should  always,  or  entirely,  or  principally,  look
to  for  the  purpose  of  estimating  our  religious  cha-
racter; or  from  whence  alone  we  should  draw  «ur
assurance  and  evidence  of  being  in  the  right
way.

Externa]  actions  mast  depend  upon  ability,  and
must  wait  for  opportunity.  From  a  change  in
the  heart,  a  visible  outward  change  will  ensue:
from  an  amendment  of'  disposition,  an  amended
conduct  will  follow ;  but  it  may  neither  be  so  soon
nor  so  evident,  nor  to  soch  a  degree,  as  we  may
at  first  sight  expect,  inasmuch  as  it  will  be  regu-
lated by  occasions  and  by  ability.  I  do  not  mean
to' say,  (for  I  do  not  believe  it  to  be  so,)  that  there
is  any  person  so  forlorn  and  destitute,  as  to  have
no  good  in  his  power:  expensive  kindnesses  may
not ;  out  there  is  much  kindness  which  is  not  ex-
pensive: a  kindness  of  temper;  a  readiness  to
oblige;  a  willingness  to  assist;  a  constant  inclina-
tion to  promote  the  comfort  and  satisfaction  of  aD
who  are  about  us,  of  all  with  whom  we  have  con-
cern or  connexion,  of  all  with  whom  we  associate
or  converse.

There  is  also  a  concern  for  the  virtue  of  those
over  whom,  or  with  whom,  we  can  have  any  sort
of  influence,  which  is  a  natural  concomitant  of  a
radical  concern  for  virtue  in  ourselves.

But,  above  all,  it  is  undoubtedly,  in  every  per-
son's power,  whether  poor  or  rich,  weak  or  strong-
ill  or  well  endowed  by  nature  or  education,  it  i*/T
say,  in  every  person's  power  to  avoid  sin :  if  he
can  do  little  good,  to  take  care  that  he  do  noiDL


SERMONS  ON  SEVERAL  SUBJECTS.


665


Although,  therefore,  there  be  no  person  in  the
world  to  circumstanced,,  but  who*"  both  can  and
will  testify  hia  inward  principle  by  hia  outward
behavioar,  in  one  shape  of  other ;  yet  on  account
of  the  very  great  difference  of  those  circum-
stances' in  which  men  are  placed,  and  to  which
their  outward  exertions. are  subjected,  outward
behaviour  is  not  always  a  just  measure  of  inward
principle.

But  there  is  a  second  case,  and  that  but  top
common,  in  which  outward  behaviour  is  no  mea-
sure of  religious  principle  at  all ;  and  that  is,  when
it  springs  from  other  and  different  motives  and
reason  from  those  which  religion  presents.  A"
very  bad  man  may  be  externally  good :  a  man
completely  irreligious  at  the  heart  may,  far  the
of  .character,  "


,  for  the  advantage  of  having  a
good,  character,  for  the  sake  of  decency,  for  the
sake  of  being  trusted  and  respected,  and  well  spo-
ken of,  from  a  lpve  of  praise  and  commendation,
from  a  view  ef  carrying  his  schemes  and  designs
in  the  world,  or  of  raising  himself  by  strength  of
character,  or  at  least  from  a  fear  lest  a  tainted
character  should  be  an  obstacle  to  his  advance-
ment— from  these  and  a  thousand  such  sort- of
considerations,  which  might  be  reckoned  up /and
with  which,  it  is  evident,  that  religion  hath  no
concern  or  connexion  whatever,  men  may  be  both
active,  and  forward,  and  liberal,  in  doing  good*;
and"  exceedingly  cautious  of  giving  offence  by
doing  evfl ;  and  this  may  be  either  wholly,  or  in
part,  the  case  with  ourselves.

In  judging,  therefore,  and  examming'ounelves,
with  »  view  of  knowing  the  real  condition  of  our
souls,  the  real  state  ana  the  truth  of  our  spiritual
situation  with  respect  to  God,  and  in  respect  to
salvation,'  it  is  neither  enough,  nor  is  it  safe,  to
look  only  to  our  external  conduct.

I  do  not  speak  in  any  manner  of  judging  of
other  men :  if  that  were  necessary  at  all,  Which,
with  a  view  to  religion,  it  never  is,  different  rules
ntast  be  laid  down  for  it  1  now  only  speakTof
that  which  is  necessary,  and  most  absolutely  so,
in  judging^rightly  of  ourselves.  To  our- hearts,
therefore,  we  must  look  for  the  marks  and  tokens
of  salvation,  for  the  evidence  of  being  in  the  right
way.  "  That  oh  the  good  ground  are  they,  who
fn  an  honest  and  good  neartbrinff  forth  fruit  with
pattence."  *

One  of  these  marks,  and  that  -no  slight  one,  is
seriousness  of  the  heart.  I  can  have  no  hope  at
all  of  a  man  who  does  not  find  himself  serious  rn
religious  matters,  serious  at  the  heart.  If  the  judg-
ment of  Almighty  God  at  the  last  day ;  if  the  dif-
ference between"  being  saved  and  being  lost ;  being
accepted  in  the  beloved,  and  being  cast  forth  into
outer  darkness  -}  being  bid  by  a  tremendous  word
either  to  enter  into  the  joy  of  our  Father,  or  to  go
into  the  fire  prepared  for  the  devil  and  his  angels,
for  all  who  have  served  hitn  and  not  God :  if  these
things  do  not  make  us  serious,  then  it  is  most  cer-
tain, either  that  we  do  not  believe  them,  or  that
we  have  not  yet  thought  of  them  at  all,  or  that
we  have  positively  broken  off. thinking  of  them.
have  turned  away  from  the  subject,  have  refused
to  let  it  enter,  have  shut  our  minds  against  it ;  or,
lastly,  that  such  a  levity  of  mind  is  our  character,
as  nothing  whatever  can  make  any  serious  im-
pression upon.  In  any  of  these  oases  our  condi-
tion is  deplorable  j  we  cannot  look  for  salvation
from  Christ's  religion  under  any  of  them.  Dd  we
i  concerning  religion,  because  we,


do  not  believe  in  it  1  we  cannot  expect  salvation
from  a  religion  which  we  reject.  What  the  root
of  unbelief  in  us  may  be,  how  for  voluntary  and
avoidable,  how  far  involuntary  and  -unavoidable,
God  knows,  and  God  only  knows:  and,  therefore,
he  wilf  in  his  mercy  treat  us  as  be  thinketh  fit  j
but  we  have  not  the  religion  to  rely  upon}  to
found  our  hopes  upon;  we  cannot,  as  I  say  again,
expect  salvation  from  a  religion  which' we  reject.
If  the  second  case  be  ours,  namely,  that  we
have  not  yet  thought  of  these  things,  and  there-
/ore  It  is,  that,  we  are  not  serious,  about  them,  it
is  high  time  with  every  one,  that  he  dol^iink  of
them.  These  'great  events  are  not  at  a  distance
from  us;  they  approach  to  every  one  of  us  with
the  end  of  our  lives ;  they  are  the  same  to  all  in-
tents and  purposes,  as  it  they  took  place  at  our
deaths.  It  is  ordained  for  men-  once  to  die;  and
after  that,  judgment.  Wherefore  it  is  folly  in  any
man  or  woman  whatever,  in  any  thing  above  a
child,  to  say  they  have  not  thought  of  religion:
How  know  they  that  they  will  be  permitted  to
think  of  itat  all  1  it  is  worse  than  folly,  it  is  high
presumption.  It  is  an  answer  one  sometimes  re-
ceives, but  it  is  a  foolish  answer.  Religion  can  do
no  good  till  it  sinks  into-the  thoughts.  Commune
with  thyself  and  \p  still.  Can;  any  health,  or
strength,  or  youth,. any  vivacity  of  spirits,  any
crowd  or  hurry  of  business,  much  less  any  course
of  pleasures,  be  an  excuse  for  not  thinking  about
religion  ?  Is  it  of  importance  only  to  the  old  and
infirm^  and  dying,  to  be  saved!  is  it  not  of  the
same  importance  to  the  young  and  strong  1  can
they  be  saved  without  religion  1  or  can  religion
save  them  without  thinking jabout  it  ?

.  If,  thirdly,  such  a  levity  of  mind  be  our  charac-
ter, as  nothing  can  make  an  impression  upon,  this
levity  must  be  cured,  before  ever  we  can  draw
near  unto, God.  Surely  human  life  wants  not
materials  and  occasions  for  the  remedying  of  this
great  infirmity.  ,  Have  we  met  with  no  troubles
to  bring  us  to  ourselves  1  *  no  disasters  .in  our  af-
fairs 1  no  losses  in  our  families!  no  strokes  of
misfortune  or  .  afijictkra  ?  no  visitations  'in  our
health  %  no  warnings  in  our  constitution  1  If
none  of  these  things  have  befallen  us,  and  it  is
for  that  reason  that  we  continue  to  want  serious-
ness and- solidity  of  character,  then  it  shows  how
necessary  these,  things  are  tor  our  real  interest
and  for  our  real  happiness :  we  are  examples  how
little  mankind  can  do  without  them,  and  that  a
state  of  unclouded  pleasure  and  prosperity  is,  of
all  others,  the  most  unfit  for  man.  it  generates
the  precise  evil  we  complain  of,  a  giddiness  and
levity  of.  temper  upon  wnich  religion  cannot  act.
It  indisposes  a  man  for  weighty  and  momentous
concerns  of  any  kind ;  but  it  most  ta tally  disquali-
fies him  for  the  concerns  of  religion.  That  is  its
worst  consequence,  though  others  may  be  bad.  1
believe,  therefore,  first,  that  there  is  such  a  thins;
as  a  levity  of  thought  and  character,  upon  which
religion  has  nti  effect  I  believe,  secondly,  that
this  is  greatly  cherished  by  health,  and  pleasures,
and  prosperity,  and  gay  society.  I  believe,  third-
ly, that  whenever  this  is  the  case,  these  things,
which  are  accounted  such  blessings,  which  meq
covet  and  envy,  are,  in  truth,  deep  and  heavy  ca-
lamities. For,  lastly,  I  believe,  that  this  levity
must  be  changed  into  seriousness,  before  the  mind
infected  with  it  can  come  unto  God ;  and  most  as-
suredly true  it  is,  that  we  cannot  come  to  happiness
in  the  next  world,  unless  we  come  to  God  m  this.
48


566


SERMONS  ON  SEVERAL  SUBJECTS.


i  repeat  ■gain,  laeiciure,  ion  v#w  mw  km
our  hearts  for  our  character .-  not  simp]  v  or  i
to  our  actions,  which  may  be  and  will  be
mixed  nature,  but  to  the  internal  state  of  oui


I  repeat  again,  therefore,  that  we  must  look  to

or  solely
be  of  a
1  nature,  but  to  the  internal  state  of  our  dis-
position. That  is  the  place  in  which  religion
dwells :  in  that  it  consists.  And  I  also  repeat,
that  one  of  these  internal  marks  of  a  right  dispo-
sition, of  an  honest  and  good  heart,  as  relative  to
swThe]


here  can  be  no  true  re-
And  farther,  a  mark  and


remedy4bit  heedlessness  and  coldness,  and  dead-
ness,  and  unconcern,  which  are  fatal,  and  under
which  we  have  so  much  reason  to  know  that  we
aryet  unhappily  labour.


SERMON  XV1IL


religion,  is  serious
hgion  without  it

of  a  growing  religion,  is  a  growing
so  that  when,  instead  of  seeing  these  things  at  a
distance,  we  begin  to  look  near  upon  them ;  when
from  feint  they  become  distinct;  when,  instead
of  now  ana  their  perceiving  a  slight  sense  of  these
matters,  a  hasty  passage  of  them,  as  it  were,
through  the. thoughts,  they  begin  to  rest  and  set-
tle there:  in  a  word,  when  we  become  serious
about  religion,  then,  and  not  till  then,  may  we
hope  that  thingB  are  going  on  right  within  us ;
that  the  soil  is  prepared,  the  seed  sown.  Its  fu-
ture growth,  and  maturity,  and  fruit  may  not  yet
be  known,  but  the  seed  is  sown  in  the  heart:  and
in  a  serious  heart  it  will  not  be  sown  in  vain ;  in
a  heart  not  yet  become  serious,  it  may.

Religious  seriousness  is  not  churlishness,  is  not
severity,  is  not  gloominess,  is  not  melancholy:  but
it  is  nevertheless  a  disposition  of  mind,  and,  like
every  disposition,  it  will  show  itself  one  way  or
other. It  will,  in  the  first  place,  neither  invite,
nor  entertain,  nor  encourage  any  thing  which  has
a  tendency  to  turn  religion  into  ridicule.  It  is  not
in  the  natureof  things,  that  a  serious  mind  should
find  delight  or  amusement  in  so  doing ;  it  is  not
id  the  nature  of  things,  that  it  should  not  feel  an
inward  pain  and  reluctance  whenever  it  is  done.
Therefore,  if  we  are  capable  of  being  pleased  with
hearing  religion  treated  or  talked  of  with  levity ;
made,  in  any  manner  whatever,  an  object  of  sport
and  jesting ;  if  we  are  capable  of  making  it  so  our-
selves, or  joining  with  others,  as  in  a  diversion,  in
so  doing ;  nay,  if  we  do  not  feel  ourselves  at  the
heart  grieved  and  offended,  whenever  it  is  our  lot
to  be  present  at  such  sort  of  conversation  and  dis-
course :  then  is  the  inference  as  to  ourselves  in-
fallible, that  we  are  not  yet  serious  in  our  religion ;
and  then  it  will  be  for  us  to  remember,  that  seri-
ousness is  one  of  those  marks  by  which  we  may
fairly  judge  of  the  state  of  our  mind  and  disposi-
tion as  to  religion;  and  that  the  state  of  our  niind
and  disposition  is  the  very  thing  to  be  consulted;
to  be  known,  to  be  examined  and  searched  into
for  the  purpose  of  ascertaining  whether  we  are
in  a  right  and  safe  way  or  not. Words  and
actions  arc  to  be  judged  of  with-  a  reference  to
the  disposition  which  they  indicate. There  may
be  language,  there  may  be  expressions,  there
may  be  behaviour  of  no  very  great  consequence
in  itself  and  considered  in  itself,  but  of  very
great  consequence  indeed,  when  considered  as
indicating  a  disposition  and  state  of  mind. If  it
show,  with  respect  to  religion,  that  to  be  want-
ing'within,  which  ought  to  be  there,  namely,
a  deep  and  fixed  sense  of  our  personal  and  in-
dividual concern  in  religion,  or  its  importance
above  all  other  important  things;  then  it  shows,
that there  Is  yet  a'  deficiency  in  our  hearts;
which,  without  delay,  must  be  supplied  by  closer
meditation  upon  the  subject  than  we  have  hither-
to used:  and,  above  all,  by  earnest  and  unceasing  I  «uuk?  ^v^u^j  w  *•««  «.««,  -»v»~%,  »«*.  .»  j
Kayer  tor  such  a  portion  and  measure  of  spiritual doubtedly  one  entire  prophecy ;  therefore  the
fluence  shed  upon  our  hearts,  as  may  cure  and  |  expressions,  which  are  still  stronger,  are  app&ca-


(PART  L)

THE  EFFICACY  OF  THE  DEATH  OF  CHHIST.

Now  once  in  the  end  of  the  world  hath  he  appear-
ed to  put  away  sin  by  the  sacrifice  of  himself.
— Hebrews  ix.  96.

The  salvation  of  mankind,  and  most  particu-
larly in  so  far  as  the  death  and  passion  of  our
Lord  Jesus  Christ  are. concerned  in  it,  and  where-
by he  comes  to  be^cajled  our  Saviour  and  our  Re-
deemer, ever  has  been,  and  ever  must  be,  a  most
interesting  subject  to  all  serious  minds.

Now  there  is  one  thing  in  which  there  is  no  di-
vision or  difference  of  opinion  at  all ;  which  is,
that  the  death  of  Jesus  Christ  is  spoken  of  in  re-
ference to  human  salvation,  in  terms  and  in  a
manner,  in  which  the  death  of  no  person  what-
ever is  spoken  of  besides.  Others  have  died  mar-
tyrs as  well  as  our  Lord.  Others  have  suffered
in  a  righteous  cause,  as  well  as  he ;  but  that  u
said  of  nun,  and  of  his  death  and  sufferings,  which
is  not  said  of  any  one  else.  An  efficacy  and  a  con-
cern are  ascribed  to  them,  in  the  business  of  human
salvation,  which  are  not  ascribed  to  any  other.

What  may  be  called' the  first  Gospel  declaration
upon  this  subject,  is  the  exclamation  of  John  the
Baptist,  when  he  saw  Jesus  coming  unto  him :
"  Behold  the  Lamb  of  God,  which  taketh  away
the  sin  of  the  world."  I  think  it  plain,  that  when
John  called  our  Lord  the  Lamb  of  God,  he  spoke
with  a  relation  to  his  being  sacrificed,  and  to  the
effect  of  that  sacrifice  upon  the  pardon  of  human
sin ;  and  this,  you  will  observe,  was  said  of  him
even  before  he  entered  upon  his  office.  If  any
doubt  could  be  made  of  the  meaning  of  the  Bap-
tist's expression,  it  is  settled  by  other  places  m
which  the  like  allusion  to  a  Lamb  is  adopted;
and  where  the  allusion  is  specifically  applied  to
his  death,  considered  as  a  sacrifice.

In  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  the  following  words
of  Isaiah  are,  by  Philip  the  evangelist,  distinctly
applied  to  our  Lord,  and  to  our  Lord's  death.
"  He  was  led  as  a  sheep  to  the  slaughter;  and
like  a  lamb  dumb  before  his  shearers,  so  opened
he  not  his  mouth ;  in  his  humiliation  his  judgment
was  taken  away,  and  who  shall  declare  his  gene-
ration! for  his  life  is  taken  from  the  earth;9
therefore  it  was-  to  his  death,  you  see,  that  the
description  relates.  Now,  I  say,  that  this  is  applied
to  Christ  most  distinctly;  for  the  pious  eunuch
who  was  reading  the  passage  in  his  chariot,  was
at  a  loss  to  know  to  whom  it  should  be  applied,
"I  pray  thee,"  saith  he  to  Philip,  "of  whom
speaketh  the  prophet  this?  of  himself  or  of  some
other  man  ?"  And  Philip,  you  read,  taught  him
that  it  was  spoken  of  Christ.  "And  I  say,  secondly,
that  this  particular  part  and  expression  of  the  pro-
phecy being  applied  to  Christ's  death,  carries  the
whole  prophecy  to  the  same  subject;  for  it  f


SERMONS  OK  SEVERAL  SUBJECTS.


697


ble  as  well  as  this.  "  He  was  wounded  for  oar
transgressions;  he  was  braised  for  our  iniquities :
the  chastisement  of  our  peace  was  upon  him ;  ana
with  his  stripes  we  are  healed ;  the  Lord  hath  laid
on  him  the  iniquity  of  us  all."  There  is  a  Strang
and  very  apposite  text  of  St.  Peter's,  in  which  the
amplication  of  the  term  "  Lamb"  to  our  Lord,  and
the  sense  in  which  it  is  applied,  can  admit  of  no
question  at  all.  It  is  in  the  1st  chapter  of  the
first  epistle,  the  18th  and  19th  verses:  "Foras-
much as  ye  know,  that  ye  were  not  redeemed  with
corruptible  things,  but  with  the  precious  blood  of.
Christ,  as  of  a  lamb  without  blemish  and  without
spot."  All  the  use  I  make  of  these  jpassages  is
to  show,  that  the  prophet  Isaiah,  six  hundred
years  before  his  birth ;  St.  John  the  Baptist,  upon
the  commencement  of  his  ministry ;  St  Peter,  his
friend,  companion,  and  apostle,  alter  the  transac-
tion was  over,  speak  of  Christ's  death,  under  the
figure  of  a  lamb  being  sacrificed ;  mat  is,  as  having
the  effect  of  a  sacrifice,  the  effect  in  kind,  though
infinitely  higher  in  degree,  upon  the  pardon  of
sins,  and  the  procurement  of  salvation;  and  that
this  is  spoken  of  the  death  of  no  other  person
whatever.  '

Other  plain  and  distinct  passages,  declaring  the
efficacy  of  Christ's  death,  are  the  following,  He-
brews  Ix.  26 :  "  Now.  once  in  the  end*  of  the  world
hath  he  appeared  to  put  away  sin  by  the  sacrifice
of  himself.  Christ  was  once- offered  to  bear  the
sins  of  many,  and  unto  them'  that  look  for  him
.shall  he  appear-  the*  second  time  without  sin  unto
salvation.  And  in  the  xth  chapter,  12th  verse :
"  This  man,  after  he  had  offered  one  sacrifice  for
sin,  for  ever  sat  down  on  the  right  hand  of  God,
for  by  one  offering  he  hath  perfected  for  ever  them
that  are  sanctified."  I  observe  again,  that  nothing
of  this  sort  is'said  of  the  death  of  any  other  per-
son; no  such  efficacy  is  imputed  to  any  other,
martyrdom.  So  likewise  in  the  following  text,
from. the  Epistle  to  the  Romans:  "While  we
were  yet  sinners,  Christ  died  for  us;  much  more
then  being  now  justified  by  his  blood  we  shall  be
saved  from  wrath  through  him;  fo>  if,  when  we
were  enemies,  we  were  reconciled  to  God  by  the .
death  of  bis  Son,  much  more,  being  reconciled,  we
shall  be  saved  by  his  life."  M  Reconciled  to  God
by  the  death  of  his  Son ;"  therefore  that  death  had
an  efficacy  in  our  reconciliation ;  but  reconcilia-
tion is  preparatory  to  salvation.  The  same  thing
is  said  by  the  same  apostle  in  his  Epistle  to  the
Colossians :.  "  He  has  reconciled  us  to  his  Father
in  his  cross,  and  in  the  body  of  his  flesh  through
death.".  What  is  said  of  reconciliation  in  these
texts,  is  said  in  other  texts  of  sanctification,  which
also  is  preparatory  to  salvation.  Thus,  Hebrews
X.  10:  "We  are  sanctified:"  howl  namely,  "  by
the  offering  of  the  body  of  Christ  once  for  all  ;'*  so
again  in  the  same  epistle,  the  blood  of  Jesus  is  call-
ed "  the  blood  of  me  covenant  by  which  we  are
sanctified."

In  these  and  many  other  passages,  that  lie
spread  in  different  parts  of  the  New  Testament,
it  appears  to  be  asserted,  $at  the  death  of  Christ
had  an  efficacy  in  the  procurement  of  human  sal-
vation. Now  these  expressions  mean  something,
mean  something  substantial ;  they  are  used  con-
cerning no  other  person,  nor  the  death  of  any
other  person  whatever.  Therefore  Christ's  death
was  something  more  than  a  confirmation  of  his
preaching ;  something  more  than  a  pattern  of  a
hoty  and  patiaot ,  and  perhaps  voluntary  martyr*


dom;  something  more  than  necessarily  antecedent
to  his  resurrection,  by  which  he  gave  a  grand  and
clear  proof  of  human  resurrection.  Christ's  death
was  all  these,  but  it -was  something  more ;'  because
none  of  these  ends,  nor  all  of  them,  satisfy  the
text  yoo  have  heard ;  come  up  to  the  assertions
and  declarations  which  are  delivered  concerning  it

Now  allowing  the  subject  to  stop  here,  allowing
that  we  know  nothing,  nor  can  know  any  thing
concerning  it  but  what  is  written,  and  that  no-
thing more  is  written  than  that  the  death  of  Christ
had  a  real  and  essential  effect  upon  human  salva-
tion; we  have  certainly  before  us  a  doctrine  of  a
very  peculiar,  perhaps  1  may  say  of  a  very  unex-
pected kind,  in  some  measure  hidden  in  the  coun-
cils of  the  divine  nature,  but  still  so  for  revealed  to
us,  as  to  excite  two  great  religious  sentiments,  ad-
miration and  gratitude.

That  a  person  of  a  nature  different  from  all
other  men;  nay,  superior,  for  so  he  is  distinctly
described  to  be,  to  all  created  beings,  whether  men
or  angels ;  united  with  the  Deity  as  no  other  per-
son is  united;  that  such  a  person  should  come
down  from  heaven,  and  sutler  upon  earth  the
pains  of  an  excruciating  death,  and  that  these  his
submissions  and  sufferings  should  avail  and.  pro-
duce a  great  effect  in  the  procurement  of  the  fu-
ture salvation  of  mankind,  cannot  but  excite  won-
der. But  it  is  by*  no  means  improbable  on  that
account:  on  the  contrary,  it  might  be  reasonably
supposed  beforehand,  that  if  any  thing  was  dis-
closed to  us  touching  a  future  life,  and  touching
the  dispensations  of  God  to  men,  it  would  be
something  of  a  nature  to  excite  admiration.  In
the  world  in  which  we  five,  we  may  be  .said  to
have  some  knowledge  of  its  laws,  and  constitution,
and  nature:  we  have  long  experienced  them;  as
also -of  the  beings  with  whom  we  converse,  or
amongst  whom  we  are  conversant,  we  may  be
said  to  understand  something,  at  least  they  are
familiar  to  us ;  we  are  not  surprised  with  appear-
ances which  every  day  occur.  But  of  the  wot  Id
and  the  life  to  which  we  are  destined,  and  of  the
beings  amongst  whom  we  may  be  brought,  the
ease  is  altogether  different.  Here  is  no  experience
to  explain  things ;  no  use  or  familiarity  to  take
off  surprise;  to  reconcile  us  to  difficulties,  to  assist
our  apprehension.  In  the  new  order  of  things,
according  to  the  new  laws  of  nature,  every  thing
will  be  suitable ;  suitable  to  the  beings  who  are  to
occupy  the  future  world;  but  that  suitableness
cannot,  as  it  seems  to  me,  be  possibly  perceived  by
us,  until  we  are  acquainted  with  that  order  and
with  those  beings.  So  that  it  arises,  as  it  were,
from  the  necessity  of  things,  that  what  is  told  us'
by  a  divine  messenger  of  heavenly  affairs,  of  af-
fairs purely  spiritual,  that  is,  relating  purely  to
another  world,  must  be  so  comprehended  by  us,
as  to  excite  admiration.

But,  seeondly ;  partially  as  we  may,  or  perhaps
must,  comprehend  this  subject,  in  common  with
all  subjects  which  relate  strictly  and  solely  to  the
nature  of  our  future  life,  we  may  comprehend  it
quite  sufficiently  for  one  purpose;  and  that  is  gra-
titude. It  was  only  for  a  moral  purpose  that-  the
thing  was  revealed  at  all ;  and  tnat~purpose  is  a
sense  of  gratitude  and  obligation.  This  was  the
use  which  the  apostles  of  our  (<ord,  who  knew
the  most,  made  of  their  knowledge.  This  was  the
turn  they  gave  to  their  meditations  upon  the  sub-
ject; the  impression  it  left  upon  their  hearts.
That  a  great  and  happy  Being  should  voluntarily


feB


SERMONS  ON  SEVERAL  SUBJECTS


enter  the  world  in  a  mean  end  low  condition,  and
humble  himself  to  a  death  upon  the  cross,  thai  is,
to  be  executed  aa  a  malefactor,  in  order,  by  what-
ever meant  it  was  done,  to  promote  the  attain-
ment of  salvation  to  mankind,  and  to  each  and
every  one  of  themselves,  was  a  theme  the?  dwelt
upon  with,  feelings  of  the  wannest  thankiulness ;
because  they  were  feelings  proportioned,  to  the
magnitude  of  the  benefit.  Earthly  benefits  are
nothing  compared  with  those  which  are  heavenly.
That  they  felt  from  the  bottom  of  their  souls.
That,  in  my  opinion,  we  do  not  feel  as  we  ought
But  feeling  this,  they  never  eease  to  testify,  to
acknowledge,  to  express  the  deepest  obligation,
the  most  devout  consciousness  of  that  obligation
to  their  Lord  and  Master;  to  him  whom,  for  what
he  had  done  and  suffered,  they  regarded  as  the
finisher  of  their  faith1,  and  the  author  of  their  sal-
vation.


'  SERMON  JUX.

(PART  no

ALL  STAND  IN  NEED  OF  A  REDEEMER.

Now  once  in  the  end  of  the  world  hath  he  op-
peared  to  put  away  sin  by  the  sacrifice  of  him*
eeflT.— Hebrews  ix.  26.

In  a  former  discourse  upon  this  text  I  have
shown,  first,  That  the  Scriptures  expressly  state
the  death  of  Jesus  Christ  ss  having  an  efficacy  in
the  procurement  of  human  salvation,  which  is  not
attributed  to  the  death  or  sufferings  of  any '  other
person,  however  patiently  undergone,  or  unde-
servedly inflicted ;  and  farther,  it  appears  that  this
efficacy  is  quite  consistent  with  our  obligation- to
obedience;  that  good  works  still  remain  the  con-
dition'of  salvation,  though  not  the  cause;  the
cause  being  the  mercy  of  Almighty  God  through
Jesus  Christ.  There  is  no  man  living,  perhaps,
who  uas  considered  seriously  the  state  of  his  soul,
to  whom  this  is  not  a  consoling  doctrine,  and  a
grateful  truth*.  But  there  are  some  situations  of
mind  which  dispose  us  to  feel  the  weight  and  im-
portance of  this  doctrine  more  than  others.  These
situations  I  will  endeavour  to  describe;  and,  in
doing  so,  to  point  out  how  much  more  satisfactory
it  is  to  have  a  Saviour  and  Redeemer,  and  the
mercies  of  our  Creator  excited  towards  us,  and
communicated  to  us  by  and  through  that  Saviour
and  Redeemer,  to  confide  in  and  rely  upon,  than
any  grounds  of  merit  in  ourselves.

First,  then,  souls  which  are  really  labouring  and
endeavouring  after  salvation,  and  with  sincerity —
such  souls  are  every  hour  made  sensible,  deeply
sensible,  of  the  deficiency  and  imperfection  of
their  endeavours.  Had  they  no  ground,  therefore, ,
for  hope,  but  merit,  that  is  to  say,  could  they  look'
for  nothing  more  than  what  they  should  strictly
dwerw, their  prospect  would  be  very  uncomforta-
ble. 1  see  not  how  they  coulcl  look  for  heaven  at
all.  They  may  form  a  conception  of  a  virtue  and
obedience  which  might  seem  to.  be  entitled  to  a
high  reward ;  but  when  they  come  to  review  their
own  performances,  and  to  compare  them  with  that
conception;  when  they  see  how  short  they  hava-
proved  of  what  they  ought  to  have  been,  and  of
what  they  might  havetoen,  how  weak  and  broken


were  their  beat  offices;  they  will  be  the  first  U,
confess,  that  it  is  infinitely  for  their  commit  that
they  have  some  other  resource  than  their  own
righteousness. One  infallible  effect  of  sincerity
in  our  endeavours  is,  to  beget  in  us  a  knowledge
of  our  imperfections. The  careless,  the  heedless,
the  thoughtless,  the  nominal  Christian.  Jeds  no
want  of  a  Saviour,  an  intercessor,  a  mediator,  be-
cause he  feels  not  his  own  defects.  Try  in  earnest
to  perform  the  duties  of  religion,  and  you  will  soon
learn  how  incomplete  your  best  performances  are,
I  can  hardly  mention  a  branch  otour  duty,  which
is  not  liable  to  be  both  impure  in  the  motive,  and
imperfect  in  the  execution;  or  a  branch  of  our
duty  in  which  our  endeavours  can  found  their
hopes  of  acceptance  upon  any  thing  but  extended
mercy,  and  the  efficacy  of  those means and
causes  which  have  procured  it  to  be  so  extended.
In  the  first  piece,  is  not  this  the  case  with  our
acts  of  piety  snd  devotion  1 We  may  admit,
that  pure  aftd  perfect  piety  has  a  natural  tide  to
reward  at  the  hand,  of  God. But  is  ours  ever
such? To  be  pare  mite  motive,  it  ought  to  pro-
ceed from  a  sense  of  God  Almighty's  goodness
towards  us,  and  from  no  other  source,  or  cause,
or  motive  whatsoever. Whereas  even pious,
comparatively  pious  men,  will  acknowledge  that
authority,  custom,  decency, imitation, have  a
share  in  most  of  their  religious  exercises,  and
that  they  cannot  warrant  any  of  their  devotions
to  be  entirely  independent  of  these  causes. I
would  not  speak  disparagingly  of  the  considera-
tions here  recited. They  are  oftentimes  neces-
sary inducements,  and  they  may  be  Hut  means  of
bringing  us  to  better ;  but  still  it  is  true,  that  devo-
tion is  not  pure  in  its  origin,  unless  it  flow  from
a  sense  of  God  Almighty's  goodness,  unmixed
with  any  other  reason. But  if  our  worship  of
God  be  defective  in  its  principle,  and  often  debased
by  the  mixture  of  impure  motives,  it  is  still  more
deficient,  when  we  come  to  regard  it  in  its  per-
formances. Our  devotions  are  broken  and  inter-
rupted, or  they  are  cold  and  languid. Woxkfly
thoughts  intrude  themselves  upon  them. Our
worldly  heart  is  tied  down  to  the  earth. Our
devotions  are  unworthy  of  God. We  lift  not  up
our  hearts  unto  him. Our  treasure  is  upon  earthy
and  our  hearts  are  with .  our  treasure, That
heavenly-mindednees  which  ought  to  be  insepara-
ble from  religious  exercises  does  not  accompany
ours;  at  least  not  constantly. I  speak  not  now
of  the  hypocrite  in  religion,  of  him  who  only
makes  a  show  of  it. His  case  comes  not  within
our  present  consideration. I  speak  of  those  who
are  sincere  men. These  feel  the  imperfection  at
their  services,  and  will  acknowledge  that  I  bave
not  stated  it  more  strongly  than  what  is  true.
Imperfection  cleaves  to  every  part  of  it Our
thankfulness  k  never  what  it  ought  to  be,  or  any
thing  Jike  it;  and  it  is  only  when  we  have  some
particular  reason  for  being  pleased  that  we  are
thankful  at  all. Formality  is  apt  continually  to
steal  upon  us  in  our  worship :  more  especially  ia
our  public  worship;  and  formality  takes  away
the immediate  consciousness  of  what  we  are
doing;  which  consciousness  is  the  very  life  of
devotion ;  all  that  we  do  without  it  being  a  dead
ceremony.

No  man  reviews  his  services  towards  God,  his
religious  services,  but  he  perceives  in  them  much
to  be  forgiven,  much  to  be  excused ;  ffreal  mi-
worthiness  as  respecting  the  object  of  aU  worahip;


SERMONS  ON  SEVERAL  SUBJECTS.


569


and*  deficiency  and  imperfection  to  be  passed
pver, ^before  oar  service  can  he  deemed  in  it*  nature
an  acceptable  service.  That>such  services/ there-
fore, sboald,  in  fact,  be  allowed  and  accepted^
and  that  to  no  lefts  an  end  and  purpose  than  the
attainment  of  heaven,  is  an  act -of  abounding
grace  and  goodness- in  Him  who  accepts  them;
and  we  are  taught  in  Scripture,  that  this  so  much
wanted  grace  and  goodness  abounds  towards  us
through  Jesus.  Christ ;  and  particularly  through
his  sufferings,  and  his  death.

But  to  pass  from  our  acts  of  worship,  which
form  a  particular  part-only  of  our'  duty  to  God ;


than  "  to  love  him  with  all  our.  heart,  with  all  our
soul,  with  all  our  strength,  and  with  alt  our  mind :"
Luke  x.  27.  Are  we  conscious  of  such  love  to
such,  a  'degree?  If  we  are  hot,  then,  in  a  most
fundamental  duty,  we  fail  of  being  what  we  ought
to  be.  'Here,  then,  as  befora,  w  a  call  for  pardon-
ing mercy  on  the  part  of  God  ;  which  mercy  is'
extended  tq  us  by  the  intervention  ef  Jesus'
Christ;  at  least  so  the  Scriptures  represent  it.

In  ota  duties  -towards  'one  -another,  it  may  be
said,  that  our  performances  are  more  adequate  to
<ntf  obligation,  than  in  our  duties:  to  God  ?  that.
the  subjects  of  them  He  more- level  with  our  capa-
city; and  there  maybe  troth  in  this  observation.
But  still  T  am  afraid,  that  both  in  principle  and
execution  on*  performances  are  not  only  defective,
hut  defective  in  e>  degree  which  we  are-  not  suffi-
ciently aware  of. The  ru)e  laid  down  for  us  is
th>,  *  to  love  our  neighbour  as  ourselves."  Which
rule,  in  Act,  enjoins,,  that  ou*  benevolence  be  as
strong  as.pur  self-interest :  that  we  be  as  anxious
to  do  good,  as  quick  to  discover,  as  eager  to  em-
brace every  opportunity -of  doing  it,  and  as  active,
and  resolute,  and  perseveringin  our  endeavours
to  do  it,  as  vfe  are  anxious  for  ourselves,  and
active  in  the  pursuit  of  our  ownr  interest 'Now
1a  this  the  case  with  us? Wherein  it  is  not,  we
fell  below  our,  rale.  '  In  the  Apostles  of  Jesus
Christ,  to-whom  this  rule  was  given  from  his  own
mouth,  you  may  read  how  it  operated  i  and  their'
example- proves, -what  some  deny,  the  possibility
ef  the  thing ;  .namely,  of  benevolence  beings  ««
strong  a  mojive  as  taett interest .They  firmly  be*
heved,  that  to  bring  men  to  the  knowledge  of
Christ's  religion  was  the  greatest  possible  good
that  could  be  done  unto  them:  was. the  highest
act  of  benevolence  they  could  exercise. Arid,
accordingly,-  they  set  about  this  work,  and  carried
it  on  with  as  much  energy,  as  much  order,  as
much  perseverance,  through  as.  great  toils  and
labours,  as  many  sufferings  and  ^difficulties,  .as
any  person,  ever  pursued  a  scheme  for  their  own
interest,  or  for  the  making  of  ajfortune. They
coohi  not  possibly  have  .done  more  for  their  own
ashes '  than  what  they  did*  for  the  sake  of  others.
They  literally  loved  their  neighbours  as  them-
selves. Same  have  followed;  their  example-  in
this j  and  some  hare.  mzeaJ  and  energy,  followed*
thedr  example  in  others  methods- of  doing"  good.
For  I  do  not  mean  to  say,  that  the  particular  me-
thod of  usefulness,  which  the  office  of  the  apostles
cast  upon  them,  is  the  only  method,  or  that  it  is  a.
method  even  competent  to  many. -Doing  good,
without  any  selfish  worldly  motive 'for  doing  it,  is
the  grand  thing:  the  mode  must  be  regulated  try
opportunity  and  occasion. To  which  may  be
^^  4C


added,  that  in  those  whose  power  of  doing' good,
according  to.  any  mode,  is  small,  the  principle  of
benevolence  will  at  least  restrain  them  from  doing
harm.  If  the  principle  be  subsisting  in  their  hearts,
it  will  have  this  operation' at  least,  l-^isk  there-
fore again,  as" I  asked  before,  are > we  as  soKcitouy
tovseize  opportunities,  tq  look  out  for  and  embrace
occasions  of  doing  good,  as  we  are  certainly  sofi-
'eitous  to  lay  hold  of  opportunities  of  making -ad-
vantage to  ourselves,  and  to  embrace  all  occasions
of  profit  and  self-kiterest?  -  Nay,  b  benevolence
strong  enough  to  hold  our  hand,  when  stretched
out  for  mischief?  is.hv  always  sufficient  to  make
us  consider. what  misery  wears  producing, •  whilst
we  are  coinrossing a  selfish  end,  or  gratifyif>g  a
lawless  passion  of  our  own  ^  .  Do  the  two  princi-
ples of  oenevolence  and  self-interest  possess  any
degree  of .  parallelism  and  equality  in  our  hearts,
and  in  our  conduct  ?  If  they  do,~theh  so  far  we.
come  up  to  our  rule.  Wherein  they  do  .not,  as  I
said  before,  we  fall  beJoW  it.  .

When  not  only  the  generality  df  mankind,  but
even  those  who  are  endeavouring  to  dotljeir  dutyy
apply  the  standard  Co  themselves,  th**y  are  made
to  learn  the  humiliating  lesson  of  their  ov«tfi  defi-
ciency. That  such  our  deficiency  should  he
overlooked,  so  as  not  to  become^thp  loss  to  us  of
happiness  after  death ;  that  our  poor,  weak,  hum-
ble endeavours  to  comply  with  our  Saviour's  rule
should  be  received  and  not  rejected ;— I  say,  if  we
hope  for  this,  we » must  hope  for  it,  not  on  the
ground  of  congTuUy  or  desert,  which  it  will  not
bear,  Dut  from  the  extreme  benignity  of  a  merciful
God,  and  the  availing  mediation  of  a  Redeemer.
You  will  observe  that  I  am  still,  and  have  been
all  along,  speaking  of  sincere  men,  of  those  who
are  m  earnest  in1  their  duty,  and  in  religion;  and
I  say,  upon  the  strength  of  what  has  been  alleged,
that  even  these  persons,  when  they  read  in  Scrip-
ture of-  the  riches  of  Jhe  .goodness  of  God,  of  the*
powerful  efficacy  of  the  death  of  Christ,  of  his
mediation  and  continual  intercession,  know  and
feel  in  their  hearts  that  they  stand  in  need  of
them  all./  , "

In  that  lemainhifl'  class  of  duties,  which  are
called  duties  to  ourselves,  the  observation  we  have
made  upon  the  deficiency  of  our  endeavours  ap-
plies with  equal  or  with  greater  force;  More  is
here  wanted  than  the  mere  command  of!  our  ac-
tions. The  heart  itself  is  U  be  regulated;  the
hardest  thing  in  this  world .  to  manage.  •  The*
.affections  and  passi6n8^are«to  be'  kept  m  order ;
constant,  evil  propensities,  are  to  be  constantly
opposed,  1  apprehend  tint  every  sincere  man  is
conscious  how  unable  he  is- to  fulfil  this  part  of
his  duty,  even  to  Us  own  satisfaction ;'  and  if  our
consignee,  accuse  us,  "  God  is  greater  than  oar
conscience,  and  knoweth  all  things/'  If  we  see
our  sad  failings,  He  must

God  forbid  that  any  things  Tsayj  either,  upon
this  or  the.,  other  branches  of  our  duty,  should
damp',  our  endeavours. .  Let  them  be  as  vigorous
and  as  steadfast  as  they  can. ..  They  will  be  so  if
we  are  sincere.;  and  without  sincerity  there  is  no
hope;  none  whatever.  But  there  will  always  be
left  enough,  infinitely  more  than  enough,  to  hum-
ble selfsufficiency.

.  Contemplate,  Chen,  what  is  placed  before  us —
heaven.  Understand  what  heaven  is:  a  state-
of  happiness  after  death ;  exceeding  what,  with-
out experience,  it  is  possible  for  us  to  conceive,
and,  nnltmitsd  »  duration.  This  is  a  reward  h>
46*


MO


SERMONS  ON  SEVERAL  SUBJECTS.


finitely  beyond  any  thing  we  am  pretend  tq,  as
of  light,  as  merited,  as  due.  Soma  dwtnetma
between  us  and  others,  between  the  caraparetfrw-
lr  good  and  the  bad,  night  be  expected  ;  but  on
these  grounds,  not  anch  a  reward  aa  this,  eien
wen  our  service*,  I  mean  the  services  of  sincere
men,  perfect.  Bat  each  services  as- ours,  in  truth,
are,  such  service*  aa,  in  fret,  we  perform,  so  poor,
ao  deficient,  so  broken,  so  mixed  with  alloy,  ao
imperfect  both  in  principle- and  execution,  what
have  their  to  look  for  upon  their  own  foundation  1
When,  tjwttrfbre,  the  Scriptoses* speak  to  us  of**
redeemer,  a.  mediator,  an  intones**  for  as ;  when
they  display  and  magnify  the  exceeding  great
mercies  of  God,  as  eat  forth  in  the  aahation  of
man,  according  to  any  mode  whatever  which  he
might  be  pleased  to  appoint,  and  therefore  in  that
moo>  which  the  Gospel  holds  forth;  they  tench
•a  no  other  doctrine  than  that  to  which  the  actual
deficiencies  of  our  duty  and  a  just  consciousness
and  acknowledgment  of  these  deficiencies,  must
naturally  cany  out.  own  minds.  What  we  feel
in  ourselves  corresponds  .with  what  we  tend  in
Scripture.


SERMON  XX.

THE'  EfFIGACT  OF  THE  DEATH  OP  CBBIST  COW-
si  stent  wit*  the  ^  necessity  of*  a  good
life:  the  One  being)  the  cj«se,  the  other
the  condition  of  salvation.

What  shall  we  sag  then.?  shall  we  continue'  in<
*t*t,  that  grace  may  abound?  Chdjbrbid.—


T«  R*eme  Scripturea  which  represent  the  death
of  Christ,  as  having  that  which  belongs  to  the
death  of  no  other  person,  namely,  an  efficacy  in
procuring  the  salvation  t)f  man,  are  also  constant
and  uniform  in  representing  the  necessity  of  our
own  endaavours,of  our  own  good  works  for.  the
aame  purpose.  Thee  ao  further.  They  foresaw
that  in  slating,  and  soli  more  when  they  went
about  to.«Etoi  and  magnify  the  death  of  Christ,  as
hastrumenjal  to  salvation,  they  were  laying  a  foun-
dation, for  the -opinion,  that  men's  own  works,
their  own  virtue,  their  personal  endeavours,  were
auporseded  and  dispensed  with.  In  proportion  as
thtaacrinbs  of  the  death  of  Christ  was  effectual,
in  the  same  proportion  were  these  less  necessary :
if  the  death  of  Christ  was  sufficient,  if  redemption
-syas  complete,  then  were  these  not  neeeasary  at
aU  They  foresaw  that  some  would  draw  this
consequence  from  their  doctrine,  and  they  provided
against  it

It  hf  observable,  (hat  the  save- consequence
might  be  deduced  from  the  goodness  of  God  in
any  way  of  representing  it:  not  only  in  the  par-
ticular and  peculiar  way  in  which  it  is  represent-
ed in  the  redemption  of  the  world  by  Jesus  Christ,
but  many  other  way.  St.  Paul,  for  one,  was  sen-
sible of  this,  and  therefore,  when  he  speaks  of  the
goodness  or  God,  even  in  general  terms,  he  takes
care,  to  point  out  the  only  true  turn  which  ought
to  be  given  to  it  in  our  thoughts—"  Despisest  thou
the  riches  of  his  goodness,  and  forbearance,  and
long  Buffering-  hot  knowing  that  Vhe  goodness  of
God  laadeth  thee  to  repentance  1"  as  if  he  had
•aid,— With  thee,  I  perceive,  that  the  considera-


tion  of  the  goodness  of  God,  leads  to  the  Allowing
of  thyself  m  sin :  tins  is  not  to  know  what  that


uuww^ww.  ought  in  truth  te  and  to:  taught
to  lead  thee  to  repentance,  audto  ns  other  cmtm*


Again:  When  the  apostle  had  been  spatial
of  the  righteousness  of  God  displayed  by  Ua>  wick-
edness of  manj  he  was  not  unaware  of  thejas-
oonstruetidrr  to  which  tfrwaepresenfanoBwaitti-
bk,  and  which  it  had,  in  fret,  experienced ;  which
sdaconstrucuon  he  stales  thus,— u  We  wskiidcr.
oualy  reported,  and  some  affirm,  that  we  ay,  at
us  do,  evil  that  good  inayeonw."  Tbn  umuhb-
fion,  however,  he  regards  as  nothing  km  thai  an
unhnr  and  wilful  perversion  of  his  words,  and  of
thewoasa  of  other  Ghriatiaxtteacher«:  taciribw
he  says  concerning  those  who  did  thus  ptr*at
them,  "  their-  condemnation  is  just :"  they  jwifl  be
justly  condemned  for  thus  abusing  the  dorttina
which  we  teach,  ,  The  passage,  however,  chtrtf
shows,  that  the  application  of  their  exprasnato
the  encouragement  of  licentiousness  of  life.  v»
an  application  contrary  to  taetrUilsntion;  and,*
met,  a  perversion,  of  their  words.

In  like  manner  in  the  aame  chapter,  our  ipoab
hadnosoonBr4siddowathedoOtrn»,tMt"»inM
ia  justified  by  frrth  without  the  deeds  of  the  nw,n
than  be  checks  himseb;  aa  it  were,  by  snbawunf
Do  we  then  make  void  the  aw


Bestabmiit.


this  proviso:'

through  faith ?  .God  forbad:  yea,  we
law."  Whatever  he  meant  by  his «
earning  faith,  he  takes  care  to  let  then  know  hi
did  not  mean  thp,  "to  tnake  wad  thelaw^ora
dispense  with  obedience.

But  the  dearest  text*  to  our  purpose  is  tmt,  m-
doubtedly,  which  I  have  prefixed  to  this  diswuw.
Saint  Paul,  after  expatiating  largely  upon  tt*
"grace,"  that  ia,  the  favour, {Lindness.and nerry
of  God,  the  extent,  the  giwtness.nheconiprehfo.
siveness  of  that  mercy,  aa  maniiested  intkeCb*
nan  dispensation,  puts  this'  questtoxrto  his  ft***
— "  What  shall  we  say  thenl  shell  we cabin"
in  sin,  that  grace  may  abound?'  which  h«  sa-
swers  by  a  strong  negative— -  God  forbid,,  WW
the  apostle  designed  in  this  passage  is  saffians
ly evident.  ^elnxwm  whet  manaer  sink  nap
be  apt  to  construe  his  eapreadon*;  sad  he  an-
ticipates their  mistake.  He  is  beforehand  situ
them,  by  protesting,  against  any  sack  aw  bring
made  of  his  doctrine;  vshfch,  yet  he  warawiie,
migbl  by  7)0ea^bh^  be  made. .

By  way<tf  showing  scripturally  the  cbfiptas
and  the  necessity  of  personal  endeavour*  •ft*
virtue,  ail  the  numerous  texts  which  exhort  toir
tue,  and,  admonish  us  against  vice,  migbt  m

r*d ;  forthey  are  all  Erectly  to  the  psruj»-
.ia  we  might  quote  every  page  of  the >e*
Testament.  "  Not  every  one  that  aaith  unto  fl*
Lord,  Lord,  shall  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  hea-
ven ;  but  he  that  death  the  wHUf  myFteher  wort
is  m  heaven."  "  If  ye  know  these  thing*  happy
are  ye  if  ye  do  them."— In  both  these  taxtsthe
reward  attends  the  doing:  the  promise  a  am»««
to  warns.  Again:  °To  them,  who  by  fa**
continuance  in  well-doing  seek  for  gfory  sod  id>
mortaiityr eternal  life :  but  unto  them  that  txtcay
tentious,andob^yncttlMtn^,butob^nnnfW^
ouarfess,  tribulation,  and  anguish  upon  ct"T.5"
of  man  that  doeth  evil."  Again :  "Of  thewhiA
namely,  certain  enumerated  vices,  "  I  tell  y«  be-
fore, aa  I  have  ulsb  toil  you  in  time  past,  that  t^
whidtdoauch  things,  shall  wa  inherit  the  xb|-


SERMONS  ON  SEVERAL  SUBJECTS.


571


dom.  of  (Sod."  Thejse  an  a  few  amongst  many
texts  of  the  same  effect,  and  they  are  stfch  as  can
never  be  got  over.  Stronger  terms  cannot  be  de-
vised than  what  are  here  used.  Were  the  pur-
.  pose,  therefore,  simply  to  prove  from  Scripture  the
necessity  of  virtue,  and  the  danger  of  vice,  so  far
as  salvation  is  concerned,  these  'texts  are  .decisive.
But  when  an  answer  is  to  be  ffiven  to  those,  who
so  interpret  certain  {passages  of  the  'apostolic  writ-
ings, especially  the  passages  which  -speak  of  the
efficacy  of  the  death  of  Christ,  or  draw  such  in-
ferences from  these  passages,  as  amount  to  a  dis*
pensing  with  the  obligations  of  virtue;  then  the
best  method  of  proving,  that  theirs  cannot  be  a
right  interpretation,  nor  thcirajust  inferences,  is  by
showing,  which  fortunately,  we  are  able  to  do,
that  it  is  the  very  interpretation,  and  these  -the
very  inferences,  which  the  apostlen  were  them-
selves aware  of,  which  they  provided  against,  and
which  they  protested  against.  The  four  texts,
quoted  from  the  apostolic  writings  in  this  discourse,
were  quoted  with  thi&view :  and  they  may  be  con-
sidered, I  think,  as  showing  the  minds  of  the
authors  upon  the  point  in  question  more  determt-
nately  than  any  general  exhortation- to  good  works',
or  any  general  denunciation  against  inn  could '^dp.
I  assume,  therefore,  as  a  proved  point,  that  what-
ever "Was  said  by  the  apostles  concerning  the  effi-
ctacy  of  the  death  of  Christ,  wassnid  by  them  un-
der an  apprehension  that  they  did  net  thereby  in
any  manner  relax  the  motives,  the  obligation,  or
the  necessity- of  good  works.  But  still  there  m
another  important  question  behind ;  namely,  whe-
ther, notwithstanding  what  the  apostle*  have  said,
or  may  have  meant  to  sayythcre  be  not,  in  the  nature
of  things,  an  invincible  inconsistency  between  the
efficacy  of  the  death  of  Christ,  and'  the  necessity
of  a  good  life ;  whether  those  two  propositions  can,
iiv  fair  reasoning,. stand  together j  or  whether  it
doe's  not  necessarily  follow^  that  if  the  death  of
Christ  be  efficacious,  then  good  works  are  no
longer  Twceasary;  and,  on  the  other  band,  thai  if
good  works  be  still  necessary,  then  |s  the  death
of  Christ  not  efficacious. .  - ,

Now,  to  give  an  account  of  this  question,  and
of  the  difficulty  which  it*  seems  to  present,  we
must  bear  in 'mind,  that  m.  the*  business  of  salva-
tion there'  are  naturally  and  property  two  things,
viz.  the  cause  and  the  condition ;  and  that  these
two  things  are  different.  We  should  see  better
the  propriety  of  this  distinction,  if  we  would  allow
ourselves  to  consider  well  v>hat  solvation  is :  what
the.  being  saved  means.  It  is  nothing  less-  than.
alter  this  life  is.  ended,  being  pjaced  in  a  state  of
happiness  exceedingly  great,  both  in  degree  and
duration^  •  state,  concerning  whjch  the  following
things  are  said:  "the  sufferings  of  this  present
world  are  not  worthy  to  be  compared  with  the
glory  that  shall  be  revealed."  "  God  hath  in  store
Jor  us  such  things  as  pass  man's  understanding.'
So  that,  you' see,  it  is  not  sifeiply  escaping  punish-
ment, simply  being-  excused  or  forgiven,  simply
being  compensated  or  repaid  for  the  little  good  we
do,  but  it  is  infinitely  more.  Heaven  is  infinitely
greater  than  mere  compensation,  which  natural  re-
ligion itself  might  lead  us  to  expect,  What  do
the  Scriptures  call  itt  '"  Glory,  honour,  immor-
tality, eternal  life."  "  To  them  that  seek  for  glory
and  honour  and  immortality,  eternal  life."  Will
any  one  then  contend,  that  salvation  ia  this  sense,
and  to  this  extent :  that  heaven,  eternal  life,  glory,
honour,  immortality ;  that  a  happiness  such  at


that  there  is  no.  way  of  describing  it.  hut  by  say-
ing that  it  8Ujmasses>human  comprehension,  that
it  casts'  the  sufferings  of  this  life  at  such  a  distance,
as  not  to  bear  arty  comparison  with  it;  will  any
one- contend,  that  this  is  no  more  than  what  virtue
deserves,  what,  in  its  own  proper,  nature,  arid  by
its  own. merit,  it  is  entitled  to  look  forward  to,  and
to  receive?  The  greatest  virtue  that  man  ever
attained  has  no  such  pretensions.  The  best  good
action  that  man  ever  performed  has -no  claim  to  '
this  extent,  or  any  thing  like  it  It  is  out  of  all
calculatiop,  and  comparison^and  proportion  above,
arid  more  thaivany  human  works  cart  possibly  de-
serve.* -  "*  ^

To  what  then  are  we  to  ascrioeit,  that*  endea-
vours after  .virtue  jhould  procure,  and  that  they
wiH,  in  foot,  procure,  to  those  who  sincerely  exert
them,  such  immense  blessings?  T6  what,  but  to
the  voluntary  bounty  of  Almighty  God,  who,  in
his  inexpressible  good  pleasure,  hath  appointed  it
so  to  he !  The  bemVnity  of  God  towards  man
hath  made  him  this  inconceivably  advantageous
oner,  But  a  most  kind  oner  may  still  be  a  condi-
tional offer.  And  tips;  though  an  infinitely  gra-
cious and  beneficial  offer;  is  still  a  conditions!  of-
fer, and  the  performance  of  the  conditions  Is  as
necessary  as  n  it  had  been  an  offer  of  mere  xetffc
bution.  The  kindness,  the;  bounty,  the  gehero*
aity  of  the  offer,  doNnot  make  it  less  necessary  to
perform  the  conditions,  but  mom  so.  *  A  condi-
tional offer  may  be  iminHely  kind  on  the  part  of
the  benefactor  who  makes  it  may  be  infinitely  be-
neficial to  those  to  whom  it  Is  made.  If  it  be  from
a  prince  or  governor,  may  be  infinitely  gracious
arid  mercifiil  on  his  part ;  and  yet,  tsewjr  condi-
tional, the  condition  is  as  necessary,  as  if  the  of-
fer had  been -no  more,  than  that  of  scanty  wages
by  *  hard  taskmaster.

In  considering  this  matter  in  general,  the  whole
of  it  appears  to  be  very  plain;  yet,  when  we  ap-
ply, the  consideration  to  religion,  there  are  two  mis-
takes into  which  we'  are  very  liable  \o  fall.  The
first- is,  that  when  we  hear  so  much  of  the  exceed-
ingly great  kindness  of  the  offer,  we  are  apt  to
infer,  that  the  conditions  upon  whicfi  it  was  made,
will  not  be  exacted.  Does  that  at  all"  follow  %
Because"  the  offer,  even  with  these  conditions,  is
represented  to  be  the  fruit  of  love,  and  mercy,  and
kindness,  and  is  in  truth  so,- and  is. most  justly  so*
to  be  accounted,  does  it  follow  that  the 'condition  e-
of  the  offer  are  not  necessary  to  be  performed  t
This*  is  one  error  into  which  we  slide,  against
which  we'  ought  to  guard,  ourselves  most  diligent-
ly ;-  for  it  is  not  simply  false  in  ita  principle,  but
most  pernicious  in  its'  application';  its  applica-
tion always  being  to  countenance  us  in  some  sin
which  we  will  not  relinquish.  The  second  mis-
take is,  that  when  we  have  performed  the  conditions,
or  think  that  we  have  performed  .the  conditions,
or  when  we  endeavour  to  perform  the  conditions,
upon  which  the  reward  is  offered,  we  forthwith
attribute  our  obtaining  the  reward  to  this  oar  per*
formance  of  endeavour,  and  not  to  that  which  is
the  beginning  and  foundation,  and  cause  of  the
whole,  the  tru*  and  proper  cause,  namely,  the
kindness  and  bounty  of  the  original  offer.  This
turn  of  thought  likewise,  as  well  as  the  former,  it
is  necessary  to  warn  you  against.  For  it  has
these  consequences ;  it  gamps  our  gratitude  to  God,
it  takes  off  our*attention  from  Him.

Some.Vhe  allow  the  necessity  of  good  works  to
salvation,  are  not  willing  that  they  should  be  called


W9


SERMONS  ON  SEVERAL  SUBJECTS.


conditions  of  salvation.  But  tins,  I  think,  is  adb-
tmction  too  refined  for  common  Christian  appre-
hension. If  they  be  necessary  to  mi  ration,  they
arc  conditions  of  salvation,  so  far  as  I  oan  see.  It
is  a  question,  however,  not  now  before  us.

But  to  return  to  the  immediate  subject  of  oar
discourse*  Our  observations  haye  carried  us  thus
far ;  thai  in  the  business  of  human  salvation  there
•are  two  meat  momentous  considerations,  the
cause  and  the  conditions,  and  that  these  consider-
ations are  distinct  I  now  proceed  to  say,  that
there  is  no  inconsistency  between  the  efficacy  of
the  death  of  Christ  and  the  necessity  of  ji  holy
life,  (by  which  1  mean  sincere  endeavours  alter
holiness;)  because  the  first,  the  death  of  Christ,
relates  to  the  cause  of  salvation ;  the  second,  name-
ly, good  works,  respects  "the  conditions  of  salva-
tion ;-and  that  the  cause  of  salvation  is  one  thing,
the  conditions  another.

The  cause  of  salvation  is  the  free  will,  the  free
gift,  the  Jove  and  mercy  of  God.  .That  alone  is
the  source,  and  fountain,  and  sause  of  salvation ;
the  origin  from  which  it  springs,  from  which,  all
our.  hopes  of  attaining  to  it  are  derived.  This
cause  is  not  in  ourselves,  nor  in  any  thing  we  do,
or  can  do,  tut  in  God,  in  his  good  wilt  and  plea*
sure.  It  is,  as  wc  have  before  shown,  in  the  gra-
eiouancfls  of  the  .original  offer.  Therefpre,  what-
ever shall  have  moved  and  excited,  and  conciliated
that  good  will  and  pleasure,  so  as  to  have,  procured
that  offer  to  be  made,  or  stall  have  formed  any
part  or  portion  of  the  motive  from  which  it  waa
made,  may  most  truly  and  properly- be  said  to  be
efficacious  in  human  salvation.
.  This  efficacy  is  in  Scripture  attributed  to  the
death  of  Christ.  It  is  attributed  in  a  variety  of
ways  of  expression,  but  this  is  the -substance  of
them  all.  He  is  "  a  sacrifice,  an  offering  to  God;
a  propitiations  the  precious  sacrifice  foreordained ;
the  lamb  slain  from  the  foundation  of  the  world-;
the  lamb  .which  taketh  away  the  sin  of  the  world.
We  are  washed  in  his  blood;  we  are  justified  by
his  blood ;  we  are  saved  from  wrath  through  him;'
he  hath  once  suffered  for  sins,  the  just  for  the  un-
just, that  he  might  bring  us  to  God."  All  these
terms,  and  many  more  that  are  used,  assert  in  sub-
stance the  same  thing;  namely,  the  efficacy  of  the
death  of  Christ  in  the  procuring  of  human  salva?
tion.  To  give  to  t£ese  expressions  their  proper
moment  and  import,  k  is  necessary  to  reflect,  over
and  over  again,  and  by  reflection  -to  impress  our
minds  with  a  just  idea,'  what  and  how  great  a
thing  salvation  is,  for  it  is  by  means  of  that  idea
alone,  that  we  can  ever  come  to  be  sensible,  how
Unspeakably  important,  how  inestimable  in  value,
any  efficacy  which  operates  upon  that  event  must
be  to  us  all  The  highest  terms  in  which  the
Scriptures  speak  of  that  efficacy  are  not  too  great :
cannot  be  too  great  y  because  it  respects  an  inter-
est and  an  event  so  vast,  so  momentous,  as  to  make
all  other  interests,  and  all  other  events,  in  com-
parison contemptible.

The , sum  of  our  argument  is  briefly  this.  There
may  appear,  and  to  many  there  has  appeared,  to
be  an  inconsistency  or  incompatibility  between  the  ■
efficacy  of  the  death  of  Christ,  and  the.  necessity
of  sincere  endeavours  after  obedience.  When  the
subject  is  properly  examined,  there  turns  out  to
be  no  such  incompatibility.  The  graciousnessof
an  offer  does  not  diminish  the  necessity  of  the
condition.  Suppose  a  prince  to  promise  to  one  of
his  subjects,  upon  compliance  with  certain  terms,


and  the  performance  of  certain  duties,  t  lewud,
in  magnitude  and  value,  out  of  all  competition  be-
yond the  me/it  of  the  compliance,  the  dent  of
the  performance;  to  what  shall.  such,  s  subject
ascribe  the  happiness  held  out  to  him  )  He  van
ungrateful  man,  if  he  attribute  it  to  soy  can*
whatever,  but  to  the  bounty  and  goodness  of  ha
prince  in  making  him  the  offer ;  or  if  be  sailer  any
consideration,  be  it  what  it  wilt,  to  interfere  with,
or  diminish  his  sense  of  that  bounty  and  good-
ness. Still  it  is  true,  that  he  will  not  obtain  what
is  offered,  unless  he  comply  with  the  terms.  So
far  his  compliance  is  a  condition  of  bis  happi-
ness. Bat  the  grand  thing  is  the  offer  beinj
made  at  alt  That  js  the  ground  and  origin  of
the  whole.  That  is  the  cause;  and  is  sscnhshk
to  fiivour,  grace,  and  goodness,  on  the  part  of  toe
prince,  and  to  nothing  else,  rt  would,  therefore,
be  the  last  degree- of  mm  tit  ude  in  suchawbjM,
to  forget  his  prince  while  he  thought  Of  hunwtf;
to  forget  the  cause,  whilst  he  thought  of  the  con-
dition ;  to  regard  every  thing  promised  ss  mental
The  geneiosity,  the  kindness,  the  voluntajinen,
the  bounty  of  the  original  ofler,  come  by  tim
means-to  be  neglected  in  hu  mind  entirely.  Tim,
in  my  opinion,  describes  our  situation  with  i*
spect  to  God.  The  love,  goodness,  and  graced
God,  in  making  us  a  tender  of  salvation,  and  the
effects  of  the  death  of  Christ,  do  nstdiaooiah  tha
necessity  or  the  obligation  of  the  condition  of  the
tender,  which  is  sincere  endeavours  after  hoboeai;
nor  are  in  any  wise  inconsistent  with  suchobliga-


SERMON  XXL


PURE  RELIGION.


Pure  religion,  and  undeJUed  before  iSodandHi
Father,  i*  Mis,  To  visit  thefatherim  and  i>
.  dowe  in  their  affliction,  and  4o  keep  kmtetf
unspotted  from  the  world,— James  L  3X


'  Notihno  can  be  more  useful  than  summary
view*  0/  our  duty,  if  they  be  well  drawn  and
rightly  understood.  It  is  a  great  advantage  to
have  our  business  laid  before  us  altogether;  u
'see  at  one  comprehensive  glance,  aa  it  were,  what
we  ars-to  do,  and  what  we  are  not  to  do.  It  would
be  a  great  ease  and  satisfaction  to  both,  if  it  wen
possible  for  a  master  to  give  his  servant  duvctiooi
for  his  conduct  in  a  single  sentences  which  he,  the
servant,  had  only  to  apply  and  draw  out  into  prac-
tice, $s  occasions  offered  themselves,  in  order  to
discbarge  every  thing  which  was  required  or  «•
pectod  from  him.  This,  which  is  not  pxactkabie
in  civil  life,  is  in  a  good  degree  so  in  a  rejig***
life;  because  a  religious  life  proceeds  more  oaon
principle,  leaving  the  exercise  and  manifestation
of  that  principle;  more  to'  theT  judgment  of  the  in-
dividual, than  it  can  be  Jeft  where,  from  the  na-
ture of  the  case,  one  man  is  to  act  preasdj  ac-
cording to  another  man's  direction.

But  then,  as  I  have  said,  it  is  essentially  neces-
sary that  these  summaries  be  well  dawn  up,  and
rightly  understood ;  because  if  they  profess  to  state
the  whole  of  men's  duties,  yet,  in  fat,  state  then
partially  and  imperfectly,  all  who  read  them  an
misled,  and  dangerously  misled.  In  teliginn,  if
in  other  things,  we  are  too  apt  of  ouisehei »


SERMONS  ON  SEVERAL  SUBJECTS.


573


substitute  a  pfcrt  for  the  whole: Substituting  a
part  for  the  whole  is  the  grand  tendency  of  hu-
man corruption,  in  matters  both  of  morality  and
religion;  which  propensity  therefore 'will  be  en-
couraged, when  that,  which  professes  to.  exhibit
the  whole  of  religion,  does  not,  ki  truth,"  exhibit
the  whole.  What  is  there  omitted,  we  shall  omit,
gjad  Of  the  occasion  and  excuse.  '  What  is  not
set  down  as  our  -duty,  we  shall  not  think  our-
selves obliged  to  perform,  not  caring  to  increase
the  weight  of  our  own  burden. This  is  the  case
whenever  we  use  summaries  of  religion,  which,  in.
truth,  are  imperfect  or 'ill  drawn. But  there  is
another  case  more  common,  and  productive  of  the
same  effect,  and  that  is,  when  we  misconstrue
these  summary^accounts  of  our  duty;  principally
whep  we  conceive  of  them  as  intending  to  -express,
more  than  they  were  really  intended  to  express.
For  then  it  comes  to  pass,  that  although  they,  be
right  and-  perfect  as  to  what  they  were  intended
for,  yet  they  are  wrong  and  imperfect  as  to  what
we  construe  and  conceive  them  for. This  obser-
vation is  particularly  applicable  to.  the  -text.  '  St.
James  is  here  describing  religion  not  in  its  prin-
ciple, but  in  its  effect*  ]  and  these  effect*  are  truly
and  jnstly  and  fully  displayed, They  are  by  the
apostle  made  to  consist  of  two  large  articles ;  in
succouring  the  distress  of  others,  and- maintaining
our  own  innocency. And  these  two  articles  do
comprehend  the  whole  of  the  effects  of  true  reli-
gion, which,  were,  exactly  What  the  apostle  meant
to  describe/ Had  St.  James  intended  to  have  set
forth  the  motives  and  principles  of  religion  as  they
ought  to *  subsist  in  the  neart  of  a  Christian,  I
doubt  not  but  he  woulq\have  mentioned  love  to
God,  and  faith  in  Jesus  Christ;  for  from  these
must  spring  every  thins  good  and  acceptable  in
our  actions. In  natural  objects  k  is  one  thing- to
describe,  the  root  of  a  plant,  and  another  its  fruits
and  flowers;  and  if  we  think  a  writer  is  describ-
ing the  roots  and  fibres,  when;  in  truth,  he  is  de-
scribing the  fruit  or  flowers,  we  shall  mistake  his
meaning,  and  our  mistake  must. produce  great
confusion. So  in  spiritual  affairs,  it  is  one  thing
to  set  before  us  the  principle  of  religion,  and  an-
other the  effects  of  it. These  are  not  to  be  con-
rounded. And  if  we  apply  a  description  to,  one
which  was  intended  for  the  other ;  we  deal  unfairly
by  the  writer  of  the  description,  and  erroneously
by  ourselves. Therefore;  first,  let  no  one  suppose
the  love  of  God,  the.  thinking,  of  him,  the, being
grateful  to  him,  the  fearing  to  disobey  him,  not  to
be  necessary  parts  of  true  religion,  because  they
are  riot  mentioned  in  St.  James's  account  of  true
religion. The  answer  is,  that  these  compose  the
principles  of  true  religion ;  St.  James7*  account  ^re-
lates to  t}ie  effects. In  like  manner  concerning
faith  in  Jesus  Christ. St,  James  has  recorded  his
opinion  upon  that  subject. His  doctrine  is,  that
the  tree  which  bears  no  fruit  cannot  be  sound  at
die  root;  that  the^aith  which  is  unproductive  is
not  the  right  faith;  hutjhen  this  is  allowing  (and
not  denying,)  that  a  right  faith  is  the  source;  and
spring  of  true  virtue;  and  had  our  apostle  been
asked  to  state  the  principle  of  religion,  I  am  per-
suaded he  "Would  have  referred  us  to  a  true  faith.
But  that  was  not  the  inquiry ;  on  the  contrary,
having  marked  strongly  the  futility  of  frith,  which
produced  no  good  effects  upon  life  and  action,  he
proceeds  in  the  text  to  tell  us  what  the  effects  are
which  it  ought  to  produce ;  and  these  he  disposes
into  two  comprehensive  claases,-{but  stilkneaning


to  describe  the  effects  of  reHgion,  and  net  its  root
or  principle,)  positive  virtue  and  personal  inno-
cence. ./  '

Now,  I  say,  that  for  the  purpose  for  which  it
was  intended,  the  account  given  Jjy  St.  James  is
full  and  complete.  And  it  carries  with  it  this  pe-
culiar advantage,  that*'
against  an  error,  natural]
ia  all  ages  of  the  world;  s  a

neficence  an  apology  fbvlfcentiousness;  the  think-
ing that  doing  good  occasionally  may  excuse  us
frdm  strictness  in  regulating  our  passions  and  de-
sires. The  text  expressly  outs  up  this  excuse,
because  it  expressly  asserts  both  things  to  be  ne-
cessary to  compose  true  religion.  Where  two
things  are  necessary,  one  cannot  excuse  the  want
of  the  other.  Now,  what  does  the  text  teach  1
it  teaches  us  what  .pure  and  untfefiled  religion  is
in  its  effects  and  in  its  practice :- and  what  is  H  %
"to  visit  the  fatherless  and  widows  in  .their  af-
fliction, and  to  keep  himself  unspotted  from  the
world."  Not  dimply  to  visit  the  fatherless  and
widows  in  their  affliction ;  that  is  not  all;  that  is
not  sufficient ;  but  likewise  "  to  keep  himself  un-
spotted from,  the  world.'1  -.. i

To  visit  the  fatherless  and  widows  in- their  af-  -
fifctioir,  is  describing  a  class  or  species,  or  kind. of
virtue;  by  singling  out  one  eminent  exatnpie  of  it
I  consider  the  apostle  as  meaning  to  represent  the
value,  and  to  enforce  the  obligation  of  active  cha?
ritv,  of  positive  beneficence,  and  that  he  has  done
it  by  mentioning  a  particular  instance.  A  stronger
or  properer  instance  could  not  have  been  selected;
but  still  it  is  to  he  regarded  as/an  instance,-  not  as
exclusive  of  other  and  similar  instances,  but  as  a  ,
specimen,  of  these  exertions.  The  ease  before  us,
as  an  Instance,  is  heightened  by  every  circunk
statfee  which  could  give  to  it  Weight  and  priority.
The  apostle  exhibits  the  most  forlorn  and  desti-
tute of  the  human-  species,  suffering  tinder  the  se-
verest of  human  losses;  helpless  children  deprived
of  a  parent,  a  wife  bereavea  of  her  husband,  both
sunk  in  affliction,  under  the  sharpest,  anguish  of
their  misfortunes.  To  viajt,  by  which  is  meant
to,  console,,  to  comfort,  to.  succour,  to  relieve,  to  as-
sist such  as  these,  is  undoubtedly  a  high  exercise
of  religion  and  benevolence,  and  well  selected:
but  still  it  is  to  be  regarded  as  an  example,  .ana
the  whole  Haas  of  beneficent  virtues  as  intended
to  be  included.  This  is  not  only  *  just  and  fair,
but  a  necessary  construction ;  because,  although
the  exercise  of  beneficence  be  a  duty  upon  every
man,  yet  the  kind,  the  examples  of  it,  must  be
goided  in  a  great  degree  by  each  man's  faculties,
opportunities,  and  by  the  occasions  which  present
themselves.  If  such  an  occasion,  as  that  which
the  text  describes,  presents  4tself,  it  cannot  be
overlooked  without  an  abandonment  of  religion  •
but  if  other  and  different  occasions  of  djring  good
present  themselves,  they  also,  according  to  the
spirit  of  our  apostle's  declaration,  must  be  attend-
ed to,  or  we  are  wanting  in  the  fruit  of  the  same
faith.  „  . '

■  The  second  principal  expression  of  the  text,
(Lto  keep  himself  unspotted  from  the  world,"  sig-
nifies the  being  clean  and  clear  from  the  licentious
practices  to  which  the  world  is  addicted*  So  that
"  pure  religion- and  undefiled  before  God  and  the
Father,"  consists  in  two  things;  beneficence  and
purity-)  doing  good  and  keeping  clear  from  sin.
Jtfot  in  one  thing,  but  in  two  things;  not  in  one
without  theothex,  big  m  both. And  this,  in  my


874


SERMONS  ON  SEVERAL  SUBJECTS.


•pinion,  k*  greet
doctrine.

I  shall  not,  at  present,  consider  the  case  of  these-
who  an  anxious,  and  effectually  so.  to  maintain
their  penonal  mnooeney  without  enoWvduring  to
do  good  to  othen ;  because  I  really  believe  it  u
not  a  common  eaae.  •  I  think  that  the  religious
principle  which  is  able  to  make  men  confine  their
passions  and  desires  within  the  Inunds  -of  virtue,
n,  with  wirj  lew  exceptions,  strong  enough,  at
the  same  time  te  prompt  and  put  them  upon  ac-
tive exertions.

Therefore,  I  would  rather  apply  myself  to  that
part  ef  the  ease  which  is  mere  common,  active  ex-
ertions of  benevolence,  accompanied  with  loose-
ness of  private  morals.  It  is  a  very  common  cha-
racter ;  out,  I  say,  in  the  first  place,  it  is  an  incon*
aistent  character;  it  i*  doing  and  undoing  *,  killing
and  curing  $  doing  good  by  our  charity,  and  mis-
chief by  our  licentiousness :  voluntarily  relieving
misery  with  one  hand,  and  voluntarily  producing
and  spreading  it  with  the  other.  No  real  advance
is  made  in  human  happiness  by  thiscipntrajnctioat
no  real  betterness  or  improvement  promoted. *

But  then,  may  not  the  harm  a  man  does  by  his ,
personal  vices  be  much  less  than  the  good  be  does
by  his  active  virtues  \  This  is  a  point,  in  which
there  is  laige  room /or  delusion  and  mistake.  Po-
sitive charity  and  acts-of  humanity  are  often  of  a .
conspicuous  nature,  natuiaUy  and  deservedly  en-
gaging the  praises  of  mankind,  which  are  follow-
ed bv  our  own.  No  one  does,  no  one  ought  to-
speak  against  them,  or  attempt  to  disparage  them ;
but  the  effect  of  vice  and  licentiousness,  not^only
hvtheir  immediate  consequences,  but  in  their  re-
mote and  ultimata  tendencies,  which  ought  all  to
be  included  in  the  account ;  the  mischief  which  is
dene  by  the  example,  as  well  aa  by  the  act, -is
seldom  honestly  computed  by  the  sinner  himself.
Bqt  I  do-not  dwell  further  upon  this  comparison,
because  I  insist,  that.no  man  has  a  right  to  make
it ;  no  man  has  a  right,  whilst  he  is  doing  occa-
sional good,  and  Jet  .indulging  his  vices  and  his
passions,  to  strike  a  balance,  as  it  were,  between,
the  good  and  the  harm.  This  is  not  Christianity  i
this  is  not  pure  and  undefiled  religion  before  God
and  the- Father^  let  the  balance  lie  on  which  aide
it  will.  For  our  text  declares,  (and  our  text  de-
clares no  more  than  what  the  Scriptures  testify
from  one  end  to  the  other,)  that  reuflon  demand*
both.  It  demands  active  virtue,  and*  it  demands
rnnocency  of  life.  I  mean  it  demands  sincere  and
vigorous  endeavours  in '  the  pursuit  of -active  vir-
tue, and  endeavours  equally  sincere  and  firm  in
x  the  preservation  of  personal  innocence.  It  makes
1  no  calculation  which- is  better;  but  it  requires  both.
Shall  it  be  extraordinary,  that  there-  should  be
men  forward  in  active  chanty  and  in  positive  bene-
ficence^ who  yet  put  little  or  no  constraint  upon
their  personal  vices  %  I  have  said  thatHhe  charac-
ter is  common,  and  I  will  tell  you  why  it  is  com-
mon.. The  reason-  is,  (and  there  is.no  other  rear-
son,)  that  it  is  usually  an  easier  thing  to  perform
acts  of  beneficence,  even  of  expensive  and  trouble- '
some  beneficence,  than  it  is  to  command  and  con-
trol our  passions;  to  give  up  and  discard  our
vices;  to  burst  the  bonds  of  the  habits  which  en-
slave us.  This  is  the  very  truth  of  the  case ;  so
that  the  matter  comes  precisely  to  this  point
Men  of  active  benevolence,  but  of  loose  morals,  are
men  who  are  for  performing  the  duties  which  are
♦eey  to  them,  and  buttling  those  which  are  hard.


They  may  place  their  own  character  to  themsehvs
in  wnai  view  they  please;  but  this  is  the  truth  of
the  case,  and  let  any  one  say,  whether  this  be  re-
ligion; whether  this  be  sufficient  The  truly  re-
ligious man,  when  he  has  once  decided  a  thing  to
be  a  duty,  has  no  farther  question  to  aak ;  whe-
ther, it  be  easy  to  be  done,  or.  whether  it  be  hard
to  be  done,  H  is  equally  a  duty.  It  then  becomes
a  question  of  fortitude,  of  resolution,  of  firmness,
of  self-cjemtsend,  and  self-government;  but  not  of
deity  or  obligation ;  these  are  already  decided  upon.
But  least  of  aU,  (and  this  is  the  inference  from
the  text,  which  1  wish  most  to  press  upon  your
attention,)  least  of  aU  does  he  conceive  the  hope
of  reaching  heaven  by  that  sort  of  compromise,
which  would  make  easy,  nay  perhaps  pleasant
duties,  an  excuse  for  duties  which  are  irksome
and  severe.  *  To  recur,  for  the  Jast  time,  to  the  in-
stance mentioned  in  our  text,  I  can  very  well  be-
lieve that  a  man  of  humane  temper  shall  have
pleasure  in  visiting^  when  by  visiting  he  can  suo-
ceur,  the  fatherless  and  the  widow  in  their  afflic-
tion :  but  if  he  believes  St.  James,  he  win  find
that  this  must  be  joined  to  and  accompanied  with
another  thing,  which  is  neither  easy  nor  pleasant,
nay,  must  almost  always  be  effected  with  pain  and
struggle,  and  mortification,  and  difficulty, —  *
"  keeping  himself  unspotted  from  the- world."


v  .SERMON  XXIL

THE AGENCY  OF  JESUS  CHRIST  SINCE  EH

48CEN8I0N.

Jetut  Christ,  the  same  yesterday,  to-day t  andjmr
ever, — Hebrews  xiuVS.

The  assertion  of  the  text  might  be  supported
by  the  consideration,  that  the  mission  and  preach-
ing of  Christ  have  lost  nothing  of  their  truth  and
importance  by  the  lapse  of  ages  which  has  taken
place  since  his  appearance  in  the  world.  .  if  they
seem  of  less  magnitude,  reality » and  concern  to  us
at  this  present  day,  than  they  did  to  .those  who
lived  is  the  days  in  which  they  were  carried  on ;
it  is  only  in*  the  same  manner  as  a  mountain  or  a
tower  appears  to  be  less,  when  seen  at  a  distance.
It  is  a  delusion  in  both  cases.  In  natural  objects
we  have  commonly  strength  enough  of  judgment
to  prevent  our  being  imposed  upon  by  these  false
appearances  \  and  it  is  not  so  much  a  want  or  de-
fect of,  as  it  is  a  nfglectmg  to  exert  and  use  our
judgment,  if  we  suffer  ourselves  fo  be  deceived  by
them  in  religion.  Distance  of  space  in  one  case,
and  distance  of  time  in  the  other,  make  no  differ-
ence in  the  real  nature  of  the  object;  and  it  is
a  great  weakness  to  allow  them  to  make  any  dif-
ference in  our  estimate  and  apprehension.  The
death  of  Jesus  Christ  is,  in  truth,  as  interesting
to  uv,  as  it  was  to  those  who  stood  by  his  cross',
his  resurrection  from  the  grave  is  a  pledge  and  as-
surance of  our  future  resurrection,  no  lees  than  it
was  of  theirs  who  conversed^  who  eat  and  drank
with  hjnv  after  his  return  to  life,

But  there  is  another  sense,  in  which  it  ia  still
more  materially  true  that  u Jesus  Christ  fejhe
same  yesterday,  to-day {  and  for  ever."  He  ia  per-
sonally living,  and  acting  in  the  same  manner;
has  been  so  all  along,  and  will  be  so  to  the  end  of
the  world.  He  is  the  same  in  his  person,  in  his
power,  in  his  office.


serm6ns  on  several  sitbjectb.


675


Ftaet,  I  say,  that  he  ia  the  nine  individual
■on,  and,  is  at  this  present  time  existing,  In  o<
acting-  fie  ia  gone  up  on  high.  Tha-clouds,  at
ma  ascension*  received  him  out  of  human  eight.
But  whither  did  he  go  1  to  ait  for  ever  at  the  right
hand  of  God.'  This  ia  expressly. declared' concern-
ing him.  It  is  also  declared  of  him,  that  death
hath-  no  more  dominion  o^er  him,  that  he  ia  no
more  to  return  to  corruption.-  So-  that,  since  his
ascension,  he  hath  continued  in  heaven  to  live
and  act.  His  human  body,  we  are  likewise'  given
to  believe,  was  changed  upon  his  ascension,  that
fc,  was  glorified,  whereby  it  became  fitted  fop
heaven,  and  fitted  for  immortality ;  no  longer  lia-
ble to  decay  or  age,  but  thenceforward  remaining
literally  and  strictly  the  same,  yesterday,  to-day,
and  for  ever.  This  change'  in  the  human  person
of  Christ  is  in  effect  asserted,  or  rather  is  referred
to,  as  a  thine  aheadyinown,  in  that  text  of  Saint
Paul's  Epistle  to  the  Philippians.  wherein  we  are
assured,  that  hereafter  Christ  shall  change  our
vile  body,  that  it  may  be  iike  his  glorious  body.
Now,  the  natural  body  of  Christ,  before  his  resur-
rection at  least,  was  like  the  natural  body  of  other
men;  was  not  a  glorious  body.  At  this 'time,
therefore,  when  Saint  Baul  calls  it  his  glorious
body,  (for  it  was  after  his  ascerieion  that  Saint
Paul  wrote  these  words,>it  must  have  undergone
a  great  jchahge.  In  this  exalted  and  glorified  state
*ur  Lord  was*  seen  by  Saint  Stephen,  in  the  mo-
ment otfris  martyrdom.  Being  full,  you  read,  of
the  Ho\y  Ghost,  Stephen  looked  up  steadfastly
uoto  heaven,  end  saw  the  glory  of  God,*  and  Jesus
standing  on  the  right  hand  of  God.  At  that  seem-
ingly dreadful  moment,  even  when  the  martyT
was  surrounded  by  a  band  of  assassins,  with
atones  ready  in  their  hands  to  stone  him  to  death,
the  spectacle,  nevertheless,  filled  his  soul  with
rapture.  He  cried  out  in  ecstasy,  "  Behold  1  see
the  heavens  opened,  and  the  Son  of  Man  stand-
ing on  the  rignt  hand  of  God.n  The  same  glori-
ous vision  was  vouchsafed  to  Saint  Pan!  -at  his
con  version;  and  to  Saint  John,  at  the  delivery  of
the  revelations.  This  change  of  our  Lord's  body
was  a  change,  we  have  reason  to  believe,  of  nature
and  substance,  so.  as  to  be  thenceforward  incapa-
ble of  decay, or  dissolution.' '  It  might  be  suscepti-
Ue  of  any  external  form,  which  the  particular  pur-
pose of  his  appearance  should  require.  Sowhen
tie  appeared  to.  Stephen  and  Paul,  or  to  any  of
his  saints,  it  was  necessary  he  should  assume  the
form  which  he  bad  born  in  the  flesh,  that-  he
might  be  known  to  them.  But  it  is  not  necessary,
to  suppose  that  he  was  confined  to  that  form.
The  contrary  rather  appears  in  the  revelation*  of
Saint  John,  in  which,  after  once  showing  himself
to  the  apostle,  our  Lord  was  afterwards  reoresent-
ed  to  his  eyes  under  different  forms.  '  All,  how-
ever, that  is  of  importance  to  us  to  know,  all  that
belongs  to  our  present  subject  to  observe,  is,  that
Christ's  glorified  person  was  incapable  of  dying
any  more;  that  itxoutinues  at  this  day4,  that  it
hath  all  along  continued  the  same  real,  identical
being,  as  that  which  went  up  into  heaven  in  the
sight  of  Ms  apostles ;  the  same  essential  nature,
the  same  glorified  substance,  the  same  proper
person.

But,  secondly,  He  is  the  same  also  in  power.

*  Ths  M  glory  of  God,"  in  Scriptow,  when  spoken  of
as  an  object  of  vision,  always,  I  think,  means  a  lumi-
nous appearance,  bright  and  refulgent,  beyond  the
splendour  of  any  natural  object  whatever.


The  Scripture  doctrine  concerning  out  Lord
seems  to  be.  this,  that  when  his  appointed  com-
mission and  his  sufleringa  were  closed  upon -earth,
he  was  advanced  in  heaven  to  a  still  higher  stale
than  what  he  possessed  before  he  came  into  the
world.*  This  point,  as  well  as  the.  glory  of  his
nature,  both  before  and  after  his  appearance  in
the  flesh,  is  attested  by  Saint  Pauk,  in  the  second
chapter  of  his  Epistle  to  the  Philippians.  u  Being
in  the  form  of  God  he  thought  it  not  robbery  to  be<
equal  with/God."  He  did  not  affect  to  be  equal
With  God,  or  to  appear  with  divine*  honours  {for
such  is  the  sense  which  the  Words  in  the  original
"wiH  bear,)  ubut  made  himself  of  no  reputation,
afnd  took  upon  him  the  formof  a  servant,  and  was
made  in  the  likeness  of  man,  and  became  obedient
unto  death,  even  the  death  of  t^e  cross.  Where-
fore," 4.  c  for  tra*  ma  obedience  even  to  the  last
extremity,  even  unto  death,  "-God  also  hath  highly
exalted  him ;"  or,  as  it  m  distinctly  and  perBDteu-
ously  expressed  in  the  original,  "  God  also  hath
more  highly  exalted  him,  that  is,  to  a  higher
state  than  what  he  even,  before  possessed:  inso-
much that  he  hath  "  given  him  a  name  which  W
above  every  name :  that  al/\**»  more  properly,  tn.
"the*  name  of  Jesus  every  knee  should  bow,  of
things  in  heaven,  and-things  in  earth,  and  things
under  the  earth;  and  that  every  tongue  should
confess  that  Jesus  Christ  is  Lord,  to  the  glory  of
God  the  Father;"  exactly  agreeable  to' what  our
Lord  himself  declared  to  his  disciples  after  his
resurrection,—"  AIT  power  ia  given  unto  me  in
heaven  and  m  earth:*?  Matt  xxvnt  18.  You
will  observe  in  this  passage  of  Saint  Paul,  not
only  the1  magnificent  term*  in  which  Christ's  ex-
altation is  described,  e£r.  "  that  every  knee  should
thenceforward  bow  in  his  name,  and  that  every
tongue  should  confess  him  to  be  the  Lord;"  but
you  will  observe  also,  the  comprehension  and  ex-
tent of  his  dominion,  "of  things  in  heaven*  of
things  on  earth,  of  things  under  theearth."  And
that  we  are  specifically  comprised  under  this  au-
thority and  this  agency,  either  of  the  two  follow-
ing texts  maybe  brought  as  a  sufficient  proof:
"Where  two  or  three  are  gathered  together,  there
am  I  in  the  midst  of  you<;"  Mstfc  xvul  96\  which
words  of  our  Lord  imply  a  knowledge  of,  an  ob-
servation of;  an  attention  to,  and  an  interference
with,  what  passes  amongst  his  disciples  upon  earth/
Or  take  his  final  words  to  his  followers,  aa  record-
ed by  Saint  Matthew:  "Lo,  I  am  with  you  al-
ways, to  the  end  of  the  world,"  and  they  carry
the  same  implication.  And,  -lastly,  that,  in  the
most  awful,  scene  and  event  of  our  existence,  the
day  of  judgment,  we  shall  not  only  become  the
objects,  but  the  immediate  objects  of  Christ's
power  and  agency,  is  set  forth  m  two  clear  and
positive  texts :  "  The  hour  is  coming,  and  now  is,
when  the  dead  shall  hear  the  voice -of  the  Son  of
God,"  John  *w  25,  not  the  voice  of -God,  but  the
voice  of  the  Son  of  God.  And  then,  pursuing  the
description  of  what  will  afterwards  take  place,  our
Lord  adds,  in  the  next  verse  but  one,  "  that  the
Father  hath  given  hhn  authority  to  execute  judg-
ment also,  because  he  is  the  Son  of  Man :"  which
is  in  perfect  conformity  .with  what  Saint  Paul  an-
nounced to  the  Athenians,  as  a  great  and  new
doctrine,  namely,  "that  God  hath  appointed -a
day,  in  which  he  will  judge  the  world  hi  right-
eousness by  that  man  whom  he  hath  ordained,


on  Pail.  11.0.


575


SERMONS  ON  SEVERAL  SUBJECTS.


whereof  he  hath  gran  aasnranr*  onto  all  men,  in

that  he  hath  raised  him  from  the  dead."

Having  ahown  that  the  power  of  -Jeans  Chriat
ia  a 'subsisting  power  at  this  time,  the  next  Ques-
tion) is,  aa  to  Ha  duration.  Now  so  lax  as  it  re-
apers mankind  in  this  present  world,  we  are  as-
sured that  it  shall  continue  until  the  end  of  the
world.  The  same  texts  which  have  been  adduced
prow  diia  point,  aa  well  aa  that  for,whicb  they
were  quoted;  and  they  are  confirmed  by  Saint
Paul's  declaration,  1  Cor.  xv.24,— "  Then  cotnetb
the  end,  when  he  shall  have  -delivered  up  the
kingdom  to  God,  even  the  Father:"  therefore  he
ahafl  retain  and  exercise  it  until  then.  But  far-
ther, this  power  ia  not  only  perpetual,  but  pro-
gressive; advancing  and  proceeding  by  different
steps  and  degrees,  until  it  shall  become  supreme
and  complete,  and  shall  paevail  against  every
enemy  and  every  opposition.  That  bur  Lord's
dominion  will  not  only  remain  unto  the  end  of  the
world,  hot  that  its- effects  in  the  world  will  be
greatly  enlarged  and  increased,  ia  signified  very  ex-
pressly in  the  second  chapter  of  the  Epistle  to  the
Hebrews.  The  apostle  in  this  passage  applies  to
our  Lord  a  quotation  from  -the  Psalms:  '*  Thou
hast  put  all  things  in  subjection  under  his  feet;"
and  then  draws  from  it  a  strict  mferenis ;  "  for  in
that  he  put  all  things  in  subjection  under  him.  he


entire  subjection,  which  is  here  promised,  hath
not  yet  taken  place.  The  promise  must,  there-
fore, refer  to  a  still  future  order  of  things.  This
doctrine  of  the  progressive  increase,  and  final  com-
pleteness of  our  Lord's  kingdom,  is  also  virtually
hid  down  in  the  passage  from  the  Corinthians
already  cited:  "  He  must  reign  till  he  hath  put  all
enemies  under  his  feet."  -For  that  this  subjuga-
tion of  his  several  enemies  will  be  successive,  one
after  another,  is  strongly  intimated  by  the  expres-
sion, "the  last  enemy  that  shall  be  destroyed  is
death."

Now,  to  apprehend  the  probability  of  these
things  coming  to  pass,  or  rather  to  remove  any
opinion  of- their  improbability,  we  ought  con-
stantly to  bear  in  ouY  mind  this  momentous  truth,
that  in  the  hands  of  the  Deity time  is  nothing;
that  he  has  eternity  to  act  in.  The  Christian
dispensation,  nay,  the  world  itself,  may  be  in  its
infancy.  A  more  .perfect  display  of  the  power  of
Christ,  and  of  his  religion,  may  be  in  reserve ;  and
the  ages  which  it  may  endure,  after  the  obstacles,
and  impedimenta  to  its  reception  are  removed,
may  be,  beyond  ..comparison,  longer  than  those
which  we  have  seen,  in  which  it  has  been  strug-
gling with  great  difficulties,  most  especially  with
ignomnee  and,prejudice.  We  ought  not  to  be
moved  any  more  than  the  apostles  were  moved,
with  the  reflection  which  we*  cast  upon  their  mis-
sion, that  since  the  "  fathers  fell  asleep,  all  things
continue  as  they  were."  We  ought  to  return  the
answer  which  one  of  them  (returned,  that  what
we  caH  tardiness  in  the  Deity,  is  not  so ;  that  our
so  thinking  it  arises  from  not  allowing  for  the
different  importance,  nay,  probably;  for,  toe  differ-
ent apprehension  of  time,  in  the  divine  mind  and
in  ours ;  that  with  him  a  thousand  years  are  as
one  day  ;  words  which  con/burtd  and  astonish  hu-
man understanding,  yet  strictly  and  metaphysi-
cally true.

Again:  We- should reinember  thattheapoatles,


the  very  persona  who  asserted  that  Gad  vnld
put  ail  things  under  hiin,  themselves,  as  we  have
seen,  acknowledged  that  it  was  not  yet  done.  In
the.  mean  time,  from  the  whole  of  their  declara-
tions and  of  this  discussion,  wc  collect,  that  Jena
Christ  ascended  into  the  heavens,  is,  at  this  day,
a  great  efficient  Being  in  the  universe,  invested
by  his  Father  with  a  high  authority,  which  he
exercises,  and  will  continue  to  Axexciee  until  the
end  of  the  world.

Thirdly,  he  is  the  same  in  his  office.  The
principal  offices  assigned  by  the  Scripture*  to  oar
Lord  in  his  glorified  state,  that  is,  since  his  asocD-
sjen  into  heaven,  am  those  of  a  mediator  and  in-
tercessor. Of  the  mediation  of  onr  Lord,  the
Scripture  speaks  in  this  wise:  "  There  u  one
God,  and  one  mediator  between  God  .and  men,
the  tnan  Christ  Jesus:"  1  Xim.il  5.  It  wt*
after  our  Lord  s  ascension  that  this,  was  spoken
of  him;  and  it  is  plain  from  the  form  and  turn  of
the  expression,  that  his  mediatorial  .character  and
office  was  meant  to  be  represented  as  a  perpetual
character  add  office,  because  it  is  described  in
conjunction  with  the  existence  of  God  and  men,
so  long  as  men  exist ;  "-there  is- one  mediator  be-
tween God  and  man,  tbjp  man  Jesus  Christ"—
u  Hitherto  ve  have  asked  nothing  in  my  nans;"
"  At  that  day  ye  shall  ask  in  my  name :"  John
xvi  24,  26.  These  words  form  part  of  our  Lord*!
memorable  conversation  with  his  sdect^disripkt,
not  many  hours  before  bis  death;  and  dearly  in*
timate  the  mediatorial  office  which  he  was  to  dls-
charge  after  his  ascension.  ,

Concerning  hie  intercession,  not  that  when  be
occasionally  exercised  upon  earth,  when  he  prey-
ed, aa  he  did  moat  fervently  for  his  disciples, ^bot
that  which  he  now*  at  this  present  time  exercises,
we  have  the  following  text,  explicit,  aitienKtotT,
and- full:  "But  thb  man,  because  he  continued
ever,  hath  an  unchangeable  priesthood:''  by  priest-
hood ia  here  meant  theoffice  of  praying  for  others.
"Wherefore  he  is  able  to  save  them  to  the  utter-
most that  come  unto  God  by  him,  seeing  he  e<er
Uveth  to  -make  intercession  for  as." No  wor*
-can  morn  plainly  declare  than  these  words  do,
the  perpetuity  of  our  Lord's  agency;  that  it  &
not  cease  with  his  presence  upon  earth,  but  con-
Unuea. *<  He  contuweth  ever ;  he  ever  uwth;  he
hath  an  unchangeable  priesthood." Smely  tns
justifies  what  our  text  aaith  of  him;  that„he'J
11  the  same  yesterday,  to-day,  and  for  ever;  and
that  not  in  a  figurative  or  metaphorical  sense,  but
literally,  effectually,  and  really/  Mowovef,  intte
same  passage,  not  only  the  constancy  andpf  rpe-
tuity,  bat  the  power  and  efficacy  of  oay  Lord'; i  in-
tercession are  asserted :  "  He  U  able  to  save  them
to  the  uttermosL^feat  come  vn*>  God  by  hint
They  must  conieunto  God ;  they  must  coa**Jf
him ;  and  thdh  he  is  ahle  to  save  them  compkWr-
These  three  heads  of  observation,  namely,  up*
his  person)  his  power,,  and  his  office,  comprise10*
relation  in  which  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  stands  w
us,  whilst  we  remain-in  this  mortal  life. J  &«e
is  another  -consideration  of  great  ■otoj^yj'JJ
interest,  namely,  the  relation  which  we  sbali  war
to  him  in  our  future  state. Now  the  economy
which  appears  to  be  destined  for  the  fcinf«»
tion,  I  mean,  for  that  part  of  it  which  shall  be  re-
ceived to  future  happiness,  is,  that  they  shall  n«
in *  state  of  local  society  with  one  anotw^
under  Jesus  Christ  as  their  head ;  expenenajP
^najhjA '^*»mift*ion  amongst  themselves,  as  was*


SERMONS  ON  SEVERAL  SUBJECTS.


677


the  operation  of  his  authority,  as  their  Lord  and)
Governor.  I  thinft  it  likely  that  oar  Saviour  had  the
state  of  things  in  view,  when,  in  his&ial  discourse
with  his  apostles,  he  tells  them:  "I  go  to  prepare
a  place  for  yon.  And  if  I  go  and  prepare  a  place
for  you,  I  will  come  again  and?  .receive  you  unto
myself;  that  where  I  am,  there  ye  may  be  also:"
John  xif .  2,  3.  And  again,  in  the  same  discourse,
and  referring  to  the  same  economy,  M  Father,"
says  he,  "  I  will  that  they  aleo,  whom  thou  hast

S'ven  me,  be  with  me  where  I  am;  that  they  may
(hold  my  glory  which  thou  bast  given  me  :M  for
that  this  was  spoken,  not  merely  of  the  twelve,
who  were  then  sitting  with  Jesus,  and  to  whom
his  discoursstfwas  addressed,  bufof  his  disciples  in
future  ages  of  the  world,  is  fairly  collected  from
his  words,  (John  xvii.  20.)  "  Neither  pray  I  for
-  these  alone,  but  for  them  also  which  shall  believe
on  me  through  their  word."  Since  the  prayer
here  stated  was  part  of  the  discourse,  it-  is  reason-
able to  infer  that  the  discourse,  in  its*  object,  ex-
tended as  far  as  the  prayer,  which  we  have  seen
to  include  believers,  as  well  of  succeeding  ages  as
of  that  then  present.

Now  concerning  this  future  dispensation,  sup-
posing it  to  consist,  as  here  represented,  of  accepted
spirits,  participating  of  happiness  in  a  state  of  sen-
sible society  with  one  another,  and  with  Jesus
Christ  m'msejf  at  their  head,  one  train  of  reflection
naturally  arises.;  namely,  first,  that  it  is- highly
probable  there  should  be  many  expressions  of
Scripture  which  have  relation, to  it;  secondly,  that
such  expressions  must,  by  their  nature, -appear  to
us,  at  present,  under  a  considerable  degree  of  ob-
scurity, which  we  may  be  apt  to  call  a  defect ;
thirdly,  that  the  credit  due  to  such  expressions
must  depend  upon-  their  authority  as  portions  of
the  written  word  of  God,  and  not  upon  the  pro-
bability, much  less  upon  the  clearness  of  what
they  contain ;  so  that  our*comprehe'nsion  of  what
they  mean  must -stop  at  very  general  notions;  and
our  belief  in  them  rest' in  the  deference  to  which
they  are  entitled,  as  Scripture  declarations.  Of
this  kind  ate  many,  if  not  all,  of  those  expressions
which  speak. so  strongly  of  the  value,  and  benefit,
and  efficacy  of  the  death  of  Christ,  of  its  saorifi<-
cial,  expiatory,  and  atoning  nature.  We  may  be
assured,  that  these  expressions  mean  something-
feal,  refer  to  something  real,  though,  it  be  some-
thing which  is  to  take  place  in  that  future  dispen-
sation of  which  we  have  been  speaking.  It  is
reasonable  to  expect,  that}  when  we  come  to  ex-
perience what  that  state  is,  the  same  experience
will  open  to  us  the  distinct  propriety  of  these  ex-
pressions, their  truth,  and  the  substantial  truth
which  they  contain ;  and  likewise  show  us,  that
however  stsong  and  exalted  the  terms  are  which
we  ses  made  use  of,  they  at%  not  stronger  nor
higher  than  the  subject  called  for:  But  for  the
present  we  must  be,  what  I  own  it  is  difficult  to
be,  content  to  take  up  with  very  general  notions,
humbly  hoping,  that  a  disposition  to  receive  and
acquiesce  in  whatf  appears  to  us  to  be  revealed,  be
it  more  or  be  it  less,  will  be  regarded  as  the  duty
which  belongs  to  our  subsisting  condition,  and  the
measure  of  information  with  which  it  is  favoured ;
and  will  stand  in  the  place  of  what,  from  our  deep
interest  in  the  matter,  we  are  sometimes  tempted
to  desire,  but  which,  nevertheless,  might  be  unfit
lor  us,  a  knowledge  which  not  only  was,  but
which  we  perceived  to  be,  fully  adequate  to  the


4D


There  is  another  class  of  expressions,  which,
akice  they  professedly  refer  to  circumstances  that
are  to  take  place  in  this  new  state,  and  not  before,
'  will,  it  is  likely,  be  rendered  quite  intelligible  by
our  experience  in  that  state ;  but  must  necessarily
convey  their  imperfect  information  until  they  be
so  explained.  Of.  this  kind  are  many  of  the  pas-
sages of  Scripture  which  we  have  already  noticed,
as  referring  to  the  changes  which  will  be  wrought
in  our  mortal  nature ;  and  the  agency  of  our  Lord
Jesus  Christ,  and  the  intervention  of  his  power  in
•producing  those  changes,  and  the  nearer  similitude
which  our  changed  natures  and  the  bodies,  with
.which  we  shall  then  be  clothed,  will  bear  to  his.
We  read,  "  that  he  shall  change  our  vile  body,
that  it  may  be  like  his  glorious  body."  A  mo-
mentous assurance,  no  doubt;  yet,  in  its  particu-
lar signification,  waiting  to  be  cleared  up  "by  our
experience  of  the  event.  So  likewise  are  some
other  particular  expressions  relating  to  the  same
event;  such  as  being  "  unclothed ;  clothed  upon :
the  dead  in  Christ  rising  first ;  meeting  the  Lord
in  the  air ;  they  that  are  alive  not  preventing  those
that  are  asleep,"  and  the  like.  These  are  all  most
interesting  intimations,  vet  to  a  certain  degree  ob-
scure. They  answer  the  purpose  of  ministering
to  our  hopes,  and  comfort,  and  admonition,  which
they  do  without  conveying  any  clear  ideas ;  and
this,  and  sot  the  satisfaction  of  our  curiosity,  may
be  the  grand  purpose  for  the  sake  of  which  intima-
tions of  these  things  were  given  at  all.  But  then,
in  so  far  as  they  describe  a  change  in  the  order  of
nature,  of  which  change  we  are  to  be  the  objects,
it  seems  to  follow,  that  we  shall  be  furnished  with
experience  which  will  discover  to  us  the  full  sense
of  this  language.  The  same  remark  may  be  re-
peated concerning  the  first  and  second  death,
which  are  expressly  spoken  of  in  the  Revelations,
and  as  I  think  alluded  to  and  supposed  in  other
of  Scripture  in  which  they  are  not


The  lesson,  inculcated  by  the  observation  here
pointed  out,  is  this,  that,  in  the  difficulties  which
we  meet  with  in  interpreting  Scripture,  instead
of  being  too  uneasy  under  them,  by  reason  of  the
obscurity  of  certain  passages,  or  the  degree  of
darkness  which  hangs  over  certain  subjects,  we
ought  first  to  take  to  ourselves  this  safe  and  con-
soling rule,  namely,  to  make  up  lor  the  deficiency
of  our  knowledge  by  the  sincerity  of  our  practice ;
in  other  words,  to  act  up  to  what  we  do  know,  or*
at  least,  earnestly  strive  so  to.  do.  So  far  as  a  man
holds  fast  to  this  rule,  he  has  a  strong  ground  of
comfort  under  every  degree  of  ignorance,  or  eves
of  error.  And  it  is  a  rule  applicable  to  the  rich
and  to  the  poor,  to  the  educated  and  to  the  unedu-
cated, to  every  state  and  station  of  life,  and  to  all
the  differences  which  arise  from  different  oppor-
tunities of  acquiring  knowledge.  .  Different  obli-
gations may  result  from  different  means  of  obtain-
ing information ;  but  this  rule  comprises  all  dif-
ferences.

The. next  reflection  is,  that  in  meeting  with
difficulties,  nay,  very"  great  difficulties,  we  meet
with  nothing  strange,  nothing  but  what  in  truth
might  reasonably  have  been  expected  tefbrchand.
It  was  to  be  expected,  that  a  revelation,  which
was  to  have  its  completion  in  another  state  of  ex-
istence, would  contain  many  expressions  which
referred  to  that  state ;  and  which,  on  account  of
such  reference,  would  be  made  clear  and  perfectly
intelligible  only  to  those  who  had  experience  of


678


8ERMOKS  ON  SEVERAL  SUBJECTS.


that  Male,  and  to  Of  after  we  had  attained  Jo  that  t  to  him  seemeth  good,)  w*  moat  haw  (hessveal
experience;  whilst,  however,  in  the  mean  time, motives  which  prevented  themsebes  to  the  mind
may  convey  to  ua  enough  of  information,  to  I  of  the  donor  before  us. This,  with  respect  to  the


admonish  as  in  oar  conduct  "to  support  our  hope,
and  to  incite  our-  endeavours.  Therefore  the
meeting  with  difficulties,  owing  to  this  cause,
ought  not  to  surprise  us,  nor  to  trouble  us  over
much.  Seriousness,  nay,  even  anxiety,  touching
every  thing  which  concerns  our  salvation,  no
thoughtful  man  can  help ;  but  it  is  possible  we
may  be  distressed  by  doubts  and  difficulties  more
than  there  is  any  occasion  to-be  distressed.

Lastly,  under  all  our  perplexities,  under  all  the
misprints  of  mind,  to  which  even  food  men
(such  is  the  infirmity  of  human  nature)  are  sub-
ject, there  is  this  important  assurance  to  resort  to,
that  we  have  a  protection  over  our.  heads,  which
is  constant  aodafrding;  that  God,  blessed  be  his
name,  is  for  evermore ;  that  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord,
is  the  same  yesterday,  to-day,  and  for  ever ;  that,
like  as  a  traveller  by  land  or  aea,  go  where  he  will,
always  sees,  when  he  looks  up,  the  same  sun ;  so
in  our  journey  through  a  yaned  existence,  whe-
ther R  be  in  our  present  state,  or  in  our  next  state,
or  in  the  awful  passage  from  one  to  the  other;  in
the  world  in  which  we  live,  or  in  the  country
which  we  seek;  in  the  hour  of  death,  no  less  than
m  the -midst  of  health,  we  are  in  the  same  uphold-
ing hanja  nnd*r  the  same  sufficient  and  im""Kwg
support


Divine  Being,  is  impossible.  Therefore  we  allow,
that,  either  in  this,  or  any  other  matter,  to  canvas
the  gifts  of  God  Is  a  presumption  not  fit  to  be  in-
dulged. We  are  to  receive  our  portion  of  them
with  thankfulness.  We  are  to  be  thankful,  for
instance,  for  the  share  of  health  and  strength
which  is  given  us,  without  inquiring  why  othen
are  healthier  And  stronger  than  ourselves.  This
is  the  right  disposition  of  mind  with  respect  to  ail
the  benefactions  of  God  Almighty  towards  us.

But '  unsearchable  dees  not  mean  arbitral;.
Our  necessary  ignorance  of  the  motives  which
rest  and -dwell  in  the  Divine  mind  in  the  bestow-
ing of  his  grace,  is  no  proof  that  it  is  not  bestowal
by  the  justest  reason.  And  with  regard  to  the
case  at  present  before  us,  viz*  the  gifts  and  grata
of  the  Spirit,  the  charge  against  it,  of  its  bemeu
arbitrary  system,  or,  in  other  words,  independent
of  our  own  endeavours,  is  not  founded  in  any  doc-
trine  or  declaration  of  Scripture.  Itisnotartotnr/
in  its  origin,  in  its  degree,  or  in  its  final  success.
First ;  It  is  not  arbitrary  in  its  origin ;  far  yon
read  that  it  is  given  to  prayer.  "  If  ye,  beinj
evil,  know  how  to  give  good  gifts  unto  your  chil-
dren, how  much  more  shall  your  heavenly  Father
givethe  Holy  Spirit  to  them  that  ask  it  T  But
whether  we  will  ask  it  or  not,  depends  upon  oo>
selves.  It  is  proposed,  you  find,  as  a  subject  far
our  prayers;  for  prayer,  not  formal,  cold,  bean-
less,  transitory,  but  prayer  from  the  soul,  pnyez
earnest  and  persevering;  for  this  last  *l°Be  "
what  the  Scripture  means  .by  prayer.  In  this,
therefore,  it  cannot  be  said  to  be  arbitrary,  aria-
dependent  of  our  endeavours.  On  the  contian,
the  Scripture  exhorts  ua  to  a  striving  in  pitjaJot
this  best  of  all  gifts.

But,  it  will  be  asked,  is  not  the  very  first  too*
of  true  religion  upon  the  soul,  sometimes  at  least,
itself  the  action  of  the  Holy  Spirit  1  this,  there-
fore, must  be  prior  to  our  praying  for  it  And  so
it  may  be,  ana  not  yet  he  arbitrarily  given.  Tm
religious  state  of  the  human  soul  is  exceedingly
various.  Amongst  others,  there  is  a  state  o
which  there  may  be  good  latent  dispositions,  sot-
able  faculties  for  religion,  yet  noiebgion.  In  soeb
a  state,  the  spark  alone  is  wanting.  To  such  a
state,  the  elementary  principle  of  religion  may  «
communicated,  though  not  prayed  for.  ftjjS
this  be  said  to  be  arWtrary.  The  Spirit  of  w»
is  given  where  it  is  wanted ;  where,  when  gi«|J
it  would  produce  its  effect;  but  that  state  d
heart  and  mind,  upon  which  the  effect  was  te»
produeedt  might  still  be  the  result  of  moral  <jwa-

^  ^, , r ,  „__ _r fication,  improvement,  and  voluntary  endeawat

any  exertion  of  our  own,  but  upon  the  gift  of  the It  in  not,  I  think,  difficult  to  conceive  such  a  caw


SERMON  XXIIL

'  OP  BPrRITOAL  INFLUENCE  INHfiNEB-AL.
X*  THJLKS  PAlTS.— {F*BT  I.)

Know  ye  not  that  ye  are  the  temple  of  God,  and
that  the  Spirit  of  God  dweUeth  in  you?—
1  Cor.  iil  16.

There  are  ways  of  considering  the  subject  of
spiritual  influence,  as  well  as  a  want  of  consider-
ing it,  which  lay  it  open  to  difficulties  and  to
misconceptions.  But  if  the  being  liable  to  misap-
prehension and  to  misrepresentation  be  thougnt
an  objection  to  any.  doctrine,  I  -know  of  no  doc-
trine which  is  not  liable  to  the  same;  nor  any
which  has  not,  in  tact,  been  loaded  at  various  times
with  great  mistakes.

One  difficulty  which  has  struck  the  minds  of
some  is,  that  the  doctrine  of  an  influencing  Spirit,
and  of  the  importance  of  this  influence  to  human,
salvation,  is  an  arbitrary  system ;  making  every
thing  to  depend,  not  upon  ourselves,  nor  upon


Spirit

It  is  not  for  us,  we  allow,  to  canvass  the  gifts  of
God ;  because~we  do  not,  and  it  seems  impossible
that  we  should,  sufficiently  understand  the  mo-
tive of  the  giver.  In  more  ordinary  cases,  and  in
cases  more  level  to  our  comprehension,  we  seem
to  acknowledge  the  difference,  between  a  debt  and
a  gift  A  debt  is  bound,  as  it  were,  by  known
rules  of  justice:  a  gift  depends  upon  the  motive
of  the  giver,  which  often  can  be  Known'  only  to
himself  To  judge  of  the  propriety  either  of
granting  or  withholding  that  to  which  there  is  no
claim  (which  is,  in  the  strictest  sense,  a  mvour,
which,  as  such,  rests  with  the  donor  to  teatowaa


as  this.

Nevertheless  it  nay  be  more  oriinaTily  m
that -the  gift  of  the  Spirit  is  hoiden  out  to  f*
struggling,  the  endeavouring,  the '  apnroscning
Christian.  When  the  penitent  prodigal  was  y»
a  great  way  off,  his  fctjier  saw  him.  This  pan;
We  was  delivered  by  our  Lord  express^  to  tj  PtfT
God's  dealing  with  such  sinners  as  are  topens
with  a  sense  of  their  condition.  Andjhfe  » «jjj
circumstance  in  it  to  be  particularly  noticed,  wj
sees  the  returning  mind;  sees  every  step  and  every
advance  towards  him,  "  though  we  be  yet  a  gjj
way  off;"  yet  at  a  great  distance;  though  n*»
remains  to  be  done,  and  to  be  attained,  and  to  »


SERMONS  ON  SEVERAL  SUBJECTS.


599


accomplished  And  what  he  sees,  he  help*.  Hi»
aid  and  influence  are  assisting  to  the  willing
Christian,  truly  and  sincerely  willing,  though  yet
in  a  low  and  imperfect  state  of  proficiency;  nay,
though  in  the  outset,  as  k  were,  of  his  religious
progress.  "  The  Lord  is  nigh  unto  them  that  are
of  a  contrite  heart:"  Psalm  xxxiv.  18.  But  in
all  this  there  in  nothing  arbitrary.

Nor,  secondly,  is  the  operation  of  the  Spirit
arbitrary  in  its-  degree.  It  has*  rule,  and  its
rule  is  this:  "  Whosoever  hath,  to  him  shaU  be
given,  and  ha  shall  have  more  abundance;  and
whosoever  hath  not,  from  him  shall  be  taken
away  even  that  which  ha  hath."  Now,  of  this
rale,  which  is-  expressed  under  some,  but  under  no
great  difference  of  phrase,  in  all  the -first  three
Gospels,  I  have  fin*  to  observe,  that  though  it
carry  the  appearance  of-  harshness  and  injustice,
-  it  is  neither  the  one  nor  the  other,  but  is  correctly
and  fundamentally  just  The  meaning  is,  that
whosoever  uses,  exercises,  and  improves  the  gifts
which  he  has  received,  shall  continue  to  receive
still  larger  portions  of  these  gifts ;  nay,  he  who
has  already  received  the  largest -portion,  provided
be  adequately  and  proportionably  uses  his  gifts,
shall  also  in  future  receive  the  largest  portion.
More  and  more  will  be  added  to  him  that  has-  the
most  j  whilst  he  Who  neglects  the  little  which  he
has,  shall  be  deprived  even  of  that.  That  this  is
the  sound  exposition  of  these  texts,  is  proved  from
hence,  that  one  of  them  is  used  as  the  application
of  the  parable  of  the  talents,  concerning  the  mean-
ing of  which  parable  there  can  be  no- doubt  at  all ;
lor  there,  he  who  had  received,  and,  having  re-
ceived, had  duly  improved  ten  talents,  waa  placed
over  ten  cities ;  and  of  him  the  expression  -in
question  is  4ised,  "  whosoever  hath,  to  him  shall
be  given,  and  he  shall' have  more  abundance."
On  the  contrary,  he  who  had  received  one  talent,
and  had  neglected  what  he  had  received,  had  it
taken  from  him;  and  of  him  the^other  part  of  the
expression  is  used:  "whosoever  hath  not,  from
him  shall  be  taken  away  even  that  which  he  hath."
But  there  is  a  point  soil  remaining,  viz.  whether
this  Scripture  rule  be  .applicable  to  spiritual  gifts.
I  answer  that- it  is  so  applied,  more  especially  to
spiritual  knowledge,  and  the  use  which*  we  make
thereof  "  Take  heed  how  ye  hear;  unto  you
that  hear  shall  more  be  given;  for  he  that  hath  to
him  shall  be  given,  ana  he  that  hath  not.  from
him  shall  be  taken'  even  that  .which  he  bath."
80  stands  the  passage  in  Mark ;  and  substantially
the  same,  that  is,  with  a  view  to  the  same  applica-
tion, the  passage  stands  in  Matthew  and  Luke.
I  consider  it,  therefore,  to  be  distinctly  asserted,
that  this  is  the -rule  with,  regard  to  spiritual
knowledge.  And  I  thinfc  the  analogy  conclusive
with  regard  to  other  spiritual  gifts,  la  all  which
there  is  nothing  arbitrary.

Nor,  thirdly,  is  it  arbitrary  in  its  final  success.
•Grieve  not  the  Spirit  of  God."  Therefore  he
may  be  grieved.  "  And  hath  done  despite  unto
the  Spirit  of  grace :"  Heb.  x.  29.  Therefore  he
may  be  despised.  Both  these  are  leading  texts
upon  the  subject.  And  so  is  the  following:
"  And  his  grace,  which  was  bestowed,  upon  me,
was  not  In  vain :"  1  Cor.  xr.  10.  Therefore  it
might  have  been  in  vain.  The  infiuence,  there-
fore, of  the  {Spirit,  may  not  prevail,  even  as  the
admonitions  01  a  friend,  the  warnings  of  a  parent,
may  not  prevail,  may  not  be  successful,  may.  not
be  attended  to;  may  be  rejected,  may  be  resisted,


may  be  despised,  may  be  lost  So  that  both  in
its  gift,  in  its  degree,  operation,  and- progress,  and,
above  ail,  in  its  final  effect,  it  is  connected  with
our  own  endeavours ;  it  is  not  arbitrary.  Through-
out the  whole,  it  does  not  supersede,  but  co-ope-
rates with  ourselves.

But  another  objection  is  advanced,  and  from  an
opposite  quarter.  It  is  said,  that  if  the  infiuence
of  the  Spirit  depend,  sifter  all,  upon  our  endea-
vours, the  doctrine  is  nugatory ;  it  comes  to  the
same  thing,  as  if  salvation  was  put  upon  ourselves
and  our -own  endeavours  alone,  exclusive  of  every
farther  consideration,  and  without  referring  11s  to
any  infiuence  or  assistance  whatever.  I  answer, '
that  this  is.  fctf  no  means  true;  that  it  is  not  the
same  thing  either  in  reality  t  or  in  opinion,  or  in
the. consequences  of  that  opinion.

Assuredly  it  is  not  the  same  thing  in  reality.  Is
it  the  same  thing,  whether  we  perform  a  work  by
our  own  strength,  or, by  obtaining. the  assistance
and  co-operation  of  another  t  Or  does  it  make  it
the  same  thing,  that  this  assistance  is  to  be  ob-
tained by  means  which  it  is  in  our  own  choice  to
use  or  not  Or  becauserwhen  the  assistance  js  ob-
tained, we  may,  or  may  not,  avail  ourselves  of  it ;
or  because  we  may,  by  neglecting,  lose  it?  After
all,  they  are  two  different  things,  performing  a
work  by  ourselves,  and  performing  it  by  means  of
help.

Again;  It  is  not  the  same'  thing  in  the  opi-
nions, and  sentiment*,  and  dispositions,  which
accompany  it.  A  person  who  knows  or  believes '
himself  to  be  beholden  to  another  for  the  progress
and  success  of  an  undertaking,  though  still  balried
on  by  his  own  endeavours,  acknowledges  his
friend  and  bis  benefactor;  feels  his  dependency
and  his  obligation ;  turns  to  him  for  help  and  aid
in  his  difficulties;  is  humble  under  the  want  and
need^vhich  he  finds  he  has  of  assistance ;  and,
above  all  things,  is  solicitous  not  to- lose  the  benefit
of  that  assistance.  This  ia  a  different  turn  of
mind,  and  a  different  way  of  thinking  from  his,
who  is  sensible  of  no  such  Want,  who  relies  en-
tUery  upon  bis  own  strength ;  who,  of  course,  can
hardly  avoid  being  proud  of  hm  success,  or  feeling
the  confidence,  the  presumption,  the  self-com-
mendation, and  the  pretensions,  which,  however
they  might  suit  with  a~being  who  achieves  his
work  by  his  own  powers,  by  no  means,  and  in  no
wise  suit  with  a  frail  constitution,  which .  must
ask  and  obtain  the  friendly  aid  and  help  of  a  kind
and  gracious  benefactor,  before  he  can  proceed  in
the  business  set  out  for  him,  and  which  it  is  o£
unspeakaWoconsequence  to  him  to  execute  some-
how or  other.

It  is  thus  in  religion.  A  sense  of.  spiritual
weakness  and  of  spiritual  wants,  a  belief  that
divine  aid  and  help  are  to  be  had*  are  principles
which  carry, the  soul  to  God;  make  us  think  of
him,  and  think  of  him  in  earnest ;  convert,  in  a
word,  morality  into  religion;  bring  us  round  to
holiness  of  life,  by  the  road. of  piety  and  devotion;
render  us  humble  in  ourselves  and  grateful  towards
God.  There  are  two  dispositions  which  compose
the  tree  Christian  character;  humility. as  to  our-
selves, affection  and  gratitude  as  to  God;  and
both  these  are  natural  fruits  and  effects  of  the
persuasion  we  speak  of.  And  what  is  of  the  most
importance  of  ail,  this  persuasion  will  be  accom-
panied with  a  corresponding  fear,  lest  we  should!

* ■ and,  by  neglecting,  lose  this  invaluable


580


SERMONS  ON  SEVERAL  SUBJECTS,


On  the  one  hand,  therefore,  it  m  not  true,  that
the  doctrine  of  an  influencing  Spurt  is  an  arbi-
trary system,  setting  aside  our  own  endeavour*.
Nor,  on  the  other  hand,  is  it  true,  that  the  con-
necting it  with  oot  own  endeavours,  as  ojbtained
through  them,  as  assisting  them,  as  co-operating
with  them,  renders  the  doctrine  unimportant,  or
ail  one  as  putting  the  whole  upon  our  endeavours
without  any  such  doctrine.  If  it  be  true,  in  Act,
that  the  feebleness  of  our  nature  requires  the  suc-
couring influence  of  God's  Spirit  in  carrying  on
the  grand  business  of  salvation;  and-  in  every
state  and  stage  of  its  progress,  in  conversion,  in
regeneration,  in  constancy,  in  perseverance,  in
sanctification ;  it  is  of  the  utmost  importance  that
this  (ruth  be  declared,  and  understood,  and  con-
fessed, and  felt ;  because  the  perception  and  sin-
cere acknowledgment  of  it-will  be  accompanied  by
•  train  of  sentiments,  by  a  turn  of  thought,  by  a
degree  and  species  of  devotion,  By  humility,  by
prayer,  by  piety,  by  a  recourse  to  God  in  our
religious  warfare,  different  from  what 'will,  or  per-
haps can,  be  found  in  a  mind  unacquainted  with
this  doctrine  j  or  in  a,  mind  rejecting  it,  or  in  a
tabid  unconcerned  aboot^hese  things  one  way  or
other.  ^


SERMON  XXIV.

ON  THE  INFLUENCE  OP  TBS  SPIRIT.

(PAfeT  II.)

Knout  ye  not  that  ye  are  the  temple  of  God,  and
that  the  Spirit  of  God  dweUeth  in  you  T—  1  Cor.
iii.  16.

It  is  undoubtedly  a  difficulty  in  the  doctrine  of
spiritual  influence,  that  we  do  not  so  perceive  the
action  of  the  Spirit,  as  to  distinguish  it  from  the
suggestions  of  our  own  mintis.  Many  good  men
acknowledge,  that  they  are  not  conscious  Of  any
such  immediate  perceptions.  They,  who  lay
claim  to  them,  cannot  advance,  like  the-  apostles,
such  proofs  of  their  claim  as  must  necessarily  satis-
fy others,  or,  perhaps*,  secure  themselves  from  de-
lusion. And  this  is  made  a  ground  of  objection
to  Ihe  doctrine  itself.  Now,  I  think,  the  objec-
tion proceeds  upon  an  erroneous  principle,  name-
ly, our  expecting  more  than  js  promised.  The
agency  and  influence  of  the. Divine  Spirit  are
spoken  of  in  Scripture,  and  are  promised ;  but  it
is  no  where  .promised  that  its  operations  shall  be
always  sensible,  viz.  distinguishable  at  the  time
from  the  impulses,  dictates,  and  thoughts  of  our
own  minds.  I  do  not  take  upon  me  to  say  that
they^are  never  so :  I  only  say  that  it  is  not  neces-
sary, in  the  nature  of  things,  that  they  should  be
so ;  nor  is  it  asserted  in  the  Scripture  that  they  are
so  jiior  is  it  promised  that  they  will  be  so. »

The  nature  of  the  thing  dope  not  imply  or  re-
quire-it:  by  which  I  mean,  that,  according  to  the
constitution  of  the  human  mina,  as  far. as  we  are
acquainted  with  that  constitution,  a  foreign  mflu-(
enceor  impulse  may  act  upon  it  without  being
distinguished  in  our  perception  from  its  natural
operations,  that  is,  without  being  perceived  at  the
time.  The  case  appears  tome  to  be  this:  The
order  hi  which  ideas'  and  motives  rise  up  in  our
minds  is  utterly  unknown  to  us,  consequenUy  it


will  be  unknown  when  that  order  is  disturbed,  or
altered,  or  affected;  therefore  it  may  lie, abend,  it
may  be  affected,  by  the  interposition  of  a  foreign
influence,  without  that  interposition  being  per-
ceived.

Again,  and  in  like  manner,  not  only  the  order
in  which  thoughts  and  motives  rise  up  in  our
minds  ia  unknown  to  ourselves,  but  the  cuss
also  are  unknown,  and  are  incalculable,  upon
which  the  vividness  of  the  ideas,  the  aim  and
strength,  and  impression  of  the  motives  which
enter  into  our  minds,  depend.  Therefore  that
vividness  may  be  made  more  or  less,  tbst  force
may  be  increased  or  diminished,  and  both  by  the
influence  of  a  spiritual-agent,  without  any  distinct
sensation  of  such  agency  being  felt  at  the  time.
Was  the  case  otherwise;  was  the  order,  according
to  which  thoughts  and  motives  rise  op  in  on
minds  fixed,  and  being  fixed,  known ;  then  I  do
admit  the  order  could  not  be  altered  or  violated,
nor  a -foreign  agent  interfere  to  alter  ornate  n,
without  our  being  immediately  sensible  af  what
was  passing.  As  also,  if  the  causes  upon  which
the  power  and  strength  of  either  good  or  bad  na-
tives depend  were  ascertained,  then  it  would  like-
wise be  ascertained  when  this  force  was  ever  in-
creased or  diminished  by  external  influence  and
operation;  then  it  might  be  true,  that  eiternal
influence  could  not  act  upon  us  without  being
perceived.  But  in  the  ignorance  under  whieh  we
are  concerning  the  thoughts  and  motives  of  «tf
minds,  when  left  to  themselves,  we  must,  natu-
rally speaking,  he,  at  the  time,  both  ignorant  and
insensible  of  the  presence  of  an  mteriermg  power ;
one  ignorance  will  correspond  With  the  other;
whilst,  nevertheless,  the  assistance  and  benefit  de-
rived from  that  power,  may,  in  reality,  be  exceed-
ingly neat

In  this  instance,  philosophy,  in  my  opmka,
comes  in  aid  of  religion.  In  the  ordinary  state  of
the  mind,  both  the  presence  and  the  power  of  the
motives  which  act  upon  H,  proceed  from  cans*
of  which  we  know  nothing.  This  phiksoph;
confesses,  and  indeed  teaches.  From  whence  rf
follows,  that  when  these  causes  are  interrupted01
influenced,  that-  interruption  and  that  infloe nee
will  be  equally  unknown  to  us.  Just  reasoning
shows  this  proposition  to  be  a  consequence  of  to*
former.  From  whence  it  follows  again,  that  im-
mediately and  at  the  time,  perceiving  the  operatkm
of  the  Holy  Spirit  is  not  only  not  necessary  te
the  reality  of  these  operations,  but  that  it  is  not
consonant  to  the  frame  of  the  human  mind  that
it  should  be  so.  I  repeat  again,  that  we  rake  not
upon  us  to  assert  that  it  is  never  so.  Undoubtedly
God  can,  if  he  please,  give  that  tact  and  <*«•%•;
his  communications,  thai  they  shall  be  perca**
to  be  divine  communications  at  the'  time.  And
this  probably  was  very  frequently  the  case  with
the  prophets,  with  the  apostles,  and  with  in^d
men  of  odd.  But  it  is  not  the  case  natartilv;  by
which  I  mean,  that  it  is  not  the  case  according  to
the  constitution  of  the  human  eoul.  It  does  not
appear  by  experience  to  be  the  case  usual!?.
What  would  be  the  effect  of  the  influence  of  the
Divine  Spirit  being  -always  or  generalhr  aocon>
panied  with  a  distinct  notice,  it  is  difficult  even  to
conjecture.  One  thing  may  be  said  of  it,  that  *
would  be  putting  us  under  a  quite  different  dis-
pensation. It  would  be  putting  us  under  a  miTt-
culous  dispensation;  for  the  agency  of  the  Spirt
in  out  souls  distinctly  perceived  is,  property  spatf-


SERMONS'  ON  SEVERAL  SUBJECTS.


581


fog,  a  miracle.  -Now  miracle*  are  instruments  in
the  hand  of  God  of  signal  and  extraordinary  ef-
fects, produeed  upon  eignal  and  extraordinary,  oc-
casions. Neither  internally  nor  externally  do
they  form  the^  ordinary  course  of  his  proceeding
with  his  reasonable  creatures.

And  in  this1  there  is  a  close  analogy  with  Jthe
course  of  nature,  as  carried  on  under  the  divine
government.  We  have  every  reason  which  Scrip-,
ture  can'  give  uv  for  believing  that  God  frequently
interposes  to  turn  and  guide  the  order  of  events  in
the  world,  so  as  to  make  them  execute  his  pur-
pose :  yet  we  do  not  so  perceive  these  interpositions,
as,  either  always  or  generally,  to  distinguish  them
from  the  natural  progress  of  things.  -  His  provi-
dence is  real,  but  unseen..  We  distinguish  not
between  the  acts  of  God  and  the  course  <of  nature.
It  is  so  with  the  Spirit  When,  therefore,  we
teach  that  good  men  may  be  led,  or  bad  men  con-
verted, by  ttie  Spirit  of  God,  and  yet  they  them-
selves not  distinguish  his  holy  influence  \  we  teach
no  more  than  is  conformable,  as,  r think,  has  been
shown,  to  the  frame  of  the  human  mind,  6r  rather
-to  our  degree  of  acquaintance  with  that  frame;
and  also  analogous  to  the  exercise  of  divine  power
in  other  things ;  and  also  necessary  to  be  so;  un-
less it  sfaoukf  have  pleased  God  to  put  us  under  a
quite  different  dispensation,  that  is,  .under  a  dis-
pensation of  constant  miracles.

I  Ad  not  apprehend  that  the  doctrine  of  spiritual
influence  carries-  the  agency  of  the  Deity  much
farther  than  the  doctrine  of  providence  carries  it ;
or,  however,  than  the  doctrine  of  prayer  carries  it.
For  all  prayer  supposes  the  Deity  to  be  intimate
with  our  minds.  ~

But  if  we  do  not  know  the  influence  of  the  Spi-
rit by  attistingnwhing  perception  at  the  time,  by
what  means  do  we  know  any  thing  of  it  at  all  %A
answer  by  its  effects,  and  by  those  alone.  And
this  I  conceive  to  be  that  which  our  Saviour  said
to  Nicodemus.  "  The  wind  bloweth  where  it
tieteth,  and  thou  hearest  the  sound  thereof,  but
canst  not-  tell  whence  it  cometli  and  whither  it
goeth;  so  is  every  one  that  is  born  of  the  Spirit:"
that  is,  thou  perceivest  an  effect,  but  the  cause
which  produces  that  effect  operates  in  its  own  way,  -
without  thy  knowing  its  rule'or  manner  of  opera-
tion. With  regard  to  the  cause,  "  thou  canst  not
tell  whence  it  xumeth  or  whither  it  goeth."  A
change  or  improvement  in  thy  religious  state  is  -
necessary.  The  agency  and  help  of  the  Spirit  in
working  that  change  or  promoting  that  •improver
ment,  are  likewise  -necessary.

"Except  a  man  be. born  of  the  Spirit,  he  cannot
enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God."  But  according
to  what -particular  manner,  of  according  to  what
rule  the  Spirit  acts,  is  a*  unknown  to  us  as  the
'•causes  are  which  regulate  the  blowing  of  the  wind,
{he  most  incalculable  and  unknown  thing  in  the
'world.  Its  origui  is  unknown ;  its  mode  is  un-
"  known ;  but  still  it  is  known  in  its  effects:  and  so
it  is  with  the  Spirit.  If  the  chance  have  taken
place ;  if  the  improvement  be  produced,  and  be
proceeding;  if  our  religious  affairs  go  on  well,
then  have  we  ground  for  trust,  that  the  enabling,
assisting  Spirit  of  God  is  with  us ;  though  We  hava
no  other  knowledge  or  perception  of  the  matter
than  what  this  affords.

Perhaps  there  is  no  subject  whatever,  in  which
we  ought  to  be  so  careful  not  to  go  before  our
guide  as  in  this  of  spiritual  influence. We  ought

"' r  to  expect  more  than  what  is  promised,  nor


to  take  upon  ourselves  to  determine  what  the
Scriptures  have  not  determined.  This  safe  rule
will  produce  both  caution  in  judging  of  ourselves,
and  moderation  in  judging,  or  rather  a  backward-
ness in  taking  upon  us  to  judge  of  others.  The
modes  of  operation  of  God's  Spirit  are  probably
extremely  various  and  numerous.  This  Variety
is  intimated,  by  our  Saviour's  comparing  It  with
the  blowing  of  the  wind.  We. have  no  right  to
limit  it  to  any  particular  mode,  forasmuch  as  the
Scriptures  have  not  limited  it;  nor  does  observa-
tion enable  us  to  do  it  with  any  degree  of  certainty.

The  .conversion  of  a  sinner,  for.  instance,  may
be  sudden;  nay.  may  be  instantaneous,  yet  be
both  sincere  and  permanent.  We  have  no  au-
thority whatever  to  deny  the  possibility  of  this.
On  the.  contrary,  we  ought  to  rejoice  when  we
obserye  in  any  one  even  the  appearance  of  such  a
change.  And  Lois  change  may  not  only  by  pos-
sibility be  sudden,  but  sodden  changes  may  he
more  frequent  than  our  observations  would  lead
us' to  expect.  For  we  can  observe  only  effects,
and  these  must  have  time  to  show  themselves  in ;
while  the  change  of  heart  may  be  already  wrought.
It  is  a  change  of  heart  which  is  attributable  to  the
Spirit  of  God,  arid  this  may  be  sudden.  The
fruits,  the  corresponding  effects,  internal  reforma-
tion and  external  good  actions,  will  follow  in  due
time.  "I  will  take  the  stony  heart  out  of  their
flesh,  and  will'  give-  them  an  heart  of  flesh."—
(Ezek.  xi  19.)  These  words  may  well  describe
GodVdealifics  with  his  moral  creatures,  and  the
operations  of  hip  grace.  Then  follows  a  •descrip-
tion of  the  effects  of  these  dealings,  of  these  opera-
tions, of  that  grace,  viz.  that  they  may  walk  in
mv  statutes,  and  Jteep  my  ordinances  and  do  them;"
which  represents  a  permanent  habit  and  course
of  life  (a  thing  of  continuance,)  resulting  from  an
inward  change,  (which  might  be  a  thing  produced
at  once.)

In  the  mean  time  it  may  be  true,  that  the  more
ordinary  course  of  God's  grace  is- gradual  and
successive;  helping  from. time  to  time  our  endea-
vours, succouring  our  infirmities,  strengthening
our  resolutions :  "  making  with  the  temptation  a
way  to  escape;  promoting  our  improvement,  as-
sisting our  progress^  warning,"  rebuking,  encou-
raging, comforting,  attending  us,  as  it  were,
through  the  different  stages  of  our  laborious  ad-
vance in  the  road  of  salvation.

And  as  the  operations  of  the  Spirit-  am  indefi-
nite, so  far  as  we  know,  in  respect  of  time,  so  are
they  likewise  in  respect  of  mode.  They  may  act,
and  observation  affords  reason  to  believe  that  they
do  sometimes  act,  by  adding  force  and  efficacy  to
instruction,  advice,  or,  admonition.  A  passage
of  Scripture  sometimes  strikes  the  heart  with
wonderful  power ;.  adheres,  as  it  were,  and  cleaves
to  the  memory,  till  it  has  wrought  its  work.  An
impressive  sermon,  is  often  known  to  sink  very
deep.  It  ie  not,  perhaps,  too  much  to  hope,  that
the  .Spirit  of  God  should  accompany  his  ordi-
nances, provided  a  person  bring  to  them  serious-
ness, humility,  and  devotion.  For  example,  the
devout  receiving  of  the  holy  sacrament  may  draw
down  upon  us  the  gift  and  benefit  of  divine  grace,
or  increase  our  measure  of  it  This,  as  being  the
most  solemn  act  of  our  religion,  and  also  an  ap-
pointment of  the  religion  itself,  may  be  properly
placed  first ;  but  every  species  of  prayer,  provided
it  be  earnest j  every  act  of  worship,  provided  it  be
sincere,  may  participate  in  the  same  effect;  may


683


SEftMONB  ON  8EVBRAL  SUBJECTS.


be  to  us  the  occasion,  the  time,  and  -the  instru-
ment of  this  greatest  of  all  gifts.
-  In  ail  these  instances,  and  in  all  indeed  that
relate  td  the  operations  of  the  Spirit,  we  are  to
judge,  if  we  will  take  upon  us  to  judge  at  all,
[which  I  do  not  see  that  we  are  obliged  to  do,)
not  only  with  great  candour  and  moderation,  but
also  with  great  reserve  and  caution ;  and  as  to
the  modes  of  Divine  glace,  or  of  its  proceedings  in
the  hearts  of  men,  as  of  things  undetermined  in
Scripture,  and  undeterminable  by  us.  In  our  own
case,  which  it  is  of  infinitely  more  importance  to
each  of  us  to  manage  rightly,  than  it  is  to  judge
even  truly  of  other  men  s,  we  are  to  use  peree-
▼eringly,  every  appointed,  every  reasonable,  every
probable,  every  virtuous  endeavour  to  render  our-
selves objects  of  that  merciful  assistance,  which
undoubtedly  and  confessedly  we  much  want,  and
which,  in  one  way  or  other,  God,  we  are  assured,
is  willing  to  affom.  *


SERMON  XXV.

ON  THE  INFLUENCE  OF  THE  SPIRIT.

(PARTm.)

Know  ye  not  that  ye  are  the  temple  of  God;  and
that  Ou  Spirit  of  God  dvelieth  in you?-^l  Car.
iiL16.

As  all  doctrine  ought  to  end  in  practice,  and  aH
sound  instruction'  lead  to  right  conduct,  it  comes,
in  the  test  place,  to  be  considered,  what  obligations
follow  from  the  tenet  of  an  assisting  jpuce  and
spiritual  influence ;  what  is  to  be  done  on  our  part
in  consequence  of  holding  such  a  persuasion;
what  is  the  behaviour  corresponding  and  consist-
ent with  such  an  opinion. For  we  must  always


bear  in  mind,  that  the  Grace  and  Spirit  of  God
no  more  take  away  our  freedom  or  action,  our
personal  and  moral  liberty,  than  the  advice,  the


admonitions,  the  suggestions,  the  reproofs,  the
expostulations,  the  counsels- of  a  friend  or  parent
would  take  them  away!  We  may  act  either  right
or  wrong,  notwithstanding  these  interferences.  It
still  depends  upon  ourselves  which  of  the  two  we
will  do.  We  are  not  machines  under  these  im-
pressions ;  nor  are  we  under  the  impression  of  the
Holy  Spirit  Therefore  there  is  a  class  of  duties
relating  to  this  subject,  as  mueh  as  any  other;
and  more, perhaps,  than  any  other  important.

And,  first,  I  would  apply  myself  to  an  objection,
which  belongs  to  this,  namely,  the  practical  part
of  the' subject;  which  objection  19,  that  the  doc-
trine of  spiritual  influence,  and  the  preaching  of
this  doctrine,  causes  men  to  attend  chiefly  to  the
feelings  within  them,  to  place  religion  in  feelings
and  sensations,  and  to  be  content  with  such  feel-
ings and  sensations,  without  coming  to  active  du-
ties and  real  usefulness:  that  it  tends  to  produce
a  contemplative  religion,  accompanied  wttn  a  sort
of  abstraction  from  the  interests  of  this  world,  as
respecting  either  ourselves  or'  others;  a  sort  of
quietism  and  indifference  which  contributes  no-
thing to  the  good  of  mankind,  or  to  make  a  man
serviceable  in  his  generation  ;•  that  men  of  this  de-
scription sit  brooding  over  what  passes  in  their
hearts,  without  performing  any  good 'actions,  or
well  discharging  their  social  or  domestic  obliga-
tions, or  indeed  guarding  their  outward  conduct
with  sufficient  care.


Now,  if  there  bs>  any  foundation  infect  feflrii
charge,  it  arises  from  some  persons  bokfing  tfaii
doctrine  defectively ;  I  mean  man  their  not  attend-
ing to  one  main  point*  in  the  doctrine,  which  a,
that  the  promise  u  not  to  those  who  hive  the  Spi-
rit, but  to  those  who  are  ltd  by  the  Spirit;  sot  to
those  who  are  favoured  with  "its  susgesuona,  bat
to  those  who  give  themselves  up  to  Jbtlov,  sad  do
actusjly/otfow  these  suggestions.  Now,  though  a
person,  by  attending  to  ins  feelings  and  codjoow-
nesses  may  persuade  himself  that  he  has  the  Spi-
rit of  God;  yet  if  be  stop  and  rest  in  these  KM*
tions  without  consequential  practical  exertion,
it  can  by  no  possibility  be  said  of  him,  nor,  one
would  think,  could  he  possibly  bring  hiraetf  to
behove,  that  he  js  led  by  the  Spirit,  that  hf/afctt
the  Spirit;  'for  these  terms necessarily  imply
something  done  under  that  influence,  jiuutwdT
carry  the  thoughts  to  a  course  of  conduct  entered
into  and  pursued  in  obedience  to,  and  by  virtue  of,
that  influence, Whether  the  objection  here  do-
tk^  baa  any  foundation  in  the  conduct  of  than
who  hold  the  doctrine  of  which  we  treat,  1  am
uncertain; accounts  are  different:  but  at  any
rate  the  objection  lies  not  against  the  doctrine,
but  against  a  defective  apprehension  of  it  For,
in  confirmation  of  all  which  we  have  said,  we  mr
produce  the  example  of  St  Paul.  No  obe  carried
the  doctrine  of  spiritual  influence  higher  than  he
did,  or  spoke  of  it  so  much ;  yet  no  character  in
the  world  could  be  farther  than  his  wss  from  red-
ing in  feelings  and  sensations. Ott~  the  contnrj,
it  was  all  activity  and  usefulness.  His  whole  bn-
tory  confirms  what  he  said  of  hhnsebf,  that  "in
labours,"  in  positive  exertions,  both  of  mind  tod
body,  he  was  "  above  measure." It  will  be  said,
perhaps,  that  these  exertions  were  in  a  particular
way,  viz.  in  making  converts- to  his  opinions;  bat
st  wss  the  way  in  which,  as  he  believed,  he  est
promoting  the  interest  of -his  fellow-creatures  in
the  greatest  degree  possible  for  him  to  prouwte  jt;
And  it  was  the  way  also  which  he  behoved  to  be
enjoined  upon  him  by  the  express  and  parocolar
command  of  God.  Had  there  been  any  other  me-
thod, any  other  course  and  line  of  beneficent  en-
deavours, in  which  he  thought  he  could  have  bees
more  useful,  and  had  the  choice  been  left  to  him-
self, (which  it  was  not,)  the  same  principle.  Ike
same  eager  desire  of  doing  good,  would  hi"
manifested  itself  with  equal  vigour  in  thatctber
line. His  sentiments  and  precepts  conesponded
with  his  example :  "  Do  good  unto  all  men,  espe-
cially unto  them  that  are  of  the  household  of
Christ." Here  doing  is  enjoined. Nothing  k«
than  doing  can  satisfy  this  precept.  Feeongsand
sensations  will  not,  though  of  the  best  kind.
Let  him  that  stole,  steal  no  mere;  but  rather  let
him  labour  with  his  hands,  that  he  may  have  la
give  to  him  that  needeth." This  is  carrying  ac-
tive .beneficence  as  far  as  it  ean  go. Men  are
commanded  to  relieve  the  necessities  of  their  mot
brethren- out  of  the  earnings  of  their  manual  la-
bour, nay,  to  labour  for  that  very  purpose;  and
their  doing  so  is  stated  as  the  best  exp***  ft
former  dishonesties,  and  the  best  proof  bow  myth
and  how  truly  they  are  changed  from  what  ther
were.  "I^tWtWTuleth,doitwith<fiUgeDrt-
This  is  a  precept  which  cannot  be  complied  with
without  activity. These  instructions  could  not
come  from  a  man  who  placed  religion  in  reahnf*
and  sensations.
Having  noticed  tms  objection  (for  it  well  o>


SERMONS  OK  SEVERAL  SUBJECTS.


563


served  notice,)  I  proceed  ta  elate  the  particular
duties  which  relate  to  the  doctrine  of  spiritual  as-
sistance. And  the  first  of  these  duties  is  to  pray
Jbr  it.  It  b  by  prayer  that  it  is  to  be  sought ;  by
player  that  it  is  to  be  obtained.  .  This  the  Scrip-
tares'  expressly  teach.  "  How  jnuch  more  will
your  Heavenly  Father  give  the  Holy  Spirit  to
them  that  ask  him?*'  The  foundation  of  prayer,
in  all  cases,  is  a  sense  of  want.  No"  man  prays
in  earnest  or  to  any  purpose  for  what  he  does  not
feel  that  he  wants.  Know  then  and  feel  the
weakness  of  your  nature.  Know  the  infinite  im-
portance of  holding  on,  nevertheless,  in  a  course
of  virtue.  Know  these  two  points  thoroughly,
and  you  can  stand  in  need  of  no-  additional  mo-
tive (indeed  none  can  be  added,)  to  excite  in  you
strong  unwearied  supplications  for  Divine  help  r
not  a  cold  asking  for  it  in  any  prescribed  form  or
pram,  but  cryings  and  supplications  foc.it,  strong
and  unwearied.  The  description  in  the  Epistle
to  the  Hebrews,  of  our  Lord's  own  devotion,  may
serve  to  describe  the  devotion  of  a  Christian,  pray-
ing, as  he  ought,  for  the  Spirit  j  that  is,  praying
from  a  deep  understanding  of  his  own  condition,
a  conviction  of  his  wants  and  necessities.  "  He
offered  up  prayers  and  supplications  with  strong
crying  and  tears  unto  him  that  was  able  to  save
lum  from  death ;  and  was  heard  in  that  he  feared."
This  is  devotion  in  reality.

There  are  occasions  also,  which  ought  to  call
forth  these  prayers  with  extraordinary  and  pecu-
liar force.

Is  it  superstition?  is  it  not  on  the  contrary,  a
just  and  reasonable  piety  to  implore  of  God  the
guidance  of  his  Holy  Spirit,  when  we  have  any
thing  of  great  importance  to  decide  upon,  or  to
undertake ;  especially  any  thing  by  which  the  hap-
piness of  others,  as  well  as*  our  own,  ia  likely  to
be  affected?

It  .would  be  difficult  to  enumerate  the  passages
and  occasions  of  a  man's  life,  in  which  he  is  par-
ticularly bound  to  apply  to  God  for  the  aid  and
direction  of  his  Spink  In  general,  in  every  turn,
as  it  may  be  called,  of  fife ;  whenever  any  thin?
critical,  any  thing  momentous,  any  thing  which
ir  to  fix  our  situation  and  course  of  life;  most  es-
pecially any  thing  which  is  likely  to  have  an  in-
fluence upon  our  moral  conduct  and  disposition,
and  thereby  affect  our  condition,  as  candidates  for
heaven,  and  as  the  religious  servants  of  God,  is  to
be  resolved  upon ;  there  and  then  ought  we  to  say
our  prayers;  most  ardently  supplicating  from  our
Creator  and  Preserver  the  grace  and  guidance  of
his  Holy  Spirit.

Is  it  not,  again,  a  time  for  calling  eernestlyfor
the  Spirit  of  God,  and  for  a  greater  measure  of
that  Spirit,  if  he  be  pleased  to  grant  it  to  us,  when
we  are  recovering  from  some  sin  into  which  we
have  been  betrayed  1  This  case  is  always  critical.
The  Question  now  is,  whether  we  shall  foil  into  a
settled  course  of  sinning,  or  whether  we  shall  be
restored  to  our  former,  and  to  better  than  our
former  endeavours  to  maintain  the  line  of  duty.
That,  under  the  sting  and  present  alarm. of  our
conscience,  we  have  formed  resolutions  of  virtue
for  the  future  is  supposed ;  but  whether  these  reso-
lutions will  stand,  is  the  point  now  at  issue.  And
in  this  peril  of  our  souls  we  cannot  be  too  earnest
or  importunate  in  our  supplications  for  Divine  suc-
cour. It  can  never  come  to  our  aid  at  a  time
when  we  more  want  it  .Our  foil  proves  our'
Our  desire  of  recovery  proves,  that,


fallen,  we  may  not  be  lost.  This  is  a
condition  which  flies  to  aid  and.  help,  .if  aid  and
help  can  be  had ;  and  it  is  a  condition  to  which  the
promised -support  of  the  Spirit  most  peculiarly  ap-
plies. On  .such  an  occasion,  therefore,  it  will  be
sought  with,. struggles  and  strong,  contention  of
mind,  if  we  be  serious  in  these  matter*.  So
sought,  it  will  be  obtained.

Again :  Is  it  not  always  a  fit  sdbject  of  prayer,
that  the  Holy  Spirit  would  inform,  animate,  warm,
and  support  our  devotion?  St.  Paul  speaks  or
the  co-operation  of  the  Spirit  with  us  in  this  very
article.  "  Likewise  the  spirit  also  helpeth  our  h>
firmities,  for  we  know  not  what  we  should  pray
for  as  we  ought;  but  the  Spirit  maketh  Interces-
sion for  us  with  groankigs  that  cannot  be  uttered."
The  specific  help  here  described  is  to  supply  our
ignorance.  But  the  words  speak  also  generally
of  helping  our  infirmities:  meaning,  as  the  pas-
sage leadscus  to  suppose,  tne  infirmities  which  at-
tend our  devotion.  Now  these  infirmities  are  not
only  ignorance,  but  coldness,  wanderings,  ab-
sence ;  for  all  which  a  remedy  is  to  be  Bought  in
the  aid  and  help  of  the  Spirit.  ^

Next  in  order  of  time,  to  praying  for  the  Spirit
of  God,  but  still  superior  to  it  in  importance,  is  lis-
tening and  yielding  ouractveajo  his  suggestions.
This  is  the  thing  in  which  we  fail.

Now,  it  being  confessed  that  we  cannot  ordina-
rily distinguish  at  the  time  the  suggestions  of  the
Spirit  from  the  operations  of  our  minds,  it  may  be
asked,  how  are  we  to  listen  to  them  7  The  answer
is,  by  attending  .universally  to  the  admonitions
within  us,  Men  do  hot  listen  to  their  consciences.
It  is  through  the  whispering  of  conscience  that
the  Spirit  speaks,  if  men  then  are  wilfully  deaf
to  their  conscience's,  they  cannot  hear  the  Spirit.
If  hearing,  if  being  compelled  to  hear,  the  remon-
strances of  conscience,  they  nevertheless  decide,
and  resolve,- and  determine  to  go  against  them;
then  they  grieve,  then  they  defy,  then  they  do  de-
spite to  the  Spirit  of  God.  In  both  cases,  that  is,
both  of  neglecting,  to  consult,  and  of  defying,
when  they  cannot  help  feeling  the  admonitions
which  rise  up  within  them,  they  have  this  judg-
ment hanging  over  their  heads :  "He  that  bath
not  from,  aim  shall  be  taken  even  that  which:  he
hath."  He  that  misuses  or  abuses  the  portion
and  measure  of  spiritual  assistance  which  is  af-
forded him,  shall  lose  even,  tfrat.

The  efficacy  of  the  Spirit  is  to  be  judged  of  by
its  fruits.  Its  immediate  effects  are  upon  the  dis-
position. A  visible  outward,  conduct  will  ensue  ;
but  the  true  seat  df  grace  and  of  spiritual  energy
is  in  the  heart  and  inward  disposition.  When-
ever, therefore,  we  find  religious  carelessness  suc-
ceeded within  us  by  religious  seriousness;  con-
science, which  was  silent  or  unheard,  now  power-
fully speaking  and  obeyed  j  sensuality  and  selfish-
ness, the  two  grand  enemies  of  salvation,  the  two
great  powers  of  darkness  which  rule  the  natural
man — when  we  find  even  these  {riving  way  to  the
inward  accusing  voice  df  conscience;  when  we
find  the  thoughts  of  the  mind  drawing  or  drawn
more  and  more  towards  heavenly  things;  the  va-
lue and  interest  of  these  expectations  plainer  to
our  view,  a  great  deal  more  frequent  than  hereto-
fore in  our  meditations,  and  more  fully  discerned ;
the  care  and  safety  of  our  souls  rising  gradually
above  concerns  and  anxieties  about  worldly  aK
fairs;  when  we  find  the  force  of  temptation,  and
of  evil  propensities  not  extinct,  but  retreating  be-


-684


SERMONS  ON  SEVERAL  SUBJECTS.


tore  a  sense  of  doty ; '  sel£government  maintain
ed ;  the  interruptions  of  it  immeiiiately  perceived,
bitterly  deplored,  and  soon  recovered :  tin  rejected
and  repelled ;  and  this  not  so  much  with  an  in-
crease of  confidence  in  our  strength,  as  of  reliance
upon  the  assisting  grace- of  God;  when  we  find
ourselves  touched  with  the  love  of  our  Maker,
taking  satisfaction  in  his  worship  and  service;
when  we  feel  a  growtnjg  -taste  and  relish  for  reli-
gious subjects  and  religious  exercises ;  above  all,
when  we  begin  to  rejoice  in  the  comfort  of  the
Holy  Ghost;  in  the  prospect  of  reaching  heaven;
in  the  powerful  aids  and  helps  which  are  given  us
in  accomplishing  this  great  end,  and  the  strength,
and  tiramess,  and  resolution,  which,  so  .helped  and
aided,  we  experience  in  our,  progress:  when  we
feel  these  things,  then  may  we;  without  either  en-
thusiasm or  superstition,  humbly  believe  that  (he
Spirit  of  God  hath  been  at  work  within  us.  Ex-
ternal virtues',  good  actions  will  follow,  as  occa-
sions may  draw  them  forth ;  but  it  is  within  that
we  must  look  for  the  change  which  the  inspiration
of  God's  Spirit  produces.

With  respect  to  positive  external  good  actions,
we  have  said  that  they  must  depend  in  some  mea-
sure upon  occasions,  and  abilities,  and  opportuni-
ties, and  that  they  must  wait  for  opportunities ;
but,  observe,  it  is  not  so  with  the  breaking  off  of
our  sins,  be  they  what  they  will.  That  work  must
wait  for  nothing;  Until  that  be  effected,  no  change
is  made*  No  man,  going  on  in  a  known  sin,  has
any  right  to  say,  that  the  Spirit  of  God  has  done
its  office  within  him.  Either  it  has  not  been  given
to  him,  or  being  given,  it  has  been  resisted,  de-

2)ised,  or,  at  least,  neglected.  Such  a  person  has
ther  yet  to  obtain  it  by  prayer,  or,  when  obtain-
ed, to  avail  himself  duly  of  its  assistance.  Let
him  understand  this'  to  he  his  condition.

The  next  duty,  or  rather  disposition,  which
flows  from  .the  doctrine  of  spiritual  influence,  is
humility.  ^  There  never  was -a  truer  Baying  than
that  pnde  is  the  adversary  of  religion,  lowliness
and  humility  the  tempers  for  it.  Now  religious
humility  consists  in  the  haVit  of  referring  every
thing  to  God.  From  one  end  of  the  New  Testa-
ment to  the  other,  God  is  set  forth  and  magnified
in  his  agency  and  his  operations.  In  the  greatest
of  all  businesses,  the  business  of  salvation,  he  is
operating,  and  we  cooperating  with  him.  "  Work
out  your  own  salvation  with  fear  and  trembling ;"
and  whyl  "  for  it  is  God  that  worketh  in  us  tp
will  and  to  do,  according  to  his  good  pleasure."
He  is  not  superseding  our  endeavours,  (the  very
contrary  is  implied  by  commanding-  us  to  exert'
them,)  but  still  nothing  in  done  without  him.  If
we  have  moral  strength,  we  are  strong  in  the  in-
ward might  of  the  Holy  Ghost:  consequently  all
boasting,  all  vanity,  all  self-sufficiency,  all  despis-
ing of  others,  on  the  score  of  moral  and  religious
inferiority,  are  eicluded.  Without  the  grace  of
God,  we  might  have  been  as  the  worst  of  them.
There  is  in  the  nature  of  things,  one  train- of  sen-
timent belonging  to  him  who  has  achieved  a  work
by  hk  own  might,  and  power,  and  prowess;  and
another  to  him,  who  has  been  fain  to  beg  for  suc-
cour and  assistance,  and  by  that  assistance  alone
has  been  carried  through  difficulties  which  were
too  great  for  his  own  strength  and  faculties.  This
last  is  the  true  sentiment  for  us.  ft  is  not  for  a
.man,  whose  life  has  been  saved  in  a  shipwreck  by
the  compassionate  help  of  others ;  it  is  not  for  a
»an,  so  saved,  to  boast  of  bis  own  alertness  and


SERMON  XXVI. ;

. SIN  EXCOUNVBRSD  B7  SP1B1TUAL  AID.

*a  Tsaaa  *A*Ts-—(*AaT  u)

6,  wretched  man  that  I  am  I  v>ko  shall  oWn*
me  from  the  body  of  this  death  ?— Rom.  vil  «•

Before  we  can  explain  what  is  the  pw*£
subject  of  this  heavy  lamentation-,  and  what  *
precise  meaning  of  the  solemn  question  hew i  ti-
ed, we  must  endeavour  to  understand  what w  »>
tended  by  the  expression, "  the  body  of  Urn  death,
or,  as  some  render  it,  "this  body  of  death."

Now,  let  it  be  remembered,  that  death,  m  Sea*


vigour- though  it  be  true,  that  miles  he  kid  e*
ertrd  what  power  and  strength  he  was  pnsjfuj
of,  he  would  not  have  been  saved  at  all,

Lastly:  This  doctrine  shuts  the  door  again*  t
most  general,  a  most  specious,  anda  most  toot-
ing excuse  for  oorains ;  which  excuse  is,  that  we
have  striven  against  them,  but  are  overpowered  by
our  evil  nature,  by  that  nature  which  the  Scrip-
tures themselves  represent  as  evil;  in  a  worn,  that
we  have  done  What  wo  could.  Now,  until  by
supplication  and  prayer  wa  ba»e  caited  for  the  pro-
mised assistance  of  God's  Spirit,  and  with  aa
earnestness,  devotion,  perseveraoce,  and  import*
nity,  proportioned  to  toe  magnitude  of  the  con-
cern ;  until  we  have  rendered  ourselves  objects  of  I
that  influence,  and  yielded  ourselves  to  it,  it  ii  not
true,  "that  we  have  done  all  that  we  can."  We
must -not  rely  upon  that  excuse ;  fork  is  nottns  I
in  fact  If,  experiencing  the  depravity  and  ins*
cility  of  our  nature,  we  wee-in  this  corruption  jsi
weakness  an  excuse  for  oor  sins,  and  taking  op
with  this  excuse,  we  surrender  ourselves  to  then;
if  wo  give  up,  or  relax  in  our  opposition  to  them,
and  struggles  against  them,  at  fat*  consenting  to
our  sins,  and  falling  down  with  the  stream  which
we  have  found  so  hard  to  resist;  if  thingitaktthji
turn  with  us,  ihen  are  we  in  a  state  to Tie  ufledf,
finally,  and  finally  undone.  We  have  it  in  oar
power  to  shut  oof  eyes  against  the  danger;  ve
naturally  shall  endeavour  to  make  onrsehesti
easy  and  contented  in  our  situation  aa  we  eu;
but  the  truth,  nevertheless,  is,  that  we  tie  haaen-
ing  to  certain  perdition.  If,  on  the  contrary, fo-
ceiving  the  feebleness  of  our  nature,™  be  dmw
by  the  perception,  aa  St.  Paul  was  driven,  to  if
for  deliverance  from  our  sins  to  the  aid,  and  influ-
ence, and  power  of  God'a  Spirit;  to  seek  for  Di-
vine' help  and  succour,  as  a  sinking  mariner  cam
out  for  help  and  succour,  not  formally,  we  ma?  to
sure,  or  coldly,  but  with  crie*,  and  tens, and l«p-
plications,  as  for  life  itself;  if  we  be  prep"**
cooperate  with  this  help,  with  the  holy  wo**
of  God's  grace  within  us  ;•  then  niay  we  trnst,  both
that  it  will  be  given  to  us,  (yet  in  such  manners!
to  God  shall  seem  fit,  and  which  cannot  be junv
ed  by  lis,)  and  also  that  the  portion  of  help  vkn
is  given,  being  duly  used  and  unproved,  (n**!
spued,  neglected,  put  away,)  more  and  nun™
be  continually  added  for  the  ultimate  aceoonbaV
ment  of  our  great  end  and  object,  the  oVfiveiaow
of  our  souls  from  the  captivity,  and  me  eon»>
quences  of  sin.


Paul's  epistles,  hardly  ever  signifies  a  ntWJj
death,  to  which  all  men  of  ajl  kinds  aw  •¥»*


SERMONS  ON  SEVERAL  SUBJECTS.


685»


Subjected ;  but  it  means  a  spiritual  death,  or  that
perdition  and  destruction  to  which  sin  brings  men
in  a  future  state. — "  The  wages  of  sin  is  death;"
not  the  death  which  we  must  ad  undergo  in  this
world,  for  that  is  the  fate  of  righteousness  as  well
as  sin,  but  the  state,  whatever  it  be,  to  which  sin
and  sinners  will  be  consigned  in  the  world  to  come.
Not  many  verses  after  our  text,  St.  Paul  says,
"  carnal  mindedncss  is  death :"  "  to  be  carnally
minded  is  death ;"  leads,  that  is,  inevitably  to  that
future  destruction-  which  awaits  the  sinful  Indul-
gence of  carnal  propensities,  and  which'  destruc-
tion is,  as  it  were,  death  to  the  soul.  The  book
of  Revelation,  alluding  to  this  distinction,  speaks
expressly  of  a  second  death,  in  terms  very  fit  to
be  called  to  mind  in  the  consideration  of  our  pre-
sent text  "I  saw  the  dead,  small  and  great,
staifd  before  God ;  and  the  books  were  opened ;
and  another  book-  was  opened,  which  is  the  book
of  life;  and  the  dead  were  judged  out  of  those
things  which  were  written,  according  to  their
works:  and  the  sea  gave  up  the  dead  which  were
in  it,  and  death  and  hell  (which  last  word  denotes
here  simply  the  place  of  the  dead,  not  the  place
of  punishment)  delivered  up  the  dead  that  were
in  them ;  and  they  were  judged  every  man  accord-
ing to  their  works ;  and  death  and  hell  were  cast
into  the  lake  of  fire;1'  (that  is,  natural  death,  and
the  receptacle  of  those  who  died,  were  thenceforth
superseded.)  This  is  the  second  death.  "  And
whatsoever  was  not  found  written  in  the  book  of
life,  was  cast  into  the  lake  of  fire."  This  descrip-
tion, which  is  exceedingly  awful,  is  given  in  the
last  three  verses  of  the  20th  chapter.  In  reference
to  the  same  event,  this  book  of  Revelation  had  be-
fore told  us,  viz.  in  the  2d  chapter  and  11th  verse,
that  he  who  overcometh  shall  not  be  hurt  of  the
second  death ;  and  in  like  manner  in  the  above
quoted  20th  chapter,  "  Blessed  and  holy  is  he  that
hath  part  in  this  resurrection :  on  such  the  second
death  hath  no  power."  Our  Lord  himself  refers
to  this  death  in  those  never  to  be  forgotten  words
which  he  uttered.  "  He  that  liveth,  and  believeth
in  me,  shall  not  die  eternally."  Die  he  must,  but
not  eternally:  die  the  first  death,  but  not  the  se-
cond. It  is  undoubtedly,  therefore,  the  second
death  which  Saint  Paul  meant  by  the  word
death,  when  he  wrote  down  the  sentence  "the
body  of  this  death ;"  and  the  second  death  is  the
punishment,  perdition,  and  destruction,  which  the
«ouls  of  sinners  will  suffer  in  a  future  state.  It  is
well  worthy  of  observation,  that  this  was  indeed
the  only  death  which  those  who  wrote  the  New
Testament,  and  probably  all  sincere  Christians  of
that  age,  regarded  as  important,  as  the  subject  of
their  awe,  and  dread,  and  solicitude.  The  first
death,  the  natural  and  universal  disease  of  the
body,  they  looked  to  simply  as  a  change ;  a  going
out  of  one  room  into  another;  a  putting  off  one
kind  of  clothing,  and  putting  on  a  different  kind.
They  esteemed  it,  compared  with  the  other,  of  lit-
tle moment  or  account.  In  this  respect,  there  is
a  wide  difference  between  the  Scripture  appre-
hension of  the  subject  and  ours.  We  think  en-
tirely of  the  first  death:  they  thought  entirely  of
the  second.  We  speak  and  talk  of  the  death
which  we  see :  they  spoke,  and  taught,  and  wrote,
of  a  death  which  is  future  to  that.  We  look  to  the
first  with  terror :  they  to  the  second  alone.  The  se-
cond alone  they  represent  as  formidable.  Such  is
the  view  which  Christianity  gives  us  of  these  things,
wo  diflferent  firom  what  we  naturally  entertain.
4E


You  see  then  what  death  is  in  the  Scripture
sense;  in  St.  Paul's  sense.  "  The  fcody  or  this
death."  The  phrase  and'expressiori  of  the  text
cannot,  however,  mean  this  death  itself,  because
he  prays  to  be  delivered  from  it;  whereas  from
that  death,  or  that  perdition  understood  by  it,
when  it  once  overtakes  the  sinner,  there  is  no  de-
liverance that  we  know  of.  The  "  body,"  then,
"  of  this  death,"  is  not  the  death  itself,  but  a  state
leading  to  and  ending  in  the  second  death ;  namely,
in  misery  and  'punishment,  instead  of  happiness
and  rest,  after  our  departure  out  of  this  world.
And  this  state  it  is,  from  which*  St.  Paul,  with
such  vehemence  and  concern  upon  his  spirit,  seeks
to  be  delivered.

Having  seen  the  signification  of  the  principal
phrase  employed  in  the  text,  the  next,  and  the
most  important  question  is,  to  what  condition  of
the  soul,  in  its  moral  and  religious  concerns,  the
apostle  applies  it.  Now  in  the  verses  preceding
the  text,  indeed  in  the  whole  of  this  remarkable
chapter,  St.  Paul  has  been  describing  a  state  of
struggle  and  contention  with  sinful  propensities ;
which  propensities,  in  the  present  condition  of
our  nature,  we  all  feci,  and  which  are  never
wholly  abolished.  But  our  apostle  goes  further :
he  describes  also  that  state  of  unsuccessful  strug-
gle and  unsuccessfid  contention,  by  which  many
so  unhappily  fall.  His  words  are  these:  "  That
which  I  do, I  allow  not:  for  what  I  would,  that  1
do  not ;  but  what  I  hate,  that  do  I.  For  I  know
that  in  me,  that  is,  in  my  flesh,  dwelleth  no  good
thing :  for  to  will  is  present  with  me,  but  how  to
perform  that  which  is  good  I  find  not :  for  the  good
that  I  would,' I  do  not;  but  the  evil  which  I  would
not,  that  I  do.  I  find  a  law,  that,'  when  I  would
do  good,  evil  is  present  with  me.  For  I  delight
in  the  law  of  God  after  the  inward  man.  But  I
■see  another  law  in  my  members  warring  against
the  law  of  my  mind,  and  bringing  me  into  captivi-
ty to  the  law  of  sin  which  is  in  my  members."

This  account,  though  the  style  and  manner  of
expression  in  which  it  is  delivered  be  very  pecu-
liar, is,  in  its  substance,  no  other  than  what  is
strictly  applicable  to  the  case  of  thousands.  "  The
good  that  I  would,  I  do  not ;  the  evil  which  I  would
not,  that  I  do."  .  How  many,  who  read  this  dis-
course, may  say  the  same  of  themselves !  as  also,
"  what  I  would,  that  do  I  not ;  but  what  I  hate,
that  I  do."  This  then  h  the  case  which  St.  Paul
had  in  view.  It  is  a  case,  first,  which  supposes
an  informed  and  enlightened  conscience:  "  I  de-
light in  the  law  of  God.''  "  I  had  not  known  sin
but  by  the  law."  "  I  consent  unto  the  law  that
it  is  good."  These  sentiments  could  only  be  ut-
teredThy  a  man  who  was  in  a  considerable  degree
at  least,  acquainted  with  his  duty,  and  who  also
approved  of  the  rule  of  duty  which  he  found  laid
down.

Secondly :  The  case  before  uS  also  supposes  an
inclination  of  mind  and  judgment  to  perform  our
duty.  "  When  I  would  do  good,  evil  is  present
with  me :  to  will  ir  present  with  me,  but  now  to
perform  that  which  is  good.  I  find  not."

Thirdly :  It  supposes  this  inclination  of  mind
and  judgment  to  be  continually  overpowered.  ^ "  I
see  another  law  in  my  members  warring  against
the  law  of  my  mind,  and  bringing  me  into  captivi-
ty to  the  law  of  sin,  which  is  in  my  members ;"
that  is,  the  evil  principle  not  only  opposes  the
judgment  of  the  mind,  and  the  conduct  which
that  judgment  dictates,  (which  may  be  Hie  case


688


SERMONS  ON  SEVERAL  SUBJECTS.


with  aD,)  but  in  the  present  case  subdues  and  gets
the  better  of  it :  "  Not  only  wan  against  the  law
of  my  mind,  bnt  brings  me  into  captivity."

Fourthly:  The  case  supposes  a  sense  and
thorough  consciousness  of  all  this:  o(  the  rule  of
duty;  of  the  nature  of  sin;  of  the  struggle;  of  the
defeat  It  is  a  prisoner  sensible  of  his  chains.  It
is  a  soul  tied  and  bound  by  the  fetters  of  its  sins,
and  knowing  itself  to  be  so.  It  is  by  no  means
the  case  of  the  ignorant  sinner ;  it  is  not  the  case
of  an  erring  mistaken  conscience ;  it  is  not  the
case  of  a  seared  and  hardened  conscience.  None
of  these  could  make  the  reflection  or  the  complaint
which  is  here  described.  "  The  cotsananoment
which  was  ordained  unto  life,  /Jbund  to  be  unto
death.  I  am  carnal,  sold  under  sin.  In  me
dweUeth  no  flood  thing.  The  law  is  holy;  and
the  commandment  holy,  just,  and  good ;  but  sin,
that  it  might  appear  sin,  (that  it  might  be  more
conspicuous,  aggravated,  and  inexcusable,)  works
death  in  me  by  that  which  is  good."  This  lan-
guage by  no  means  belongs  to  the  stupified  in-


Nor,  fifthly,  as  it  cannot  belong  to  an  original
insensibility  of  conscience,  that  is,  an  insensibility
of  Which  the  person  himself  does  not  remember
the  beginning,  so  neither  can  it  belong  to  the  sin-
ner who  has  got  over  the  rebukes,  distrusts,  and
uneasiness  which  sin  once  occasioned.  True  it
is,  that  this  uneasiness  may  be  got  over  almost
entirely;  so  that  whilst  the  danger  remains  the
same,  whilst  the  final  event  will  be  the  same,
whilst  the  coming  destruction  is  not  leas  sure  or
dreadful  the  uneasiness  and  the  apprehension  are
gone.  This  is  a  case  too  common,  too  deplorable,
too  desperate-,  but  it  is  not  the  case  of  which  we
are  now  treating,  or  of  which  St  Paul  treated.
Here  we  are  presented  throughout  with  complaint
and  uneasiness;  with  a  soul  exceedingly  dissatis-
fied, exceedingly  indeed  disquieted,  and  disturbed,
and  alarmed,  with  the  view  of  its  condition.

Upon  the  whole,  St  Paul's  account  is  the  ac-
count of  a  man  in  some  sort  struggling  with  his
vices;  at  least  deeply  conscious  ofwhat  they  are.
whither  they  are  leading  him,  where  t^ey  will
end ;  acknowledging  the  law  of  God,  not  only  in
words  and  speeches,  but  in  his  mind ;  acknowledg-
ing its  excellency,  its  authority;  wishing  also,
and  willing  to  act  up  to  it,  but,  in  fact,  doing  no
-such  thing;  feeling  in  practice  a  lamentable  ina-


bility of  doing  his  duty,  yet  perceiving  that  it
must  be  done.  All  he  has  hitherto  attained  is  a
state  of  successive  resolutions  and  relapses.  Much
is  willed,  nothing  is  effected.  No  furtherance,  no
advance;  no  progress,  is  made  in  the  way  of  sal-
vation. He  feels  indeed  his  double  nature;  but
he  finds  that  the  law  in  his  members,  the  law  of
the  flesh,  brings  the  whole  man  into  captivity.
He  may  have  some  bettor  strivings,  but  they  are
unsuccessful.  The  result  is,  that  he  obeys  the
law  of  sin.

This  is  the  picture  which  our  apostle  contem-
plated, and  he  saw  in  it  nothing  but  misery :  "  O
wretched  man  that  I  am !"  Another  might  have
aeen  it  in  a  more  comfortable  light  He
have  hoped  that  the  will  would  be  taken  for
deed;  that  since  he  felt  in  his  mind  a  strong  ap-
probation of  the  law  of  God;  nay,  since  he  felt  a
delight  in  contemplating  it  ana  openly  professed
to  do  so ;  since  he  was  neither  ignorant  of  it,  nor
forgetful  of  it,  nor  insensible  of  its  obligation,  nor
ever  set  himself  to  dispute  ita  authority;  nay,


since  he  had  occaaonaDr  likewise  endeavoawltt
bring  himself  to  an  obedience  to  this  law,  howtrcr
unsuccessful  his  endeavours  had  been;  above  afl,
since  he  had  sincerely  deplored  and  bewailed  hie
fellings  off  from  it,  he  might  hope,  I  say,  that  hii
was  a  case  Jbr  favourable  acceptance.

St  Paul  saw  it  not  in  this  bght  Be  saw  hit
no  ground  of  confidence  or  satisfaction.  It  wis  t
state,  to  which  he  gives  no  better  name  than  "  the
body  of  death."  It  was  a  state  not  in  which  he
hoped  to  be  saved,  but  from  which  he  sought  to
be  delivered.  It  was  a  state,  in  a  word,  of  fitter-
ness  and  terror ;  drawing  from  him  expresaou
of  the  deepest  anguish  and  distress:  "  0,  wretched
man  that  I  am!  who  shall  deliver  me  from  the
body  of  this  death  r


8ERMON  XXVIL

EVIL  PROPENSITIES  ENCOUNTERED  BY  TB  AID  Of
THE  SPIRIT.

(PAST  n.)

O,  wretched  man  that  I  am!  who  shall  deiirxr
me  from  the  body  of  this  death  ?— Rom.  vilSL

He  who  has  not  felt  the  weakness  of  hisnttore,
it  'is  probable,  has  reflected  little  upon  the  subject
of  religion.  I  should  conjecture  this  to  be  the
case.

But  then,  when  men  do  feel  the  weaknesi  of
their  nature,  it  is  not  always  that  thie  conecioaft*
ness  carries  them  into  a  right  course,  bat  eone-
times  into  a  course  the  very  contrary  of  what  ii
right  They  may  see  in  it  as  hath  been  obeened.
and  many  do  see  in  it,  nothing  but  sir  excuse  and
apology  for  their  sins.  Since  it  is  acknowledged
that  we  carry  about  with  us  a  frail,  not  to  call  it
a  depraved,  corrupted  nature,  surely,  they  say,  we
shall  not  be  amenable  to  any  severities  or  extremi-
ties of  judgment  for  delinquencies  to  which  aoch
a  nature  must  ever  be  liable ;  or,  which  is  indeed
all  the  difference  there  is  between  one  man  and
another,  for  greater  degrees  or  less,  for  mare  or
fewer  of  these  delinquencies.  The  natural  nan
takes  courage  from  this  consideration.  He  finde
ease  in  it  It  is  an  opiate  to  his  fears.  It  lnlk
him  into  a  forgetfulness  of  danger,  and  of  the
dreadful  end,  if  the  danger  be  real.  Then  the
practical  consequence  is,  that  he  begins  to  relax
even  of  those  endeavours  to  obey  God  which  he
has  hitherto  exerted.  Imperfect  and  inconstant
as  these  endeavours  were  at  best,  they  become
gradually  more  languid  and  more  unrrequent,ana
more  insincere  thin  they  were  before :  his  fi»
increase  upon  him  in  the  same  proportion:  he
proceeds  rapidly  to  the  condition  of  a  confined
sinner,  either  secret  or  open ;  it  makes  no  dlrfc-
ence  as  to  his  salvation.  And  this  descent  into
the  depths  of  moral  vileneas  and  depravity  begin,
in  some  measure,  with  perceiving  and  confesanj
the  weakness  of  his  nature;  and  giving  to  thj
perception  that  most  erroneous,  that  most  fetal
turn,  the  regarding  it  as  an  excuse  for  every  thinfj
and  as  dispensing  even  with  the  self-denisle,  and
with  the  exertions  of  self-government,  which  •
man  had  formerly  thought  it  necessary  to  exercte
and  in  some  sort,  though  in  no  iun%aent  sort,  had
exercised*


SERMONS  ON  SEVERAL  SUBJECTS.


687


New,  I  ask,  Mi  this  St.  PauT$  way  of  con-
eidering  the  subject  1  Was  this  the  tarn  which
A*  gave  to  it?  Altogether  the  contrary.  Jtwaa
impossible  for  any  Christian  of  any  age,  to  be
more  deeply  impressed  with  a  sense  of  the  weak-
ness of  human  nature  than  he  was ;  or  to  express
it  more  strongly  than  he  has  done  in  the  chapter
before  us.  But,  observe ;  feeling  most  sensibly,
and  painting  moat  forcibly,  the  sad  condition  of
hianature,  he  never  alleges  it  aa  an  excuse  for
sin :  he  does  not  console  himself  with  any  each
excuse.  He  does  not  make  it  a  reason  for  setting
himself  at  rest  upon  the  subject  He  finds  no
relief  to  his  fearsin  any  such  consideration.  It  is
not  with  him  a  ground  for  expecting  salvation
on  the  contrary,  ne  sees  it  to  be  a  state  not  lead-
ing to  salvation ;  otherwise,  why  did  he  seek  so
earnestly  to  be  delivered  from  it  f

And  how  to  be  delivered  ?  that  becomes  the
next  question.  In  order  to  arrive  at  St.  Paul's
meaning  in  this  matter,  we  must  attend  with  some
degree  of  care,  not  only  to  the  text,  but  to  the
words  which  follow  it  The  24th  verse  contains
the  question.  "  Who  shall  deliver  me  from  the
body  of  this  death  T'  and  then  the  25th  verse  goes
on,  "  I  thank  God  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord."
Now  there  is  good  reason  to  believe,  that  this
25th  verse  does  not  appear  in  our  copies  as  it
ought  to  be  read.  It  n  most  probable  that  the
passage  stood  thus:  the  24th  verse  asks,  "  Who
shall  deliver  me  from  the  body  of  this  death  T
Then  the  25th  verse  answers,  "The  grace  of
God,  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord."  Instead
of  the  words  "  I  thank  God  "put  the  words  "  The
"  grace  of  God,"  and  you  will  find  the  sense  cleared
up  by  the  change  very  much.  I  say.  it  is  highly
probable  that  this  change  exhibits  what  St.  Paul
really  wrote.  In  English  there  is  no  resemblance
either  in  sound  or  writing  between  the  two  sen-
tenors,  "  I  thank  God,"  and  "  The  grace  of  God;"
but  in  the  language  in  which  the  epistle  was  writ-
ten there  is  a  very  great  resemblance.  And,  as  1
have  said,  there  is  reason  to  believe  that  in  the
transcribing  one  has  been  confounded  with  the
other.  Perhaps  the  substantial  meaning  may  be
the  same  whichever  way  you  read  the  passage  :•
bat  what  is  implied  only  in  one  way,  is  dearly
expressed  in  the  other  way.

The  Question,  then{  which  St  Paul  so  earnest-
ly and  devoutly  asks  is,  "  Who  shall  deliver  me
from  this  body  of  death  r  from  the  state  of  soul
which  I  feel,  and  which  can  only  lead  to  final  per-
dition 1  And  the  answer  to  the  question  is,  "  The
grace  of  God,  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord."
Can  a  more  weighty  question  be  asked  7  Can
an  answer  be  given  which  better  deserves  to  be
thoroughly  considered  1

The  question  is,  "Who  shall  deliver  us?"
The  answer:  "  The  grace  of  God,  through  Jesus
Christ  our  Lord."  The  "  grace  of  Goo?'  means
the  favour  of  God:  at  present,  therefore,  the  an-
swer stands  in  general  terms.  We  are  only
informed,  that  we  are  rescued  from  this  state  of
moral  difficulty,  of  deep  religious  distress,  by  the
favour  of  God.  through  Jesus  Christ  It  remains
to  be  gathered  from  what  follows,  in  what  parti-
cularly this  grace  or  favour  consists.  St  Paul
having  asked  the  question,  and  given  the  answer
in  general  terms,  proceeds  to  enlarge  upon  the
answer  in  these  words :— "  There  is  therefore
now  no  condemnation  to  them  who  are  in  Christ
Jesus,  who  walk  not  titer  the  flesh  but  after  the


Spirit"  There  is  now  no  condemnation :  but  of
wnom,  and  to  whom,  is  this  spoken  1  It  is  to
them  who  first  are  in  Christ  Jesus ;  who.  second*
ly,  walk  not  after  the  flesh;  who,  thirdly,  walk
after  the  Spirit

And  whence  arises  this  alteration  and  improve*
ment  in  our  condition  and  our  hopes ;  this  exemp-
tion, or  rather  deliverance,  from  the  ordinary  state
of  man  1  .St.  Paul  refers  us  to  the  cause.  "  The
law  of  the  Spirit  of  life  in  Christ  Jesus  hath  made
me  free  from  the  law  of  sin  and  death."  Which
words  can  hardly  bear  any  other  signification  than .
this,  viz.  "  That  the  aid  and  operation  of  God's
Spirit,  given  through  Jesus  Christ,  hath  subdued
the  power  which  sin  had  obtained,  and  once
exercised  over  me."  With  this  interpretation
the  whole  sequel  of  St  Paul's  reasoning  agrees.
Every  sentence  almost  that  follows  illustrates  the
interpretation,  and  proves  it  to  be  the  true  one*
With  what}  but  with  the  operation  and  the  co-
operation of  the  Spirit  of  God,  as  of  a  real,  effi-
cient, powerful,  active  Being,  can  such  expressions
as  the  following  be  made  to  suit? — "  If  so  be  that
the  Spirit  of  God  dwell  in  you."—"  If  any  man
have  not  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  he  is  none  of  his."
— "  If  the  Spint  of  him  that  raised  up  Jesus  from
the  dead  dwell  in  you."—"  By  his  Spirit  that
dwelleth  in  you." — "  Ye  haye  received  the  Spirit
of  adoption/'—"  The  Spirit  itself  heareth  witness
with  our  spirit"  All  which  expressions  are  found
in  the  eighth  chapter,  namely,  the  chapter  follow*
ing  the  text,  and  all,  indeed,  within  the  compass
of  a  few  verses.  These  passages  either  assert
or  assume  the  feet,  namely,  the  existence  and
agency  of  such  a  Spirit ;  its  agency,  I  mean,  in
and  upon  the  human  soul.  It  is  by  the  aid,  there-
fore, of  this  Spirit,  that  the  deliverance  so  earnestly
sought  for  is  effected ;  a  deliverance  represented
as  absolutely  necessary  to  be  effected  in  some  way
or  other.  And  it  is  also  represented  as  one  of
the  grand  benefits  of  the  Christian  dispensation,
"  What  the  law  could  not  do  in  that  it  was  weak
through  the  flesh}  God  sending  his  own  Son  in
the  likeness  of  sinful  flesh,  and  for  sin,  con-
demned sin  in  the  flesh,  that  toe  righteousness  of
the  law  might  be  fulfilled  in  us,  who  walk  not
after  the  flesh,  but  after  the  Spirit"  Which  pas-
sage I  expound  thus :  A  mere  law,  that  is,  a  rule
merely  telling  us  what  we  ought  to  do,  without
enabling  us,  or  affording  us  any  help  or  aid  in
doing  it,  is  not  calculated  for  such  a  nature  as
ours ;  "  it  is  weak  through  the  flesh ;"  it  is  inef-
fectual by  reason  of  our  natural  infirmities.  Then
what  the  law,  or  a  mere  rule  of  rectitude,  (for
that  is  what  any  law,  as  such  is,)  could  not
do,  was  done  under  the  Christian  dispensation ;
and  how  done  1  The  righteousness  of  the  law,
that  is.  the  righteousness  which  the  law  dictated,
and  which  it  aimed,  as  far  as  it  could,  to  procure
and  produce,  is  fulfilled  in  us,  who  walk  not  after
the  flesh,  but  after  the  Spirit ;  is  actually  produced
and  procured  in  us,  who  live  under  the  influence
and  direction  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  By  this  Holy
Spirit  we  have  that  assistance  which  the  law
could  not  impart,  and  without  which,  as  a  mere
rule,  though  ever  so  good  and  right  a  rule,  it  was
weak  ana  insufficient,  forasmuch  as  it  had. not
force  or  strength  sufficient  to  produce  obedience
in  those  who  acknowledged  its  authority.

To  communicate  this  so  much  wanted  i


ance,  was  one  end  and  effect  of  Christ's  coming.
So  it  is  intimated  by  St  Paul,  "What  the  law


SERMONS  ON  SEVERAL  SUBJECTS.


could  not  do,  in  that  it  was  weak  through  tho
flesh,  God  did ;  that  is,  God  "  sending  his  own
Son  in  the  likeness  of  sinful  flesh  and  for  sin,"
namely,  sending  him  by  reason  or  on  account  of
sin,  "condemned  sin  in  the  fle*h ;"  vouchsafed,  thai
is,  spiritual  aid  and  ability,  by  which  aid  and
ability  sin  and  the  power  of  sin  might  be  effec-
tually opposed,  encountered,  and  repelled.


SERMON  XXVIII.

THE  AID  OF  THE  SPIRIT  TO  BE  SOUGHT  AND
PRESERVED  BT  PRAYER.

(PART  in.)

O,  wretched  man  that  lam  !  who  •hall  deliver  me
from  the  body  oflhia  death  ?— Rom.  vii.  24.

I  p  it  be  doctrinally  true,  that  man  in  his  ordi-
nary state,  in  that  state  at  least  in  which  great
numbers  And  themselves,  is  in  a  deplorable  condi-
tion, a  condition  which  ought  to  be  a  subject  to
him  of  great  and  bitter  lamentation,  viz.  that  his
moral  powers  are  ineffectual  for  his  duty;  able,
perhaps,  on  most  occasions,  to  perceive  and  ap-
prove of  the  rule  'of  right ;  able,  perhaps,  to  will
it;  able,  perhaps,  to  set  on  foot  unsuccessful,  frus-
trated, and  defeated  endeavours  after  that  will,
but  by  no  means  able  to  pursue  or  execute  it : —
if  it  be  also  true,  that  strength  and  assistance
may  and  can  be.  communicated  to  this  feeble  na-
ture, and  that  it  is  by  the  action  of  the  Holy
Spirit  upon  the  soul,  that  it  is  so  communicated;
Wit  with  this  aid  and  assistance  sin  may  be  suc-
cessfully encountered,  and  such  a  course  of  duty
maintained  as  may  render  us  accepted  in  Christ;
and  further,  that  to  impart  the  above  described
assistance  is  one  of  the  ends  of  Christ's  coming,
and  one  of  the  operations  of  his  love  towards  man-
kind:— if,  I  say,  these  propositions  be  doctrinally
true,  then  follow  from  them  these  three  practical
rules :  first,  That  we  are  to  pray  sincerely,  earn-
estly, and  incessantly  for  this  assistance ;  secondly,
That  by  so  doing  we  are  to  obtain  it;  thirdly,
That  being  obtained,  we  are  to  yield  ourselves  to
its  agency,  to  be  obedient  to  its  dictates.

First:  We  are  to  pray  sincerely,  earnestly,
and  incessantly,  for  this  assistance'.  A  funda-
mental, and,  as  it  seems  to  me,  an  insurmounta-
ble text,  upon  this  head,  is  our  Saviour's  declara-
tion Luke  xi.  13,—"  If  ye,  being  evil,  know  how
to  give  good  gifts  onto  your  children,  how  much
more  shall  your  heavenly  Father  give  the  Holy
Spirit  to  them  that  ask  him  V  This  declaration,
besides  expressing  (which  was  its  primary  object)
God's  benignant,  prompt,  and  merciful  disposition
towards  us;  which  here,  as  in  other  places,  our
Saviour  compares  with  the  disposition  of  a  parent
towards  his  children;  beside  this,  the  text  un-
doubtedly assumes  the  feet  of  there  being  a  Holy
Spirit,  of  its  being  the  gift  of  Gbd,  of  its  being
given  to  them  that  ask  him;  that  these  things  are
all  realities;  a  real  spiritual  assistance,  really
given,  and  given  to  prayer.  But  let  it  be  well
observed,  that  whensoever  the  Scripture  speaks
of  prayer,  whensoever  it  uses  that  term,  or  other
terms,  equivalent  to  it,  it  means  prayer,  sincere
and  earnest;  in  the  full  and  proper  sense  of  these
words,  prayer  proceeding  from  the  heart  and  soul.


It  does  not  mean  any  paxtiraav  form  of  wads
whatever;  it  does  not  mean  any  service  of  the
lips,  any  utterance  or*  pronunciation  of  prayer,
merely  as  such,  bat  supplication  actually  and
truly  proceeding  from  the  heart  Prayer  may  be
solemn  without  being  sincere.  Every  decency,
every  propriety,  every  visible  mark  and  token  of
prayer  may  be  present,  yet  the  heart  not  engaged.
This  is  the  requisite  which  must  make  prayer
availing ;  this  is  the  requisite  indeed  which  must
make  it  that  which  the  Scripture  means  whenever
it  speaks  of  prayer.  Every  ootward  act  of  wor-
ship, without  this  participation*  of  the  heart,  fail*,
not  because  men  do  not  pray  sincerely,  but  be-
cause, iri  Scripture  sense,  they  do  not  pray  at  all.

If  these  qualities  of  internal  seriousness  and  im-
pression belong  to  prayer,  whenever  prayer  k
mentioned  in  Scripture,  they  seem  more  peculiarly
essential  in  a  case,  and  for  a  blessing,  purely  and
strictly  spiritual.  We  must  pray  with  the  spirit,
at  least  when  we  pray  for  spiritual  succour.

Furthermore ;  there  is  good*  authority  in  Scrip-
tore,  which  it  would  carry  us  too  widely  from  our
subject  to  state  at  present,  for  persevering  in
prayer,  even  when  long  unsuccessrul.  Peneter*
anee  in  unsuccessful  prayer  is  one  of  the  doctrine!
and  of  the  lessons  of  the  New  Testament.

But  again :  We  must  pray  for  the  Spirit  ear-
nestly, imean  with  jl  degree  of  earneatncsi  pro-
portioned to  the  magnitude  of  the  request.  The
earnestness  with  which  we  pray  will  always  be  in
proportion  to  our  sense,  knowledge,  and  consriout-
ness  of  the  importance  of  the  thing  which  we
ask.  This  consciousness  is  the  source  sod  win- ,
ciple  of  earnestness  in  prayer ;  and  in  this,  I  fear,
we  are  greatly  deficient.  We  do  not  possess  or
feel  it  in  the  manner  in  which  we  ought;  and  we
are  deficient  upon  the  subject  of  spuitual  ass*
anee  most  particularly.  1  fear  that  many  under-
stand and  reflect  little  upon  the  importance  of
what  they  are  about,  upon  the  exceedingly  great
consequence  of  what  they  are  asking,  when  they
pray  to  God,  as  we  do  in  oar  liturgy,  "to  dean*
the  thoughts  of  our  hearts  by  the  inspiration  of
his  Holy  Spirit ;"  "  to  make  clean  our  hearts  with-
in us ;"  "  not  to  take  his  Holy  Spirit  from  »;"  u  '<>
§ive  us  increase  of  grace ;"  "  to  grant  that  his  Holt
pint  may  in  all  things  direct  and  rule  our  hearts.

These  are  momentous  petitions,  little  as  we
may  perceive,  or  think,  or  account  of  them  at  the
time.  It  has  been  truly  said,  that  we  are  hardly
ever  certain  of  praying  aright,  except  when  we
pray  for  the  Spirit  of  God.  When  we  prayfoj
temporal  blessings,  we  do  not  know,  though  Gal
does,  whether  we  ask  what  is  really  for  our  good,
when  we  ask  for  the  assistance  and  saflctincat*»
of  God's  Spirit  in  the  work  and  warfare  of  religion,
we  ask  for  that  which  by  its  very  nature  is  £""<
and  which  without  oar  great  fault,  will  be  good
to  us.  .

But,  secondly;  We  must  obtain  it  Ood  is
propitious.  You  hear  that  he  has  promised  it »
prayer,  to  prayer  really  and  truly  such ;  to  priTer,
viz.  issuing  from  the  heart  and  soul ;  for  no  other
is  ever  meant  We  are  suppliants  to  our  Maker
for  various  and  continual  blessings;  ^^"^
ease,  it  may  be  for  prosperity  and  success.  There
is,  as  hath  already  been  observed,  some  degree  of
uncertainty  in  all  these  cases,  whether  wi ia»
what  is  fit  and  proper  to  be  granted,  or  even  w»
if  granted,  would  dons  good.  Tliere  is  tluaWJ
wise  farther  to  be  observed,  that  they  are  whit,  n


SERMONS  ON  SEVERAL  SUBJECTS.


569


such  be  the  pleural*  of  God,  we  can  do  without.
But  how  incapable  we  are  of  doing  without  God's
Spirit,  of  proceeding  in  oar  spiritual  course  upon
our  own  strength  and  our  own  resources,  of  final-
ly accomplishing  the  work  of  salvation  without  it,
the  strong  description  which  is  given  by  St.  Paul
may  convince  us,  if  our  own  experience  had  not
convinced  us  before.  Many  of  us,  a  large  majori-
ty of  us,  either  require,  or  have  required,  a  great
change,  a  moral  regeneration.  This  is  to  be  .ef-
fectuated by  the  aid  of  God's  Spirit  Vitiated
hearts  will  not  change  themselves ;  not  easily,  not
frequently,  not  naturally,  perhaps,  not  possibly.
Yet,  "without  holiness  no  man  shall  see  God."
How  then  are  the  unholy  to  become  holy  %  Holi-
ness is  a  thing  of  the  heart  and  soul.  It  is  not  a
few  forced,  constrained  actions,  though  good  as
actions,  which  constitute  holiness.  It  must  reside
within  us ;  it  is  a  disposition  of  soul.  To  acquire,
therefore,  that  which  is  not  yet  acquired,  to  change
that  which  is  not  yet  changed,  to  go  to  the  root
of  the  malady,  to  cleanse  and  purify  the  inside  of
(he  cup,  the  foulness  of  our  mind,  is  a  work  of
the  Spirit  of  God  within  us.  Nay,  more :  many,,
as  the  Scripture  most  significantly  expresses  it,
are  dead  in  sins  and  trespasses ;  not  only  commit-
ting sins  and  trespasses,  but  dead  in  them :  that  is,
as  insensible  of  their  condition  under  them,  as  a
dead  man  is  insensible  of  his  condition.  Where
this  is  the  case,  the  sinner  must,  in  the  first  in-
stance, be  roused  and  quickened  to  a  sense  of  his
condition,  of  his  danger,  his  fate;  in  a  word,  he
must  by  some  means  or  other  be  brought  to  feel  a
strong  compunction.  This  is  also  an  office  for
the  Spirit  of  God.  "  You  hath  he  quickened,  who
ware  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins,"  Eph.  ii.  1.
"  Awake,  thou  that  sleepest,  and  arise  from  the
dead,  and  Christ  shall  give  thee  light,"  Eph.  v.  14.
Whether,  therefore,  we  be  amongst  the  dead  in
sin,  or  whether  we  be  of  the  number  of  those  with
whom,  according  to  St  Paul's  description,  to  witl
is  present,  but  how  to  perform  that  which  is  good
they  find  not ;  who,  though  they  approve  the  law
of  God,  nay  delight  in  it,  after  the  inward  man,
that  is,  in  the  answers  of  their  conscience,  are
nevertheless  brought  into  'captivity  to  the  law  of
sin  which  is  in  their  members ;  carnal,  sold  under
sin ;  doing  what  they  allow  not,  what  they  hate ;
doing  not  the  good  which  they  would,  but  the
evil  which  they  would  not ;  whichever  of  these  be
our  wretched  estate,  for  such  the  apostle  pro-
nounces it  to  be,  the  grace  and  influence  of  God's
Spirit  must  be  obtained  in  order  to  rescue  and  de-
liver us  from  it ;  and  the  sense  of  this  want  and
of  this  necessity  lies  at  the  root  of  our  devotions,
when  directed  to  this  object

To  those  who  are  in  a  better  state  than  what
has  been  here  described,  little  need  be  said,  be-
cause the  very  supposition  of  their  being  in  a  bet-
ter state  includes  that  earnest  and  devout  applica-
tion by  prayer,  for  the  continual- aid,  presence,  and
indwelling  of  God's  Holy  Spirit,  which  we  state
to  be  a  duty  of  the  Christian  religion.

But,  thirdly,  The  assistance  of  God's  Spirit
being  obtained,  we  are  to  yield  ourselves  to  its  di-
rection ;  to  consult,  attend,  and  listen  to  its  dictates,
suggested  to  us  through  the  admonitions  of  our
conscience.  The-terms  of  Scripture  represent  the
Spirit  of  God  as  an  assisting,  not  a  forcing  power ;
as  not  suspending  our  own  powers,  but  enabling
them;  as  imparting  strength  and  faculty  for  our
reugious  work,  if  we  will  use  them;  but  whether


we  will  use  them  or  not,  still  depending  upon  our-
selves. Agreeably  hereunto  St.  Paul,  you  have
heard,  asserts,  that  there  is  no  condemnation  to
them  who  walk  not  after  the  flesh  but  after  the
Spirit.  The  promise  is  not  to  them  who  have
the  Spirit,  but  to  them  who  walk  after  the  Spirit
To  walk  after  the  flesh,  is  to  fellow  wherever  the
impulses  of  sensuality  and  selfishness  lead  us ;
which  is  a  voluntary  act.  To  walk  after  the  Spi-
rit, is  steadily  and  resolutely  to  obey  good  motions
within  us,  whatever  they  cost  us;  whicn  also  is  a
voluntary  act  All  the  language  of  this  remark-
able chapter  (Rom.  vii.)  proceeds  in  the  same
strain ;  namely,  that  after  the  Spirit  of  God  is
given,  it  remains  and  rests  with  ourselves  whether
we  avail  ourselves  of  it  or  not.  "  If  ye  through
the  Spirit  do  mortify  the  deeds  of  the  flesh,  ye  shall
live."  It  is  through  the  Spirit  that  we  are  ena-
bled to  mortify  the  deeds  or  the  flesh.  But  still,
whether  we  mortify  them  or  not,  is  our  ast,  be-
cause it  is  made  a  subject  of  precept  and  exhorta-
tion so  to  do.  Health  is  God's  gih,  but  what  use
we  will  make  of  it  is  our  choice.  Bodily  strength
is  God's  gift,  but  of  what  advantage  it  shall  be  to
us  depends  upon  ourselves.  Even  so  the  higher
gift  of  the  Spirit  remains  a  gift,  the  value  of  which
will  be  exceedingly  great,  will  be  little,  will  be
none,  will  be  even  an  increase  of  guilt  and  con-
demnation, according  as  it  is  *PPued  and  obeyed,
or  neglected  and  withstood.  Tne  fourth  chapter
of  Ephesians,  verse  30,  is  a  warning  voice  upon
this  subject:  « Grieve  not  the  Spirit  of  God;"
therefore  he  may  be  grieved :  being  given,  he  may
be  rejected ;  rejected,  he  may  be  withdrawn.

St.  Paul,  Rom.  viii.,  represents  the  gift  and  pos-
session of  the  Spirit  in  these  words:  "  Ye  are  not
in  the  flesh,  but  in  the  Spirit,  if  so  be  that  the
Spirit  of  God  dwell  in  you  :*'  and  its  efficacy,
where  it  is  efficacious,  in  the  following  magnificent
terms:  "If  the  Spirit  of  him  that  raised  Christ
from  the  dead  dwell  in  you,. he  that  raised  up
Christ  from  the  dead  shall  also  quicken  your  mor-
tal bodies,  by  his  Spirit  that  dwelleth  in  you."
What,  nevertheless,  is  the  practical  inference
therefrom  stated  in  the  very  next  words'?  "There-
fore, brethren,  we  are  debtors  not  to  the  flesh,  to
live  after  the  flesh;  for  if  ye  live  after  the  flesh,  ye
shall  die:"  consequently  it  is  still  possible,  and
plainly  conceived,  and  supposed,  and  stated  to  be
so,  even  after  this  communication  of  the  Spirit,  to
live,  notwithstanding,  according  to  the  flesh;  and
still  true,  that,  "  if  ye  live  after  the  flesh,  ye  shall
die."  "  We  are  debtors ;"  our  obligation,  our  duty
imposed  upon  us  by  this  gift  of  the  Spirit,  is  no
longer  to  live  after  the  flesh;  but,  on  the  contrary,
through  the  Spirit  so  given,  to  do  that  which,
without  it,  we  could  not  have  done,  to  "  mortify
the  deeds  of  the  body-*  ««--*"•--•-—-
gestions  of  the  f

as  are  led  1  „  m  w

themselves  to  its  guidanoe  and  direction,  "  they
are  the  sons  of  God."

To  conclude  the  subject :  The  difference  be-
tween those  who  succeed,  and  those  who  foil  in
their  Christian  course,  between  those  who  obtain,
and  those  who  do  not-obtain  salvation,  is  this:
They  may  both  feel  equally  the  weakness  of  their
nature,  the  existence  and  the  power  of  evil  pro-
pensities within  them ;  but  the  former,  by  praying
with  their  whole  heart  and  soul,  and  that  perse-
▼eringly,  for  spiritual  assistance,  obtain  it;  ans%
by  the  aid  so  obtained,  are  enabled  to  withstand
50


c,  we  couia  not  nave  none,  w  -  morwy
i  of  the  body  .?  Thus  following  the  su£
of  the  Spirit,  ye  shall  live ;  for  "  as  many
I  by  the  Spint  of  God,"  as  many  as  yM


890


BEftMONS  OK  SEVERAL  SUBJECTS*


and  do,  In  foci,  withstand,  their  evil
the  latter  aink  under  them.  I  will  not  say  that  all
are  comprised  under  this  deacription :  for  neither
are  all  included  in  St  Paul's  account  of  the  matter,
from  which  ojir  discourse  set  out;  but  I  think,  that
it  represents  the  general  condition  of  Christians
as  to  their  spiritual  state,  and  that  the  greatest
part  of  those  who  read  this  discourse,  will  find,
that  they  belong  to  one  aide  or  other  of  the  alter-
native here  stated.


SERMON  XXIX.

THE  DESTRUCTION  OP  THE  CAttLANITEfl.

fib  Joshua  emote  all  the  country  of  the  MIU,  and
of  the  south.,  and  of  the  vale,  and  of  the  springe,
and  all  their  kings :  he  left  .none  remaining,
but  utterly  destroyed  all  that  breathed,  as  the
Lord  God  of  Israel  commanded.-- Joshua  x.  40.

■  I  hate  known  serious  and  well-disposed  Chris-
tiana much  affected  with  the  accounts  which  are
delivered  in  the  Old  Testament,  of  the  Jewish
wars  and  dealings  with  the  inhabitants  of  Canaan.
From  the  Israelites'  first  setting  foot  in  that  ooun-

S,  to  their  complete  establishment  in  it,  which
es  up  the  whole  book  of  Joshua  and  part  of  the
book  of  Judges,  we  read,  it  must  be  confessed,  of
massacres  and  desolations  unlike  what  are  prac-
tised now-a-days  between  nations  at  war,  of  cities
and  districts  laid  waste,  of  the  inhabitants  being
totally  destroyed,  and  this,  as  it  is  alleged  in  the
history,  by  the  authority  and  command  of  Al-
mighty God.  Some  have  been  induced  to  think
such  accounts  incredible,  inasmuch  as  such  con-
duct could  never,  they  say,  be  authorised  by  the
good  and  merciful  Governor  of  the  universe.

I  intend  in  the  following  discourse  to  consider
this  matter  so  for  as  to*  show  that  these  transac-
tions were  calculated  for  a  beneficial  purpose,  and
for  the  general  advantage  of  mankind,  and  being
so  calculated,  were  not  inconsistent  either  with
the  justice  of  God,  or  with  the  usual  proceedings
•/divine :J


Now  the  first  and  chief  thing  to  be  observed  is,
that  the  nations  of  Canaan  were  destroyed  for
their  wickedness.  In  proof  of  this  point  I  pro-
duce the  18th  chapter  of  Leviticus,  tne  24th  and
the  following  verses.  Moses  in  this  chapter  ."after
laving  down  prohibitions  against  brutal  and  abo-
minable vices,  proceeds  in  the  34th  verse  thus:
"  Defile  not  yourselves  in  any  of  these  things,  for
in  all  these  tne  nations  are  defiled  which  I  cast
out  before  you,  and  the  land  is  defiled ;  therefore  I
do  visit  the  iniquity  thereof  upon  it,  and  the  land
itself  vomiteth  out  her  inhabitants.  Ye  shall
therefore  keep  my  statutes  and  my  judgments,
and  shall  not  commit  any  of  these  abominations,
neither  any  of  your  own  nation,  nor  any  stranger
that  sojourneth  among  jrou:  for  all  these  abomi-
nations have  the  men  of  the  land  done  which  were
before  you,  and  the  land  is  defiled;  that  the  land
▼omit  not  you  out  also,  when  ye  defile  it,  as  it
vomited  out  the  nations  that  were  before  you.
For  whosoever  shall  commit  any  of  these  abomi-
nationSj  even  the  souls  that  commit  them  shall  be
cut  oft  from  amongst  their  people.  Therefore
shall  ye  keep  my  ordinances  that  ye  commit  not
•ny  of  these  abominable  customs  which  were  con>


mitted  before  you:  and  that  you  b^nlAliotvonnelvBi
therein."  Now  the  tacts  disclosed  in  this  paaaage,
are, for  our  present  purpoae.extremely  material
and  extremely  satis&ctory.  First,  The  pafsagB
testifies  the  principal  point,  namely,  that  the  Ca-
naanites  were  the  wicked  people  we  represent
them  to  be;  and  that  this  point  does  not  rest  upon
supposition,  but  upon  proof:  in  particular,  the
following  words  contain  an  express  assertion
the  guilt  of  that  people.  "  In  all  these  the  nano
are  defiled  which  I  cast  out  before  you;  for
these  abominations  have  the  men  of  the  had
done"  -Secondly,  The  form  and  Cum  of  expres-
sion seems  to  show  that  these  detestable  pncticei
were  general  among  them,  and  habitual:  they  are
said  to  be  abominable  customs  which  were  com-
mitted. Now  the  word  custom  is  not  applicable
to  a  few  single,  or  extraordinary  instances,  talta
usage  and  to  national  character;  which  aim
that  not  only  the  practice,  but  the  sense  and  no-
tion of  morality  was  corrupted  among  them, «
lost;  and  it  is  observable,  that  these  practice*,  m
for  from  being  checked  by  their  religion,  formed  a
part  of  it  They  are  described  not  onlv  under
the  name  of  abominations,  but  of  abominationi
which  they  have  done  unto  their  gods.  What  a
state  of  national  morals  must  that  have  been!
Thirdly,  The  passage  before  us  positively  and  di-
rectly asserts,  that  it  was  for  these  sins  that  the
nations  of  Canaan  were  destroyed.  Thia,  iooj
judgment,  is  the  important  part  of  the  inquiry.
And  what  do  the  words  under  consideration  de-
clare 1  "In  all  these,  namely,  the  odious  and  bru-
tal vices  which  had  been  spoken  o£  the  nation
are  defiled  which  I  cast  out  before  you;  and  tJ»
land  is  defiled :  therefore  I  do  visit  the  iniquity
thereof  upon  it"  This  is  the  reason  and  case
of  the  calamities  which  1  hring  on  it  The  land
itself  vomiteth  out  her  inhabitants.  The  very
land  is  sack  of  its  inhabitants;  of  their  odious  and
brutah  practices ;  of  their  corruption  and  wicked-
ness. This,  and  no  other,  was  the  reason  forde*
atroying  them :  this,  and  no  other,  is  the  ieas*
here  alleged.  It  was  not,  as  hath  been  imagined,
to  make  way  for  tb^  IsjBaelUes  j  nor  was  it  aunnry
for  their  idolatry.

It  appears  to  me  extremely  probable,  that  idola-
try in  these  times  led,  in  ail  countries,  to  there*
here  described;  and  also  that  the  detestation,
threats,  and  severities,  expressed  against  idolatry
in  the  Old  Testament,  were  not  against  idolatry
simply,  or  considered  as  an  erroneous  religion,
but  against  the  abominable  crimes  which  usually
accompanied  it  I  think  it  quite  certain  that  U»
case  was  so  in  the  nations  of  Canaan.  Fourthly,
It  appears  from  the  passage  before  us,  and  what
is  surely  of  great  consequence  to  the  question,  that
God's  abhorrence  and  God's  treatment  of  the*
crimes*  were  impartial,  without  distmctkavand
without  respect  of  nations  or  persons.  The  «J*
which  point  out  the  divine  impartiality  are  the*
in  which  Moses  warns  the  Israelites  against  fry-
ing into  any  of  the  like  wicked  courses ;  "  that  U»
land,"  says  he,  "  cast  not  you  out  also,  when  TflO
defile  it,  as  it  cast  out  the  nations  that  were  beJae)
you ;  for  whoever  shall  commit  any  of  these  abo-
minations, even  the  souls  that  commit  them,  nail
be  cut  off  from  among  their  people."  The  Jew
are  sometimes  called  the  chosen  and  fi\vouredpa>
pleofGod;  and,  in  a  certain  m^^****?
purposes  they  were  so:  yet  is  this  very  paopj
Urti*  in  thie  place,  and  in  other  places,  over  a*


SERMONS  ON  SEVERAL  SUBJECTS.


691


over  again  reminded,  that  if  they  followed  the
name  practices-,  they  most  expect  the  same  fate;
"Ye  shall  not  walk  in  the  way  of  the  nations
which  1  cast  out  before  yon;  for  they  committed
all  those  things,  and  therefore  I  abhorred  them :
as  the  nations  which  the  Lord  destroyed  before
your  fooa,  so  shall  ye  perish:  because  ye  were' not
obedient  unto  the  voice  of  the  Lord  your  God."

What  farther  'proves  not  only  the  justice  but
the  clemency  of  God,  his  lon£-suffering,  and  that
it  was  the  incorrigible  wickedness  of  those  nations,
which  at  last  drew  down  upon  them  their  destruc-
tion, is,  that  he  suspended,  as  we  may  so  say,  the
stroke,  till  their  wickedness  was  come  to  such  a
pitch,  that  they  were  no  longer  to  be  endured.
In  the  15th  chapter  of  Genesis.  God  tells  Abra-
ham, that  his  descendants  of  me  fourth  genera-
tion, should  return  into  that  country,  and  not  be-
fore; "  for  the  iniquity,"  saith  he, "  of  the  Amorites
is  not  yet  lull."  It  should  seem  from  hence,  that
so  Ions  as  their  crimes  were  confined  within  any
bounds,  they  were  permitted  to  remain  in  their
country.  We  conclude,  therefore,  and  we  are
well  warranted  in  concluding,  that  the  Canaanites
were  destroyed  on  account  of  their  wickedness.
And  that  wickedness  was  perhaps  aggravated  by
their  having  had  among  them  Abraham,  Isaac,
and  Jacob— examples  of  a  purer  religion  and  a
better  conduct;  still  more  by  the  judgments  of
God  so  remarkably  set  before  them  in  the  history
of  Abrahsun's  family ;  particularly  by  the  destruc-
tion of  Sodom  and  Gomorrah:  At  least  these
things  prove  that  they  were  not  without  warding,
and  that  God  did  not  leave  himself  without  wit-
ness among  them.

Now,  w/nen  God,  for  the  wickedness  of  a  peo-
ple, sends,  an  earthquake,  or  a  fire,  or  a  plague
among  them,  there  is  no  complaint  of  injustice,
especially  when  the  calamity  is  known,  or  ex-
pressly declared  beforehand,  to  be  inflicted  for  the
wickedness  of  such  people.  It  is  rather  regarded
as  an  act  of  exemplary  penal  justice,  arid,  as  such,
consistent  with  the  character  of  the  moral  Gover-
nor of  the  universe.  The  objection,  therefore,  is
not  to  the  Canaanitish  nations  being  destroyed ;
(for  when  their  national  wickedness  &  considered,
and  when  that  is  expressly  stated  as  the  cause  or
their  destruction,  the  dispensation,  however  se-
vere, will  not  be  questioned ;)  but  the  objection  is
solely  to  'the  manner  of  destroying  them.  I  mean
there  is  nothing  but  the  manner  left  to  be  objected
to:  their  wickedness  accounts  for  the  thing  itself.
To  which  objection  it  may  be  replied,  that  if  the
thing  itself  be  iust,  the  manner  is  of  little  signifi-
cation; of  little  signification  even  to  the  sufferers
themselves:  For  where  is  the  great  difference,
even  to  them,  whether  they  were  destroyed  by  an
earthquake,  a  pestilence,  a  famine,  or  by  the  hands
of  an  enemy  1  Where  is  the  difference,  even  to
our  imperfect  apprehensions  of  divine  justice,  pro-
vided it  be;  and  is  known  to  be, 'for  their  wicked-
ness that  they  are  destroyed  7  -But  this  destruc-
tion, you  say,  confounded  the  innocent  with  the
guilty.  The  sword  of  Joshua  and  of  the  Jews  spared
neither  women  nor  children.  Is  it  not  the  same
with  all  other  national  visitations?  Would  not  an
earthquake,  or  a  fire,  or  a  plague,  or  a  famine
amongst  them  have  done  the  samel  Even  in  an
ordinary  and  natural  death  the  same  thing^  hap-
pens. God  takes  away  the  life  be  lends,  without
regard,  that  we  can  perceive,  to  age,  or  sex,  or
character. Bat,  after  all,  proinj«5W)us  massacres,


the  burning  of  cities,  the  laying  waste  of  coun-
tries,, are  things  dreadful  to  reflect  upon.  Who
doubts  it?  so  are  all  the  judgments  of  Almighty
God.  The  effect,  in  whatever  way  it  shows  it-
self)-must  necessarily  be  tremendous,  when  the
Lord,  as  the  Psalmist  expresses  it.  "moveth  out
of  .his  place  to  punish  the  wicked/'  But  it  ought
to  satisfy  us,  at  least  this  is  the  point  upon  which
we  ought  to  rest  and  fix  our  attention— that  it  was
for  excessive,  wilful,  and  forewarned  wickedness,
that  all  this  befel  them,  and  that  it  is  expressly  so
declared  in  the  history  which  recites  it

But  further:  If  punishing  them  by  the  hands]
of  the  Israelites,  rather  than  by  a  pestilence,  an
earthquake,  a  fire,  or  any  such  calamity,  be  still
an  objection,  we  may  perceive,  I  think,  some  rea-
sons for  this  method  or  punishment  in  preference
to  any  other  whatever;  always,  however,  bearing
in  our  mind,  that  the  question  is  not  concerning
the  justice  of  the  punishment,  but  the  mode  of  it.
It  is  well  known  that  the  people  of  those  ages
were  affected  by  no  proof  of  the  power  of  the
gods  arnica  they  worshipped  so  deeply,  as  by
their  giving  them  victory  in  war.  It  was  by  this
species*  of  evidence  that  the  superiority  of  their
own  gods  above  the  gods  of  the  nations  which  they
conquered  was  in  their  opinion  evinced.  This
being  the  actual  persuasion  which  then  prevailed
in  the  world,  no  matter  whether  well  or  ill  founded,
how  were  the  neighbouring  nations,  for  whose  ad*
monition  this  dreadful  example  was  intended,  how
were  they  to  be  convinced  of  the  supreme  power
of  the  God  of  Israel  above  the  pretended  gods  of
other  nations,  and  of  the  righteous  character  of
Jehovah,  that  is  of  his  abhorrence  of  the  vices
which  prevailed  in  the  land  of  Canaan  1  how,  1
say,  were  they  to  be  convinced  so  well,  or  at  all
indeed,  as  by  enabling  the  Israelites,  whose  God
he  was  known  and  acknowledged  to  be,  to  conquer
under  his  banner,  and  drive  out  before  them  those
who  resisted  the  execution  of  that  commission
with  which -the  Israelites  declared  themselves  to
be  invested — the  expulsion  and  extermination  of
the  Canaanitish  nations  1  This  convinced  sur-
rounding countries,  and  all  who  were  observers  or
spectators  of  what  passed ;  first,  That  the  God  of
Israel  was  a  real  God;  secondly.  That  the  gods
which  other  nations  worshipped  were  either  no
gods,  or  had  no  power  against  the  God  of  Israel;
and,  thirdly,  That  it  was  he,  and  he  alone,  who
possessed  both  the  power  and  the  will  to  punish,
to  destroy,  and  to  exterminate  from  before  his
race,  both  nations  and  individuals  who  gave  them-
selves up  to  the  crimes  and  wickedness  for  which
the  Canaanites  were  notorious.  Nothing  of  this
sort  would  have  appeared,  or  with  the  same  evi-
dence however,  from  an  earthquake,  or  a  plague,
or  any  natural  calamity.  These  might  not  have
been  attributed  to  divine  agency  at  all,  or  not  to
the  interposition  of  the  God  of  Israel.

Another  reason  which  made  this  destruction
both  more  necessary  and  more  general  than  it
would  have  otherwise  been,  wss  the  consideration,
that  if  any  of  the  old  inhabitants  were  left,  they
would  prove  a  snare  to  those  who  succeeded  them
in  the  country ;  would  draw  and  seduce  them  by
degrees  into  the  vices  and  corruptions  which  pre-
vailed amongst  themselves.  Vices  of  all  kinds,  but
vices  most  particularly  of  the  licentious  kind,  are
astonishingly  infectious.  A  little  leaven  feaven-
eth  the  whole  lump.  A  small  number  of  persona
addicted  to  them,  and  allowed  to  practise  them


699


SERMONS  ON  SEVERAL  SUBJECTS.


with  impunity  or  encouragement,  will  spread
them  through  the  whole  mass.  This  reason  is
formally  and  expressly  assigned,  not  simply  for
the  punishment,  but  for  the  extent  to  which  it
was  carried,  namely,  extermination.  "Thou  shall
utterly  destroy  them,  that  they  teach  you  not  to
do  after  all  their  abominations  which  they  have
done  unto  their  gods."

To  conclude :  In  reading  the  Old  Testament
account  of  the  Jewish  wars  and  conquests  in  Ca-
naan, and  the  terrible  destruction  brought  upon
the  inhabitants  thereof,  we  are  constantly  to  bear
in  our  minds,  that  we  are  reading  the  execution
of  a  dreadful  but  just  sentence  pronounced  by
God  against  the  intolerable  and  incorrigible  crimes
of  these  nations — that  they  were  intended  to  be
made  an  example  to  the  whole  world  of  God's
avenging  wrath  against  sins  of  this  magnitude
and  this  kind :  sins  which,  if  they  had  been  suf-
fered to  continue,  might  have  polluted  the  whole
ancient  world,  and  which  could  only  be  checked
by  the  signal  and  public  overcrow  of  nations  no-
toriously addicted  to  them,  and  so  addicts*  as  to
have  incorporated  them  even  into  their  religion
and  their  public  institutions — that  the  miseries  in-
flicted upon  the  nations  by  the  invasion  of  the
Jews  were  expressly  declared  to  be  inflicted  on  ac-
count of  their  abominable  sins — that  God  had
borne  with  them  long — that  God  did  not  proceed
to  execute  his  judgments  till  their  wickedness  was
full — that  the  Israelites  were  mere  instruments  in
the  hands  of  a  righteous  Providence  for  the  effec-
tuating the  extermination  of  a  people  of  whom  it
was  necessary  to  make  a  public  example  to  the
lest  of  mankind :  that  this  extermination,  which
might  have  been  accomplished  by  a  pestilence,  by
fire,  by  earthquakes,  was  appointed  to  be  done  by
the  hands  of  the  Israelites,  as  being  the  clearest
and  most  intelligible  method  of  displaying  the
power  and  righteousness  of  the  God  of  Israel;  his
power  over  the  pretended  gods  of  other  nations,
and  his  righteous  hatred  of  the  crimes  into  which
they  were  fallen.

This  is  the  true  statement  of  the  case.  It  is  no
forced  or  invented  construction,  but  the  idea  of
the  transaction  set  forth  in  Scripture ;  and  it  is  an
idea  which,  if  retained  in  our  thoughts,  may  fair-
ly, I  think,  reconcile  us  to  every  thing  which  we
read  in  the  Old  Testament  concerning  it


SERMON  XXX.

NEGLECT  OP  WARNINGS.

Oh  that  they  were  wise,  that  they  understood
this,  that  they  would  consider  their  latter  end!
— Dcut.  xxxii.  29.

There  is  one  great  sin,  which  nevertheless
may  not  be  amongst  the  number  of  those  of  which
we  are  sensible,  and  of  which  our  consciences  ac-
cuse us;  and  that  sin  is  the  neglect  of  warnings.

It  is  our  duty  to  consider  this  life  throughout  as
a  probationary  state,  nor  do  we  ever  think  truly,
or  act  rightly,  but  so  long  as  we  have  this  consi-
deration fully  before  our  eyes.  Now  one  charac-
ter of  a  state,  suited  to  qualify  and  prepare  rational
and  improvesble  creatures  for  a  better  state,  con-
sists in  the  warnings  which  it  is  constantly  giving
them;  and  the  providence  of  God,  by  placing  us


in  such  a  state,  becomes-  the  author  of  these  warn-
ings. It  is  his  paternal  cam  which  adxnomahes
us  by  and  through  the  events  of  life  andf  death
that  pass  before  us.  Therefore  it  is  a  sin  against
Providence  to  neglect  them.  It  is  hardiness  and
determination  in  sin ;  or  it  is  tilindbesa,  which  in
whole  or  in  part  is  wilful;  or  it  is  giddiness,  and
levity,  and  contemptuousness  in  a  subject  which
admits  not  of  these  dispositions  towards  it  without
great  offence  to  God.

A  serious  man  hardly  ever  passes  a  day,  never
a  week,  without  meeting  with  seme  warning  to
his  conscience;  without  something  to  call  to  his
mind  his  situation  with  respect  to  his  future  life.


And  these  warnings,  as  perhaps  was  proper,  con
the  thicker  upon  us  the  farther  we  advance  m
life.  The  dropping  into  the  grave  of  oar  acquaint-
ance,  and  friends,  and  relations;  what  can  be  bet-
ter calculated,  not  to  prove,  (for  we  do  not  waac
the  point  to  be  proved,)  but  to  possess  our  hearts
with  a  complete  sense  and  perception  of  the  ex-
treme, peril  and  hourly  precariousness  of  our  con-
dition 1  viz.  to  teach  this  momentous  lesson,  that
when  we  preach  to  yon  concerning  heaven  and
hell,  we  are  not  preaching  concerning  things  at  a
distance,  things  remote,  thugs  long  before  they
come  to  pass ;  but  concerning  things  near,  soon
to  he  decided,  in  a  very  short  time  to  be  fixed  one
way  or  other.  This  is  a  truth  of  which  we  are
warned  by  the  course  of  mortality;  yet  with  this
truth  confessed,  with  these  warnings  before  us,
we  venture  upon  sin.  But  H  will  be  said,  that  the
events  which  ought  to  warn  us  are  out  of  our
mind  at  the  time.  But  this  is  not  so.  Were  it
that  these  things  came  to  pass  in  the  wide  world
only  at  large,  it  might  be  that  we  should  seldom
hear  of  them  or  soon  forget  them.  Bui  the  events
take  place  where  we  ourselves  ere ;  within  our
own  doors ;  in  our  own  families ;  amongst  those
with  whom  we  have  the  most  constant  corres-
pondence, the  closest  intimacy,  the  strictest  con-
nexion. It  is  impossible  to  say  that  such,  events
can  be  out  of  our  mind ;  nor  is  it  the  fact.  The
feet  is,  that  knowing  them,  we  act  in  defiance  of
them :  which  is  neglecting  warnings  in  the  wont
sense  possible.  It  aggravates  the  dariiugnessi  it
aggravates  the  desperateness  of  sin ;  bnt  it  is  so
nevertheless.  Supposing  these  warnings  to  be
sent  by  Providence,  or  that  we  believe,  and  have
reason  to  believe,  and  ought  to  believe,  that  they
are  so  sent,  then  the  aggravation  is  very  greaL

We  have  warnings  of  every  kind.  Even  youth
itself  is  continually  warned  that  there  is  no  reli-
ance to  be  placed,  either  on  strength,  or  constitu-
tion, or  early  age;  that  if  they  count  upon  life  as
a  thing  to  be  reckoned  secure  for  a  considerable
number  of  years,  they  calculate  most  falsely,  and
if  they  act  upon  this  calculation,  by  allowing
themselves  m  the  vices  which  are  incidental  to
their  years,  under  a  notion  that  it  will  be  long  be-
fore they  shall  have  to  answer  for  them,  ana  be-
fore that  time  come  they  shall  have  abundant  sea-
son for  repenting  and  amending ;  if  they  suffer
such  arguments  to  enter  into  their  minds,  and  act
upon  them,  then  are  they  guilty  of  neglectingGtri
in  his  warnings.  They  not  only  err  in  point  ef
just  reasoning,  but  they  neglect  the  warning!
which  God  has  expressly  set  before  them.  Or  if
they  take  upon  themselves  to  consider  religion  as
a  thing  not  made  or  calculated  for  them ;  as  much
too  serious  for  their  years;  as  made  and  intended
for  the  old  and  the  dying;  at  least  as  what  b  an-


SERMONS  ON  SEVERAL  SUBJECTS.


necessary  to  be  entered  upon  ftt  present ;  as  what
may  be-  postponed  to  a  more  suitable  time  of  life:
whenever  they:  think  thus,  they  think  vary  pre-
sumptuously ;  they  are  justly  chargeable  with  neg-
warnings.  And  what  is  the  event  1  Theee


postponers  never  enter  upon  religion  at  all,.  In
earnest  or  effectually;  that  is  the  end  and  event
of  the  matter.  To  account  for  this,  shall  we  say
that  they  have  so  offended  God  by  neglecting  his
warnings,  as  to  have  forfeited  his  grace  ?  Certain-
ly we  may  say,  that  this  is  not  the  method  of  ob-
taining his  grace;  and  that  his  grace  is  necessary
to  oar  conversion..  Neglecting  warnings  is  not
the  way  to  obtain  God's  grace ;  and  God'8  grace
is  necessary  to  conversion.  The  young,  I  repeal
again,  want  not  warnings.  Is  it  new  f  is  it  un-
heard of  1  is  it  not,  on  the  contrary,  the  intelli-
gence of  every  week,  the  experience  of  every
neighbourhood,  that  young  men  and  young  wo-
men are  cut  off?  Man  is  in  every  sense  a  flower
of  the  field.  The  flower  is  liable  to  be  cut  down
in  its  bloom  and  perfection  as  well  as  in  its  wither-
ing and  its  decays.  So  is  man:  and  one  probable
cause  of  this  ordination  of  Providence  is,  fbat  no
one  of  any  age  may  be  so  confident  of  life  as  to
allow  himself  to  transgress  God's  laws;  that  all
of  every  age  may  live  in  constant  awe  of  their
Maker.

I  do  admit  that  warnings  come  the  thicker  upon
ns  as  we  grow  old.  We  have  more  admonitions,
both  in  our  remembrances  and  in  our  observations,
and  of  more  kinds.  A  man  who  has  passed  a  long
fife,  has  to  remember  preservations  from  danger,
which  ought  to  inspire  him  both  with  thankful-
ness and*  caution.  Yet  I  fear  we  are  very  defi-
cient in  both  these  qualities.  We  call  our  preser-
vations esrcapes,  not  preservations ;  and  so  we  fee}
no  thankfulness  for  them ;  nor  do  we  turn  them
into  religious  cautions.  When  God  preserved  us,
he  .meant  to  warn  us.  When  such  instances,
therefore,  have  no  effect  upon  our  minds,  we  are
guilty  before  God  of  neglecting  his  warnings.
Most  especially  if  we  have  occasion  to  add  to  all
other  reasons  lor  gratitude  this  momentous  ques-
tion, What  would  have  become  of  us,  what  would
have  been  our  condition,  if  we  had  perished  in  the
danger  by  which  our  lives  were  threatened  1  The
parable  of  the  fig-tree,  (Luke  xiii.  ver.  6,)  is  a
most  apt  Scripture  for  persons  under  the  circum-
stances we  have  described.  When  the  Lord  had
said,  "  cut  it  down ;  why  cumbereth  it  the  ground  V
he  was  entreated  to  try  it  one  year  longer;  and
then  if  it  proved  not  fruitful  to  cut  it  down.
Christ  himself  there  makes  the  application  twice
over,  (verses  3d  and  5th,)  "  except  ye  repent,  ye
shall  all  likewise  perish."  If  the  present,  or  if  the
then  state  of  our  conscience  and  of  our  souls  call
op  this  reflection,  then  are  we  very  guilty  indeed,
if  such  preservations  leave  no  religious  impression
upon  us ;  or  if  we  suffer  the  temporary  impression
to  pass  off  without  producing  in  us  a  change  for
the  better.

Infirmities,  whether  they  be  of  health,  or  of  age,
decay,  and  weakness,  are  warnings.  And  i^has
been  asked,  with  some  degree  of  wonder,  why
they  make  so  little  impression  as  they  do  1  One
chief  reason  is  this:  they  who  have  waited  for
warnings  of  .this  kind  before  they  would  be  con-
verted, nave  generally  waited  until  they  are  be-
come hardened  in  sin.  Their  habits  are  fixed.
Their  character  has  taken  its  shape  and  form.
Their  disposition  is  thoroughly  infected  arid  in-
4F


vested  with  sin.  When-it  is  come  to  this  case,  it
is  difficult  for  any  call  to  be  heard,  for  any  warn-
ing to  operate.  It  is  difficult,  but  with  God  all
things  are  possible.  If  there  be  the  will  and  the
sincere  endeavoiir  to  reform,  the  grace  of  God  can
give  the  power.  .  Although,  therefore,  they  who
wait  for  the  advances  of  age,  the  perception  of
decay,  the  probable  approach  of  deein,  before  they
turn  themselves  seriously  to  religion,  have  wafted
much  too  long,  have  neglected,  and  despised,  and
defied  man^  solemn  warnings  in  the  course  of
their  lives;  have  waited  indeed  till  it  be" next  to
impossible  that  they  turn  at  all  from  their  former
ways :  yet  this  is  not  a  reason  why  they  should
continue  in  neglect  of  the  warnings  which  now
press  upun  them,  and  which  at  length  they  begin
to  perceive ;  but  just  the  contrary.  The  effort  is
greater,  but  the  necessity  is  greater :  It  .is  their
last  hope,  and  their  last  trial.  I  put  the  case  of  a
man  grown  old  in  sin.  If  the  warnings  of  old
age  bring  him  round  to  religion,  happy  is  tjiat  man
in  his  old  age  above  any  thing  he  was  in  any  other
part  of  his  life.  But  if  these  warnings  do  not  af-
fect him.  there  is  nothing  left  in  this  world  which
will.  We  are  not  to  set  limits  to  God's  grace,
operating  according  to  his  good  pleasure;  but  we
say  there  is  nothing  in  this  world,  there  is  nothing
in  the  course  of  nature  and  the  order  of  human
affiurs,  which  will  affect  him,  if  the  feelings  of
age  do  not  I  put  the  case  of  a  man  grownokf  in
sin,  and.  though  old,  continuing  the  practice  of  sin :
that,  it  is  said,  in  the  full  latitude  of  the  expres-
sion, describes  a  worse  case  than  is  commonly  met
with.  Would  to  God  the  case  was  mere  rare  than
it  is !  But,  allowing  it  to  be  unusual  in  the  ut-
most extent  of  the  terms,  in  a  certain  considera-
ble degree  the  description  applies  to  many  old  per-
sons. Many  feel  in  their  hearts  that  the  word*
"  grown  old  m  sin,"  belong  to  them  in  some  sense
which  is  very  formidable.  They  feel  some  dross
and  defilement  to  be  yet  purged  away ;  some  deep
corruption  to  be  yet  eradicated;  some  virtue  or
other  to  be  yet  even  learnt,  yet  acquired,  or  yet,
however,  to  be  brought  nearer  to  what  it  ought  to
be  than  it  has  hitherto  been  brought  NowTf  the
warnings  of  age  taught  us  nothing  else,  they
might  teach  us  this :  that  if  these  things  are  to  be
done,  they  must  be  done  soon  ;  they  must  be  set
about  forthwith,  in  good  earnest,  and  with  strong
resolution.  The  work  is  most  momentous ;  the
time  is  short  The  day  is  far  spent :  the  evening
is  come  on :  the  night  is  at  hand.

Lastly:  I  conceive  that  this  discourse  points  out
the  true  and  only  way  of  making,  old  age  comfort-
able; and  that  is,  by  making  it  the  means  of  re*
ligious  improvement.  #  Let  a  man  be  beset  by
ever  so  many  bodily  complaints,  bowed  down  by
ever  so  many  infirmities,  if  he  find  his  soul  grown
and  growing  better,  his  seriousness  increased,  his
obedience  more  regular  and  more  exact,  his  in-
ward principles  and  dispositions  improved  from
what  they  were  formerly,  and  continuing  to  im-
prove ;  that  man  hath  a  fountain -of  comfort  and
consolation  springing  up  within  him.  Infirmities,
which  have  this  effect,  are  infinitely  better  than
strength  and  health  themselves;  though  these,
considered  independently  of  their  consequences,
be  justly  esteemed  the  greatest  of  all  blessings  and
of  all  rifts.  The  oldage  of  a  virtuous  man  ad-
mits of  a  different  and  of  a  most  consoling  de-
scription.

It  is  this  property  of  old  age,  namely,  that  its
GO*


694


SERMONS  ON  SEVERAL  SUBJECTS,


proper  and*  mot  rational  comfort  coiuki  in  the
consciousness  of  001111081  amendment.  A  very
pious  writer  give*  the  following  representation  of
this  stage  of  Jwman  life,  when  employed  and  oc-
cupied aa  it  ought  to  be,  and  when  life  baa  been
drawn  to  ita  close  by  a  coarse  of  virtue  and  reli-
gion. "  To  the  intelligent  and  virtuoua,"  says  our
author,  "old  age  presents  a  acane  of  tranquil  en-
joyment, of  obedient  appetites;  of  well  regulated
ejections,  of  maturity  in  knowledge,  and  or  calm
preparation  for  inunortalitv.  In  this  serene  and
dignified  state,  placed,  as  it  were,  an  the  confines
or  two  worlds,  the  mind  of  a  good  man  reviews
what  is  passed  with  the  complacency  of  an  ap-
proving conscience,  and  looks  forward  with  hum-
ble confidence  in  the  mercy  of  God,  and  with  de-
vout aspirations  towards  his  eternal  and  ever  in-
creasing favour."


SERMON  XXXI.

THE  TERRORS  OF  THB  LORD.

What  is  a  man  profited,  \f  he  shall  gain  the
whole  world,  and  lose  his  own  soul?  or  what
shall  a  man  give  in  exchange  for  his  soul  ? —
Mattxvi.  26\

JTbzse  words  ask  a  question,  the  moat  home  to
every  man's  concern  of  any  that  can  possibly  en-
ter into  his  thoughts.  What  our  Saviour  meant
to  assert,  though  proposed  to  his  hearers  in  the
form  of  a  question  Jwhich  indeed  waa  only  a
stronger  and  more  affecting  way  of  asserting  it,)
is,  that  a  man's  soul,  by  which  term  is  here  meant
ms  state  after  death,  is  so  infinitely  more  important
to  him,  so  beyond  and  above  any  thing  he  can  get,
or  any  thing  he  can  lose,  any  thing  he  can  enjoy,
or  any  thing  he  can  suiter  on  this  side  the  grave,
that  nothing  which  the  world  offers  can  male  up
for  the  loss  of  it,  or  be  a  compensation  when  that
vt  at  stake.  You  say  that  this  is  very  evident :  I
reply,  that  evident  as  it  is.  it  is  not  thought  of,  it
Is  not  considered,  it  is  not  believed.  The  subject,
therefore,  is  very  proper  to  be  set  forth  in  those
strong  and  plain  terms  which  such,  a  subject  re-
quires, for  the  purpose  ef  obtaining  for  it  some  de-
gree of  that  attention  which  each  man's  own  deep
interest  in  the  event  demands  of  him  to  give  it.

There  are  two  momentous  ideas,  which  are  in-
cluded in  the  expression — the  loss  of  a  man's
soul;  and  these  are,  the  positive  pain  and  suffer-
ings which  he  will  incur  after  his  death,  and  the
happiness  and  reward  which  he  will  forfeit.  Upon
both  of  these  points  we  must  go  for  information  to
the  Scriptures.  No  where  else  can  we  receive  any.
Now  as  to  the  first  point,  which  is,  in  other  words,
the  punishment  of  hell,  I  do  admit  that  it  is  very
difficult  to  handle  this  dreadful  subject  propesfy;
and  one  cause,  amongst  others,  of  the  difficulty  is,
that  it  is  not  for  one  poor  sinner  to  denounce  such
appalling  tenors,  such  tremendous  consequences
against  another.  Damnation  is  a  word,  which  lies
not  in  the  mouth  of  man,  who  is  a  worm,  towards
any  of  his  fellow  creatures  whatsoever ;  yet  it  is«b;
solutely  necessary  that  the  threatenings  of  Al-
mighty God  oe  known  and  published.  Therefore
we  begin  by  observing,  that  the  accounts  which  the
Scriptures  contain  of  the  punishment  of  hell,  are
for  the  most  part  delivered  in  figurative  or  meta-
phorical terms  i  that  is  to  say,  in  terms  which  re-


present things  of  which  we  have  no  notion,  bjt
comparison  with  things  of  which  we  have  a  notion.
Therefore  take  notice  what  those  figures  and  me-
taphors are.  They  are  ef  the  most  dreadful  kind
which  words  can  express:  and  be  they  undentood
now  they  may,  *ver  so  figuratively,  it  is  plain  that
they  convey,  and  were  intended  to  convey,  idea
of  horrible  torment  They  are  such  as  these:
"  Being  cast  into  hell,  where  the  worm  (fieth  not,
and  where  the  fire  is  not  quenched."  It  is  "  burn-
ing the  chaff  with  unquenchable  fire,"  It  b  "  to-
ing  into  fire  everlasting,  which  is  prepared  fa  the
devil  and  his  angels.1?  It  is  "being  cast  withall
his  members  into  heu\  where  the  worm  dieth  n*,
and  the  fire  is  not  quenched."  These  are  heart-
appalling  expressions:  and  were  undoubtedly  in-
tended by  the  person  who  used  them,  (whowai
no  other  than  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  himself)  to
describe  terrible  enduringn;.  positive,  actual  pava,
of  the  most  horrible  kinds.  I  have  said  that  tha
punishment  ef  hell  is  thus  represented  to  usii
figurative  speech.  I  now  say,  that  from  the  nanus
of  things  it  could  hardly  have  been  represented
to  ns  in  any  other.  It  is  of  the  very  nature  of
pain,  that  it  cannot  be  known  without  being  fek.
It  is  impossible  to  give  to  any  one  an  exact  con*
caption  of  it,  without  his  actually  tasting  it  Ex-
perience alone  teaches  its  acuteness  and  intensity.
For  which  reason,  when  it  waa  necessary  that  the
punishment  of  hell  should  be  set  forth  in  Scripnut
for  our  warning,  and  set  forth  to  terrify  as  fan
our  fiins,  it  could  only  be  done  as  it  has  been  done,
by  comparing  it  with  Bufferings  of  which  we  cm
form  a  conception,  and  making  use  ef  termsditwa
from  these  sufferings.  .  When  words  less  figura-
tive, and  more  direct,  but  at  the  same  time  more
general,  are  adopted,. they  are  not  less  suing,
otherwise  than  aa  they  are  more  general.  "In-
dignation and  wrath,  tribulation  ana  anguish,  upon
every  soul  of  man  that  doeth  <eviL"  These  ait
St.  Paul's  words.  It  Is  a  short  sentence,  bat
enough  to  make  the  stoutest  heart  tremble;  fac
though  it  unfold  no  particulars,  it  dearly  deay-
nates  positive  torment  The  day  of  judgment  it-
self, so  far  as  it  respects  the  wicked,  is  expieady
called  "  a  day  of  wrath."  The  Lord  Jesus,  at  to
them,  shall  be  revealed  in  flaming  fire.  How  ter-
rible a  fete  it  must  be  to  find  ourselves  at  that  day
the  objects  of  God's  wrath—the  objects  upon  whom
his  threats  and  judgments  against  sin  are  now  to
be  executed,  the  revelation  of  his  righteous  judg-
ment and  of  his  unerring  truth  to  be  displayed--
may  be  conceived,  in  some  sort,  by  conswering
what  stores  of  inexhaustible  misery  are  always  in
his  power.  With  our  present  constitutions,  if  we
do  but  touch  the  smallest  part  of  our  bodies,  if  a
nerve  in  many  places  goes  wrong,  what  torture
do  we  endure  I  Let  any  man  who  has  felt,  or
rather,  whilst  he  ia  feeling,  the  agony  of  some  bo-
dily .torment,  only  reflect  what  a  condition  that
must  be,  which  .nad  to  suffer  this  continually,
which  night  and  day  was  fo  undergo  the  same,
without  prospect  of  cessation  or  relief,  and  the)
to  go  on ;  ana  then  ask,  for  what  he  would  know-
ingly bring  himself  into  this  situation ;  what  plea-
sure, what  gain  would  be  an  inducement  1  14
him  reflect  also,  how  bitter,  how  grinding  an  ag-
gravation of  his  sufferings,  as  weuas of  ni* grift,
it  must  be,  that  he  has  wilfully,  and  forewarned,
brought  all  this  upon  himself.— Maj  it  not  be  ne-
cessary that  God  should  manifest  his  truth  by  ex-
ecuting his  threat*  1— may  it  not  be  necessary  that


SERMONS  ON  SEVERAL  StTBlECTS.


595


he  should  at  least  testify  his  justice  by  placing  a
wide  difference  between  the"  good  and  the  bad?
between  virtue,  which  he  loves,  and  vice,  which
he  abhors?  which  difference  must  consist  in  the
the  different  state  of  happiness  and  of  misery  in
which  the  good  and.  bad  are  finally  placed.  And
may  we  not  be  made  deserved  sacrifices  to  this  dis-
pensation ?

Now  If  any  one  feel  his  heart  struck  with  the
terrors  of  the  Lord,  with  the  consideration,  of  this
dreadful  subject,  and  with  the  declarations  of
Scripture  relating  thereto,  which  will  all  have
their  accomplishment,*  let  him  be' entreated,  let
him  be  admonished  to  hold  the  idea,  tremendous,
as  it  is,  fully  in  his  view,  till  if  has  wrought  its
effect,  that  is,  til)  it  has  prevailed  with  him  to  part
with  nis  sins ;  and  then  we  assure  him,  that  to
alarm,  "fright,  and  horror,  will  succeed  peace,  and
hope,  and  comfort,  and  Joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost.
There  is  another  way  of  treating  the  matter^  and
that  is  to  shake  off  the  idea  if  we  can ;  to  drown
it  in  intemperance;  to  overpower  it  with  worldly
business  -  to  fly  from  it  in  all  directions,  but  mostly
in  that  which  carries  us  to  hurrying  tumultuous  di-
versions) to  criminal  indulgences,  or  into  gross
sensuality.  Now  of  this  course  of  proceeding  it
is  certain,  that  if  it  lay  the  mind  in  any  degree  at
ease  in  this  life,  it  is  at  the  expense  of  the  incvita?
ble  destruction  of  our  souls  in  the  next ;  which  is
enough  to  say  against  it ;  but  in  truth  it  answers
even  ite  present  purpose  very  imperfectly.  It  is  a
way  of  getting  nd  of  the  matter,  with  which  even
We  ourselves  are  not  satisfied.  We  are  sensible
that  it  is  a  false,  treacherous,  hollow  way  of  acting
towards  our  own  souls/  We  have  no  trust  in
what  we  are  doing.  It  leaves  no  peace,  no  hope,
no  comfort,  no  joy.

But  to  return  to  the  direct  subject  of  our  dis-
course:  The  Scriptures  urriformly  represent  the
wicked  as  not  only  suffering  positive  misery,  but
also  as  having  lost,  by  their  wickedness,  the  hap-
piness of  heaven,  and  as  being  sensible  of  their
una.  They  are  repeatedly  described  as  east  out,
or  as  shut  out,  into  outer  darkness :  whilst  the
good  are  entering  into  the  joy  of  their  Lord.  This
imports  a  knowledge  of  their  own  exclusion.  In
the  parable  of  the  rich  man  and  Lazarus,  the  rich
man  being  in  torments,  is  made  to  see  Lazarus  at
rest  This  teaches  us,  that  the  wicked  will  be  so
far  informed  of  the  state  of  the  good,  as  to  per-
ceive and  bewail,  with  unutterable  anguish  and
regret,  their  own  sad  fate  in  being  refused  and  re-
jected, when,  Tiad  they  acted  differently,  they
would  have  been  admitted  to.  it.  This  is,  strictly
speaking,  losing  a  man's  soul:  it  is  losing  that
happiness  which  his  soul  might  have  attained,
and.  for  which  it  was  made.  And  here  comes  the
bitter  addition  of  their  calamity,  that,  being  lost
it  cannot  be  recovered.  The  neaven  we  hear  of
in  Scripture,  and  the  hell  we  hear  of  in  Scripture,
are  a  heaven  and  hell  depending  upon  our  be-
haviour in  this  life.  So  they  are  all  along  spoken
of  "Indignation,  wrath,  tribulation,  and  an-
guish, upon  every  soul  of  man  that  doeth  evil:"
meaning  evidently  the  evil  done  by  him  in  this
life ;  no  other  evil  was  in  the  apostle's  thoughts.
Or  again,  more  expressly,  "  we  must  all  appear
before  the  judgment-seat  of  Christ,  that  every  one
may.  receive  the  things  done  in  the  body,  accord-
ing to  that  he  hath  done,  whether  it  be  good  or
bad."-- "  The  things  done  in  the  body,"  are  the
things  taken  into  the  account.


Now,  by  the  side  of  this  immense  consequence
of  saving  or  of  losing'  our  immortal  souls,  place
any  difference  that  the  things  of  this  life  can  make
te  us ;  place  riches  and  poverty,  grandeur  and  hu-
mility, success  or  misfortune ;  place,  more  especi-
ally, the  difference  between  possessing  and  sacri-
ficing an  unlawful  gratification ;  between  compas-
sing and  renouncing  an  unjust  purpose ;  making
or  giving  up  an  unfair  gain ;  in  a  word,  between
the  pleasures  and  temptations  or  vice,  and  the
self-denials  of  virtue ;  and  what  do  they  amount
to?  The  objects  themselves  are  nothing  when
put  in  competition  with  heaven  and  hell. — Were
it  true,  which  it  is  not,  that  real,  solid,  inward
happiness  was  proportioned  either  to  outward  cir-
cumstances, or  the  indigencies  of  our  appetites
and  passions;  that  the  good  things,  as  they  are

led,  end


called,  end  pleasures  of  life,  were  as  satisfactory
to  the  possessor^  as  they  are,  for  the  most  part,  de-
ceitful and  disappointing,  still  their  duration  is
nothing.  The  oldest  men,  when  they  cast  back
their  eyes  on  their  past  life,  see  it  in  a  very  nar-
row compass.  It  appears  no  more  than  a  small
interval  cut  out  *f  eternal  duration,  both  before
and  after  it ;  when  compared  with  that  duration
as  nothing.  But  we  must  add  to  this  two  other
questions.  Can  life  be  counted  upon  to  last  to
what  is  called  old  age  1  No  man,  who  observes
the  deaths  that  take  place  in  his  neighbourhood,
or  amongst  his  acquaintance,  will  so  compute.
Or,  secondly,  do  the  pleasures  of  sin  last  as  long
as  our  Hves  1  We  may  answer,  never  ;  with  the
single  dreadful  exception  of  the  sinner  being  cut
off  in  his  prime.  Whoever  looks  for  permanent
happiness  from  the  pleasures  of  sin  will  find  him-
self miserably  mistaken.  They  are  short,  even
compared  with  our  short  lives ;  subject  to  casual-
ties and  disasters  without  number ;  transitory,  not
only' as  the  things  of  this  world  are  transitory,  but
in  a  much  greater  degree.  It  will  be  said,  how-
ever, that  though  tins  observation  may  be  true  of
the  pleasures  of  sin,  vet  an  advantage  gained  by
sin,  that  is,  by  unrighteous,  unconscious  means,
may  nevertheless,  remain  an  advantage  as  long  84
we  live.  This  may  sometimes  be  the  case;  an4
such  advantage  may  be  so  long  enjoyed,,  if  that
can  be  enjoyed  which  has  a  tearful  expectation
and  looking-for  of  Judgment  annexed  to  it.  But
what  is  the  term  of  that  enjoyment  compared  wtth  .
the  sequel  1  It  is  a  moment,  the  twinkling  of  an
eye,  compared  with  a  day ;  an  hour  compared  with
a  year ;  a  single  day  with  a  long  life.  It  is  less
than  these ;  tor  all  these  comparisons  are  short  of
the  truth.  Well  therefore  doth  our  Saviour  ask,
<'  What  doth  a  man  profit  if  he  gain  the  whole
worl4  and  lose  his  own  soul?"  That  world,
when  gained,  he  could  not  keep;  nor,  if  hercoold,
would  it  make  him  happy.

But  our  Saviour  delivered  his  powerful  admo-
nition, not  so  much  for  his  disciples  to  reason  upon,
as  to  carry  into  practice;  that  is,  that  his  words
might  strike  into  their  souls  upon  these  occasions
(which  are  but  too  many,)  when  thebusiness,  the
bustle,  or  the  allurements  of  the  worl<rarc  in  dan-
ger of  shutting  out  futurity  from  their  thoughts.
—These  are  the  times  for  calling  to  mind  our  Sa-
viour's question.  Whenever,  therefore,  we  are
driving  on  in  the  career  of  worldly  prosperity ;
meeting  with  success  after  success ;  fortunate,  rich,
and  flourishing;  when  every  thing  appears  to  thrive
and  smile  around  us;  but  conscience,  in  the  mean*
time,  little  heeded  and  attended  to;  the  justice,  the


696


SERMONS  ON  SEVERAL  SUBJECTS.


integrity,  the  uprightness  of  oar  ways,  aid  of  oar
dealings  seldom  weighed  tnd  scrutinised  by  us ;
religion  very  much,  or  entirely,  perhaps,  oat  of
the  question  with  us ;  soothed  ana  buoyed  up  with
that  self-applause  which  success  naturally  begets;
— in  this  no  very  uncommon  state  of  soul,  it  will
be  well  if  we  hear  our  Saviour's  voice  asking  us,
what  does  all  this  prosperity  signify?  if  it  do  not
lead  to  heaven,  what  is  it  worth  1  When  the
scene  is  shifted,  if  nothing  but  death  and  darkness
Remain  behind;  much  more,  if  God  Almighty  be
all  this  while  offended  by  our  foigetfulness  both
of  his  mercies  and  his  laws,  our  neglect  of  his  ser-
vice, our  indevotion,  our  thoughtlessness,  our  diso-
bedience, our  love  of  the  world  to  the  exclusion
of  all  consideration  of  Him ;  if  we  be  assured,  and
if,  in  reality,  it  be  the  case,  that  his  displeasure
shall  infallibly  overtake  us  at  our  death ;  what  in
truth,  under  all  this  appearance  of  advantage,  are
we  getting  or  gaining  1  The  world  may  amuse
us  with  names  and  terms  of  felicitation,  with  their
praises  or  their  envy,  but  wherein  are  we  the  bet-
ter in  the  amount  and  result  of  substantial  happi-
ness 1  We  have  got  our  aim,  and  what  is  the
end  of  it?  Death  is  preparing  to  level  us  with
the  poorest  of  mankind ;  and  alter  that,  a  fearful
looking-for  and  expectation  of  judgment ;  no  well
founded  hopes  of  happiness  beyond  thograve ;  and
we  drawing  sensibly  nearer  to  that  grave  every
▼ear.  This  is  the  sum  of  the  account.  Or,  which
»  another  case  no  less  apposite  to  our  present  ar-
gument, is  it  some  sensual  pleasure  that  tempts
us,  some  wicked  enjoyment  that  lias  taken  such
hold  of  our  passions,  that  we  are  ready  to  rush
upon  it  whatever  be  the  consequence  ?  If  we
sain  our  object;  if  we  possess  our  wishes,  we  are
nappy :  but  what,  if  we  lose  our  own  souls?  what,
if  we  find  ourselves  condemned  men  for  hardily
venturing  upon  crimes,  which  will,  and  whkb  we
were  forewarned  that  they  would,  render,  us  the
objects  of  God's  final  indignation  and  displeasure  ?
Will  any  gratifications  which  sin  affords  be  a  re-
compense or  a  consolation  ?  Are  they  so  even
for  the  diseases,  shame,  and  ruin,  which  they
often  bring  upon  men  in  this  workl  ?  Ask  those
who-  are  so  ruined  or  so  diseased.  How  much
less  Chen  for  the  gnawings  of  that  worm  which
dieth  not :  the  burnings  of  that  fire  which  will  not
be  quenched  ?  In  hopeless  torment,  will  it  as-
suage our  sufferings,  or  mitigate  the  bitterness  of
our  self-accusation,  to  know  that  we  have  brought
ourselves  into  this  state  for  some  transient  plea-
sure which  is  gone,  lost  and  perished  forever  ?  Oh
that  we  had  thought  of  these  things  before  as  we
think  of  them  now !  that  we  had  not  been  infidels
as  touching  our  Lord's  declaration  !  that  we  had
believed  in  him :  and  that  believing  that  he  had  a
perfect  knowledge  of  the  future  fate  of  mankind,
and  of  the  truth  of  what  ne  taught,  we  had  listen-
ed in  time  to  his  admonition !

Universally  the  true  occasion  for  remembering
and  applying  the  passage  of  Scripture  before  us  is,
when  we  arexteliberating  concerning  the  conduct
we  an  to  pursue  in  the  contests  which  arise  be-
tween temptation  and  duty,  between  the  flesh
and  the  world,  or  between  both  united  and  our
own  souls.  Be  .the  temptation  what  it  will,  either
in  kind  or  strength,  this  is  the  thought  to  be  for
ever  set  against  it  That  if  we  give  way,  we  give
way  in  exchange  for  our  own  souls ;  that  the  per-
dition of  the  soul  is  set  forth  in  Scripture  in  terms
most  tremendous,  but  not  more  tremendous  than


true;  that  the  sinner,  die  man  involved  in  uu*>
pented,  unfoiuaken  sins,  can  never  know  how
soon  he  may  be  reduced  to  this  state.


SERMON  XXXII.

PRESERVATION  AND  RECOyEBT  FROM  SIN.

Pot  the  grace  qf  God,' that  bringeth  salvation,
hath  appeared  unto  all  men,  teaching  tu,  that
denying  ungodliness  and  worldly  lusts,  we
should  live  soberly,  righteously,  and  godly  in
this  present  world.— Titus  ii.  11,  12.

There  are  certain  particular  texts  of  Scripture
which  are  of  inestimable  use ;  for  that  in  a  few,
short,  clear  words,  they  show  us  the  sum  of  oar
duty.  Such  texts  ought  to  be  deeply  infixed  and
imprinted  upon  our  memories ;  to  be  written,  in-
deed, upon  our  hearts.  The  text  which  1  -have
read  to  you,  k  entitled  to  this  distinction.  No
single  sentence  that  ever  was  written  down  for
the  direction  of  mankind,  comprises  more  import-
ant truth  in  less  room.  The  text  gives  us  a  rate
of  life  and  conduct;  and  tells  us,  that  to  Jay  down
for  mankind  this  rule,  and  enforce  it  by  the
promise  of  salvation,  was  a  great  object  of  the
Gospel  being  published  in  the  world.  The  Gos-
pel might  include  other  objects,  and  answer  other
purposes;  but  as  far  as  related  to  the  regulation  of
life  and  conduct,  this  was  its  object  and  its  pur-
pose. The  rule,  you  bear,  ist  that,  "  denying  un-
godliness and  worldly  lusts,  we  should  live  soberly,
righteously,  and  godly  in  this  present  world.
We  must  begin  "by  denying  ungodliness  and
worldly  lusts*  which  means,  that  we  must  resist
or  break  off  all  sins  of  licentiousness,  debauchery,
and.  intemperance ;  for  these  are  what  are  apecifr-
caDy  meant  by  worldly  lusts.  And  these,  must  be
deniedt  that  is,  they  must  either  be  withstood  in
the  first  instance,  or  the  evil  courses  Sato  which
they  have  drawn  us  must  be  broken  off,

When  a  rule  of  morals  is  plain  and  positive,  it
is  seldom  that  there  is  any  advantage  in  enlarging
upon  the  rule  itself.  We  only  weaken  it  by  di-
lating it  I  shall  employ,  therefore,  my  present
discourse  in  offering  such  heads  of  advice  as  may
be  likely,  by  God's  blessing,  to  assist  us  in  render-
ing obedience  to  the  rule  laid  down  for  us;  an
obedience  upon  which  salvation  depend*.

First,  then,  I  observe  concerning  licentious
practices,  that  it  is  most  practicable  to  be  entirely
innocent;  that  it  is  a  more  easy  tiling  to  withstand
them  altogether,  thaji  it  is  to  set  bounds  to  their
indulgence.  This  is  a  point  not  sufficiently  un-
derstood; though  true,  it  is  not  believed.  Men
know  riot  what  they  are  doing  when  they  enter
upon  vicious' courses :  what  a  struggle,  what  a
contest,  what  misery,  what  torment,  they  are  pre-
paring for  themselves.  I  trust  that  there  is  hardly
a  man  or  woman  living  who  enters  into  a  course
of  sin  with  the  design  of  remaining  in  it  to  the  end ;
who  can  brave  the  punishment  if  bell ;  who -in-
tends to  die  in  that  state  of  sure  perdition,  to  which
a  course  of  unrepented  sin  must  bring  him  or  her.
No;  that  is  not  the  plan  even  of  the  worst,  much
less  of  the  generality  of  mankind.  Their  plan  is
to  allow  themselves  to  a  certain  length,  and  there
stop;  for  a  certain  time,  and  then  reform;  in  such
and  such  opportuntieg  and  temptations,  but  in  no


SERMONS  ON  SEVERAL  SUBJECTS.


397


more,  Now,  to  such  persona,  and  to  such  plana,
I  say  this,  that  it  would  not  have  coat  them  one
tenth  of  the  mortification,  pain,  and  self-denial,  to
have  kept  themselves  at  a  distance  from  sin,  that
it  must  and  will  coat  them  to  break  it  off;  adding
the  farther  consideration,  that,  so  long  as  men
preserve  their  innocence,  the  consciousness1  of
doing  what  is  right  is  both  the  strongest  possible
support  of  their  resolution,  and  the  most  constant
source  of  satisfaction  to  their  thoughts;  but  that
when  men  once  begin  to  five  way  to  vicious  in-
dulgences, another  state  of  things  takes  place  in
their  breasts.  Disturbance  at  the  heart,  struggles
and  defeats,  resolations  and  relapses,  self-reproach
and  setf-condemnation,  drive  out  all  quietness  and
tranquillity  of  conscience.  Peace  within  is  at  an
end.  AH  is  unsettled.  Did  the  young  and  un-
experienced know  the -truth  of  this  matter;  how
much  easier  it  is  to  keep  ihnocency  than  to  return
to  it;  how  great  and  terrible  is  the  danger  that  they
do  not  return  to  it  at  all ;  surely  they  would  see,
and  see  in  a  light  strong  enough  to  influence  their
determination,  that  to  adhere  inviolably  to  the
rules  of  temperance,  soberness,  and  chastity,  was
their  safety,  their  wisdom,  their  happiness.  How
many  bitter  thoughts  docs  the  innocent  man  avoid  ?
Serenity  And  cheerfulness  are  his  portion.  Hope
is  continually  pouring  its  balm  into  his  soul.  Ilis
heart  is  at  rest,  whilst  others  are  goaded  and  tor-
tured by  the  stings  of  a  wpunded  conscience,  the
remonstrances  and  risings  up  of  principles  which
they  cannot  forget ;  perpetually  teased  by  return-
ing temptations,  perpetually  lamenting  defeated
resolutions.  "  There  is  no  peace  unto  the  wicked,
smith  my  God."  There  is  no  comfort:  in  such  a
life  as  this,  let  a  man's  outward  circumstances  be
what  they  will.  Genuine  satisfaction  of  mind  is
not  attainable  under  the  recurring  consciousness
of  being  immersed  in  a  course  of  sin,  and  the  still
remaining  prevalence  of  religious  principles.  Yet
either  this  must  be  the  state  of  a  sinner  till  he  re-
cover again  his  virtuous  courses,  or  it  must  be  a
state  infinitely  worse;  that  is,  it  must  be  a  state  of
entire  surrender  of  himself  to  a  life  of  sin.  which
will  be  followed  by  a  death  of  despair;  by  ruin
final  and  eternal  ;  by  the  wrath  of  God ;  by  the
pains  of  hell.

But,  secondly,  In  what  manner,  and  br  what
methods  are  sins  to  be  broken  off?  for  although
the  maxim  which  we  have  delivered  be  perfectly
and  cestainly  true,  namely,  that  it  is  ease  and  hap-
piness to  preserve  innocence  entirely,  compared
with  what  it  is  to  recover  our  innocence,  or  even
to  set  bounds  to  guilt,  yet  it  is  a  truth  which  all
cannot  receive.  I  do  not  mean  that  all  will  not
acknowledge  it,  for  I  believe  that  those  will  be
most  ready  to  give  their  assent  to  it,  who  feel
themselves  bound  and  entangled  by  the  chain  of
their  sin.  But  it  is  not  applicable  to  every  man's
esse;  because  many  having  already  fallen  into  vi-
cious courses,  have  no  longer  to  consider  how
much '  better,  how  much  happier  it  would  have
been  for  them,  to*  have  adhered  closely  to  the  laws
of  virtue  and  religion  at  first,  but  how  to  extricate
themselves  from  the  bad  condition  in  which  they
are  placed  at  present.  Now  to  expect  to  break
off  nn  in  any  manner  without  pain  and  difficulty,
is  a  vain  expectation.  It  is  to  expect  a  moral  im-
possibility- Such  expectations  ought  not  to  be  held
out,  because  they  are  sure  to  deceive;  and  because
they  who  act  under  such  encouragement,  finding


themselves  deceived,  will  never  persist  in  iheir  en-
deavours to  any  purpose  of  actual  reformation.
All  mankind  feel  a  reluctance  to  part  with  their
sins.  It  must  be  so.  It  arises  from  the  very  na-
ture of  temptation,  by  which  they  are  drawn  into
sin.  Feeling  then  this  strong  reluctance,  it  in
very  natural  for  men  to  do  what  great  numbers
do,  namely,  propose  to  themselves  to  part  with
their  sins  by  degrees;  thinking  that  they  can
more  easily  do  it  in  this  .way  than  in  any  other.
It  presents  to  their  view  a  kind  of  compromise  j  a
temporary  hope  of  enjoying,  for  the  present  at
least,  the  criminal  pleasures  to  which  they  have
addicted  themselves,  or  the  criminal  advantages
they  are  making,  together  with  the  expectation  of
a  final  reform.  I  believe,  as  I  have  already  said,
that  this  is  a  course  into  which  great  numbers  fell ;
and  therefore  it  becomes  a  question  of  very  great
importance  whether  it  be  a  safe  and  successful
course  or  not  What  I  am  speaking  of  is  the  try*
ing  to  break  off  our  sins  by  degrees.  Now,  in  the
first  place,  it  is  contrary  to  principle.  A  man  is
supposed  to  feel  the  guilt  and  danger  of  the  prac-
tices which  he  follows.  He  must  be  supposed  to
perceive  this,  because  he  is  supposed  to  resolve  to
emit  them.  His  resolution  is  founded  upon,  springs
from  tins  perception.  Wherefore,  I  say,  that  it  is
in  contradiction  to  principle,  to  allow  ourselves
even  once  more  in  sin.  after  we  have  truly  become
sensible  of  the  guilt,  the  danger,  and  the  conse-
quences of  it  It  is  from  that  time  known  and
wilful  sin.  I  own  I  do  not  see  how  the  plan  of
gradually  diminishing  a  sinful  habit  can  be  con-
sistent with,  or  can  proceed  from  sincere  religious
principles ;  for,  as  to  what  remains  of  the  habit,  it
implies  an  express  allowance  of  ourselves  in  sin,
which  is  utterly  inconsistent  with  sincerity.  Who*
ever  continues  in  the  practice  of  any  one  known
sin,  in  defiance  of  God's  commands,  cannot,  so
continuing,  hope  to  find  mercy:  but  with  respect
to  so  much  of  the  habit  as  is  yet  allowed,  by  him
to  remain,  he  is  so  continuing,  and  his  continu-
ance is  part  of  his  plan.  These  attempts,  there-
fore, at  gradual  reformation,  do  not  proceed  from
a  true  vital  religious  principle;  which  principle,
succoured  by  God's  grace,  is  the  only  thing  that
can  stand  against  sin,  strengthened  by  habit.  So
I  should  reason,  upon  the  case,  looking  at  it  in  its
own  natuje.  The  next  question  is,  How  is  it  in
feet?  Is  it  in  feet  better,  is  it  in  experience  more
successful,  than  from  its  nature  we  should  expect
it  to  be?  Now  I  am  much  afraid,  that  all  the
proof  which  can  he  drawn  either  from  observation
or  consciousness  is  against  it.  Of  other  men  we
must  judge  by  observation ;  of  ourselves  by  con-
sciousness, what  happens  then  to  gradual  re-
formation 1  Perpetual  relapses,  perpetually  defeat-
ed and  weakened  resolutions.  The  principle  of
resistance  is  weakened  by  every  relapse.  Did
the  mortification  of  a  .defeat  incite  and  quicken
men  to  stronger  efforts,  it  would  be  well.  But  it
has  a  contrary  effect;  it  renders  everjr  succeeding
exertion  more  feeble.  The  checked  indulgences,
which  in  the  progress  of  our  fancied  amendment
we  allow  ourselves,  are  more  than  sufficient  to
feed  desire,  to  keep  up  the  force  and  strength  of
temptation ;  nay,  perhaps  the  temptation  acquires
more  force  from  the  partial  curb  which  we  impose
upon  it  Then,  while  the  temptation  remains
with  unabated,  or  perhaps  augmented  strength,
our  resolution  is  suffering  continual  relaxation;


SERMONS  ON  SEVERAL  SUBJECTS.


oar  eruleavours  become  unsatisfactory  even  to  our-
selves. This  miserable  struggle  cannot  be  main-
tained kmg.  Although  nothing  but  persevering
in  it  coulu  save  us,  we  do  not  persevere.  Finding
not  ease,  but  difficulty  increased,  and  increasing
difficulty,  men  give  up  the  cause;  that  is,  they  try
to  settle  themselves  into  some  mode  of  thinking
which  may  quiet  their  consciences  and  their  fears.
They  fall  back  to  their  sins :  and  when  they  find
their  consciences  easier,  they  think  their  guilt  less ;
whereas  it  is  only  their  conscience  that  is  become
more  insensible ;  their  reasoning  more  treacherous
and  deceitful !  The  danger  is  what  it  was,  or
greater ;  the  guilt  is  so  too.  Would  to  God  we
could  say,  that  gradual  reforms  were  frequently
successful;  They  are  what  men  often  attempt;
they  are,  alas !  what  men  usually  fail  in.

tt  is  painful  to  seem  to  discourage  endeavours
of  any  kind  after  amendment ;  but  it  is  necessary
to  advertise  men  of  their  danger.  If  one  method
of  going  about  an  important  work  be  imposing  in
expectation,  and  yet  in  truth  likely  to  end  in  ruin ;
can  any  thing  be  more  necessary  than  to  set  forth
this  danger  and  this  consequence  plainly  1  This
».  precisely  the  case  with  gradual  reforms.  They
do  not  very  much,  alarm  our  passions :  they  soothe
oar  consciences.  They  do  not  alarm  our  passions,
because  the  absolute  rupture  is  not  to  come  yet.
We  are  not  yet  entirely  and  totally  to  bid  adieu
to  our  pleasures  and  indulgences,  never  to  enjoy
or  return  to  them  any  more.  We  only  have  in
view  to  wean  and  withdraw  ourselves  from  them

ar  degrees ;  and  this  is  not  so  harsh  and  formida-
e  a  resolution  as  the  other.  Yet  it  soothes  our
consciences.  It  presents  the  semblance  and. ap-
pearance of  repenting  and  reforming.  It  confesses
our  sense  of  sin  and  danger.  It  takes  up  the  pur-
pose, it  would  fain  encourage  us  with  the  hope,
of  delivering  ourselves  from  this  condition.  But
what  is  the  result  ?  Feeding  in  the  mean  time  and
fomenting  those  passions  which  are  to  be  con-
trolled and  resisted;  adding,  by  every  instance  of
E'ving  way  to  them,  fresh  force  and  strength  to
kbits  which  are  to  be  broken  off,  our  constancy
is  subdued  before  our  work  is  accomplished.  We
continue  yielding  to  the  importunity  of  temptation.
We  have  gained  nothing  by  our  miserable  endea-
vour, but  the  mortification  of  defeat.  Our  sins
are  still  repeated.  The  state  of  our  salvation  is
where  it  was.  Oh !  it  is  a  laborious,  a  difficult,  a
painful  work  to  shake  off  sin ;  to  change  the
course  of  a  sinful  life;  to  quit  gratifications  to
which  we  have  been  accustomed,  because  we  per-
ceive them  to  be  unlawful  'gratifications ;  and  to
find  satisfaction  in  others  which  are  innocent
and  virtuous.  If  in  one  thing  more  than  another
we  stand  in  need  of  God's  holy  succour  and
assistance,  of  the  aid  and  influence  of  bis  blessed
Spirit  upon  our  souls,  it  is  in  the  work  of  reform-
ation. But  can  we  reasonably  expect  it,  whilst
we  are  not  sincere  ?  And  I  say  again,  that  the
plan  of  gradual  reformation  is  in  contradiction  to
principle,  and  so  far  insincere.  Is  there  not  rea-
son to  believe  that  this  may  in  some  measure
account  for  the  failure  of  these  resolutions  1

But  it  will  be  asked  of  us,  what  better  plan
have  we  to  offer  1  We  answer,  to  break  off  our
sins  at  once.  This  is  properly  to  deny  ungod-
liness and  worldly  lusts.  This  is  truly  to  do,
what,  according  to  the  apostle,  the  grace  of  God
teaches  us  to-do.  fteting  thus,  we  may  pray,  we
may  humbly  hope  for  the  assistance  of  God's


Spirit  in  the  work  and  straggle  through  which
we  have  to  go.  And  I  take  upon  me  to  say,  that
all  experience  b  in  favour  of  this  plan,  in  prefer-
ence to  that  of  a  gradual  reform ;  in  favour  of  it,
both  with  respect  to  practicability,  and  with  re-
spect to  ease  and  happiness.  We  do  not  pretend
but  that  a  conflict  with  desire  must  be  supported;
that  great  resolution  is  necessary ;  yet  we  teach
that  the  pain  of  the  effort  is  lessened  by  this
method,  as  far  as  it  can  be  lessened  at  alL  Passions
denied,  firmly  denied  and  resisted,  and  not  kept
up  by  occasional  indulgences,  lose  their  power  of
tormenting.  Habits,  absolutely  and  totally  dis-
used, lose  their  hold.  It  is  the  nature  of  man.
They  then  leave  us  at  liberty  to  seek  and  to  find
happiness  elsewhere,  in  better  things;  to  enjoy
as  weir  as  to  practise  virtue ;  to  draw  comfort  from
religion;  to  dwell  upon  its  hopes;  to  pursue as
duties;  to  acquire  a  love,  a  taste,  and  relish  fit
its  exercises  and  meditations.

One  very  general  cause  of  (entanglement  in
habits  of  sin  is  the  connexion  which  they  have  *
with  our  way  of  life,  with  our  business,  with  the
objects  that  are  continually  thrown  in  our  way,
with  the  practices  and  usages  which  prevail  in  the
company  we  keep.  Every  condition  of  life  has
its  particular  temptation.  And  not  only  so,  but
when  we  have  fallen  into  evil  habits,  these  habits
so  mix  themselves  with  our  method  of  life,  return
so  upon  us  at  their  usual  times  and  places,  and
occurrence  of  objects,  that  it  becomes  very  difficult
to  break  the  habit,  without  a  general  change  of
our  whole  system.  Now  I  say,  whenever  this  is
a  man's  case,  that  he  cannot  shake  off  ins  sins
without  giving  up  his  way  of  life,  he  must  give
up  that  also,  let  it  cost  what  it  will;  for  it  is  in
truth  no  other  sacrifice  than  what  our  Saviour
himself  in  the  strongest  terms  enjoins,  when  he
bids  his  disciples  to  pluck  out  a  right  eye,  or  cut
off  a  right  hand  (that  is,  surrender  whatever  is
most  dear  or  valuable  to  them,)  that  they  be  not
cast  with  all  their  members  into  hell  fire.  If  a
trade  or  business  cannot  be  followed  without
giving  into  practices  which  conscience  does  not
approve,  we  must  relinquish  the  trade  or  business
itself.  If  it  cannot  be  followed  without  bringing
us  into  the  way  of  temptation  to  intemperance,
more  than  we  can  withstand,  or  in  fact  do  with-
stand, we  must  also  relinquish  it,  and  turn  our-
selves to  some  safer  course.  If  the  company  we
keep,  the  conversation  we  hear,  the  objects  that
surround  us,  tend  to  draw  us,  and  do  intact  draw
us,  into  debauchery  and  licentiousness,  we  must
fly  from  the  place,  the  company,  and  the  objects,
no  matter  with  what  reluctance  we  do  so,  or  what
loss  and  inconvenience  we  suffer  by  doing  H.
This  may  appear  to  be  a  hard  lesson :  it  is,  never-
theless, what  right  reason  dictates,  and  what,  as
hath  already  been  observed,  our  Saviour  himself
enjoins,  in  terms  made  as  strong  and  forcible  as
he  could  make  them.

Sometimes  men  are  led  by  prudential  motives,
or  by  motives  of  mere  indinatiov,  to  change  their
employment,  their  habitation,  or  their  station  of
life.  These  occasions  afford  excellent  and  invalua-
ble opportunities  for  correcting  and  breaking  off
any  vicious  habits  which  we  may  have  contracted.
It  is  when  many  associations,  which  give  strength
to  a  sinful  habit,  are  interrupted  and  dissolved  by
the  change  which  has  taken  place,  that  we  can
best  resolve  to  conquer  the  sin,  ana  set  out  upon
a  new  course  and  a  new  life. The  man  who


SERMONS  ON  SEVERAL  SUBJECTS.


599


don  not  4aka  advantage  of  such  opportunities
when  they  viae,  has  not  the  solvation  of  his  soul
at  heart;  nevertheless,  they  are  not  to  be  waited

But  to  those  sudden  changes  which  we  recom-
mend, will  it  be  objected  mat  they  are  seldom
lasting?  Is  this4he  fact?  Are  they  more  liable
to  laiF,  than  attempts  to  change  gradually  1  I
.  think  not  And  there  is  always  wis  difference
between  them.  A  sudden  change  is  sincere  at
the; time;  a  gradual  change  never  is  such  truly
and  properly :  and  this  is  a  momentous  distinc-
tion. In  every  view,  and  in  every  allowance,  and
in  every  plea  of  human  frailty,  we  must  distin-
guish between  what  is  consistent  with  sincerity,
and  what  is  not.  And  in  these  two  methods  or
setting  about  a  reformation,  by  reason  of  their  dif-
ferent character  in  this  respect,  the  first  may,
though  with  fear  and  humility,  expect  the  help  of
God's  aiding  Spirit,  the  other  hardly  can. '  For
whilst,  not  by  surprise  and  unpremeditatedly,  we
fell  into  casual  sins,  but  whilst,  by  plan  and  upon
system,  we  allow  ourselves  in  licenses,  which,
though  not  so  many  or  so  great  as  before,  are
still,  whenever  they  are  indulged,  so  many  known
sins ;  whilst,  in  a  word,  though  we  imagine  our-
selves to  be  in  a  progress  of  amendment,  we  yet
deliberately  continue  to  sin,  our  endeavours  are  so
corrupted,  I  will  not  say  by  imperfection,  but  by
insincerity,  that  we  can  hardly  nope  to  call  down
upon  them  the  blessing  of  Almighty  God.

Reformation  is  never  impossible ;  nor,  in  a  strict
sense,  can  it  be  said,  to  be  doubtful.  Nothing  is,
properly  speaking,  doubtful,  which  it  is  in  a  man's
power  to  accomplish ;  nothing  is  doubtful  to  us,
bat  what  is  placed  out  of  the  reach  of  our  will,  of
depends  upon  causes  which  we  cannot  influence ;
and  this  is  not  the  cose  with  reformation  from  sin.
On  the"  other  hand,  if  we  look  to  experience,  we
are  compelled,  though  with  grief  of  heart,  to  con-
fess that  the  danger  is  very  great  of  a  man,  who
is  engaged  in  a  course  of  sip,  never  reforming
from  his  sin  at  all.  Oh  1  let  this  danger  be  known.
Xjet  it  stand,  like  a  naming  sword,  to  turn  us  aside
from  the  road  to  vice.  Let  it  oiler  itself  in  its
full  magnitude.  Let  it  strike,  as  it  ought  the
souls  of  those  who  are  upon  the  brink,  perhaps,
of  Aheir  whole  future  fete ;  who  are  tempted ;  and
who  are  deliberating  about  entering  upon  some
course  of  sin.

Let  also  the  perception  and  convincement  of
this  danger  sink  deep,  into  the  hearts  of  all  wljo
are  in  such  a  situation,  as  that  they  must  either
reform  or  perish.  They  have  it  in  their  power,
and  it  must  be  now  their  only  hope,  by  strong  and
'firm  exertion,  to  make  themselves  an  exception  to
the  general  lot  of  habitual  sinners.  It  must  be  an
exception.  .  If  they  leave  things  to  their  course,
they  will  share  the  fate  in  which  they  see  others,
involved  in  guilt  like  themselves,  end  their  lives.
It  is  only  by  a  most  strenuous  effort  they  can
rescue  themselves  from  it.  We  apprise  them,
that  their  best  hope  is  in  a  sudden  and  complete
change,  sincerely  begun,  faithfully  persisted  in ;
broken,  it  is  possible,  by  human  frailty,  but  never
changed  into  a  different  plan,  never  declining  into
a  compromised,  partial,  gradual  reform;  on  the
contrary,  resumed  with  the  same  sincerity  as  that
with  which  it  set  out,  and  with  a  force  of  resolu-
tion, and  an  earnestness  of  prayer,  increased  in
proportion  to  the  clearer  view  they  have  acquired
of  their  danger  and  of  their  want  1


SERMON  XXXIII. -

THIS  UPS  A  STATE  OF  PROBATION.

It  is  good  for  me  that  I  have  been  afflicted,  that
I  might  learn  thy  statutes. — Psalm  cxix.  71.

Of  the  various  views  under  which  human  life
has  been  considered,  no  one  seems  so  reasonable
as  that  which  regards  it  as  a  state  of  probation':
meaning,  by  a  state  of  probation,  a  state  calculated
for  trying  us,  and  calculated  for  improving  us.  A
fltate  of  complete  enjoyment  and  happiness  it  cer-
tainly is  not.  The  hopes,  the  spirits,  and  the
inexperience  of  young  men  and  young  women
are  apt,  and  very  willing,  to  see  it  in  this  light
To  them  life  is  full  of  entertainment ;  their  rehab
is  high;  their  expectations  unbounded :  for  a  very
few  years  it  is  possible,  and  I  think  barely  possi-
ble, that  they  may  go  on  without  check  or  inter-
ruption ;  but  they  will  be  cured  of  this  delusion.
Pain  and  sorrow,  disease  and  infirmity,  accident
and  disappointment,  losses  and  distress,  will  soon
meet  them  in  their  acquaintance,  their  families,  or
their  persons.  The  hard-hearted  for  their  own.
the  tender  for  others'  wo,  will  always  find  and
feel  enough  at  least  to  convince  them,  that  this
world  was  not  made  for  a  scene  of  perpetual  gayety
or  uninterrupted  enjoyment.

Still  less  can  we  believe  that  it  was  made  for  a
place  of  misery :  so  much  otherwise,  that  misery
is  in  no  instance  the  end  or  object  of  contrivance.
We  are  surrounded  by  contrivance  and  design.
A  human  body  is  a  cluster  of  contrivances.  So
is  the  body  of  every  animal ;  so  is  the  structure  of
every  plant;  so  is  even  the  vilest  weed  that  grows
upon  the  road-side.  Contrivances,  therefore,
infinite  in  number,  infinite  also  in  variety,  are  all
directed  to  beneficial  purposes,  and,  in  a  vast  plu-
rality of  instances,  execute  their  purpose.  In  our
own  bodies  only  reflect  how  many  thousand  things
must  go  right  for  us  to  be  an  hour  at  ease.  Yet
at  all  times  multitudes  are  so ;  and  are  so  without
being  sensible  how  great  a  thing  it  is.  Too  much
or  too  little  of  sensibility,  or  of  action,  in  any  one
of  the  almost  numberless  organs,  or  of  any  part
of  the  numberless  organs,  by  which  life  is  sus-
tained, may  be  productive  of  extreme  anguish  or
of  lasting  infirmity.  A  particle,  smaller  than  an
atom  in  a  sun-beam,  may,  in  a  wrong  place,  be
the  occasion  of  the  loss  of  limbs,  of  senses,  or  of
life.  Yet  under  all  this  continual  jeopardy,  this
momentary  liability  to  danger  and  disorder,  we
are  preserved.  It  is  not  possible,  therefore,  that
this  state  could  be  designed  as  a  state  of  misery,
because  the  great  tendency  of  the  designs  which
we  see  in  the  universe,  is  to  counteract,  to  prevent,
to  guard  against  it.  We  know  enough  of  nature
to  Be  assured,  that  misery,  universal,  irremediable,
inexhaustible  misery,  'was  in  the  Creator's  power
if  he  had  willed  it.  Foftismuch,  therefore,  as
tjie  result  is  so  much  otherwise,  we  aw  certain
that  no  such  purpose  dwelt  in  the  divine  mind.

But  since,  amidst  much  happiness,  and  amidst
contrivances  for  happiness,  so  far  as  we  can
judge,  (and  of  many  we  can  judge,)  misery,  and
very  considerable  portions  of  it  do  exist,  it  becomes
a  natural  inquiry,  to  what  end  this  mixture  of

§ood  and  evil  is  properly  adapted  3  And  I  think
le  Scriptures  place  before  us,  not  only  the  true,
([for,  if  we  believe  the  Scriptures,  We  must  believe
it  to  be  that,)  but  the  most  rational  and  satiaiac-


€00


SERMONS  ON  SEVERAL  SUBJECTS.


tory  answer  which  can  be  given  to  the  inquiry;
namely,  that  it  is  intended  for  a  state  of  trial  and
probation.  For  it  appears  to  me  capable  of  proof,
both  that  no  state  but  one,  which  contained  in  it
an  admixture  of  good  and  evil,  would  be  suited  to
this  purpose;  and  also  that  our  present  state,  as
well  in  its  general  plan  as  in  its  particular  proper-
ties, serves  this  purpose  with  peculiar  propriety.

A  state,  totally  incapable  of  misery,  could  not
be  a  state  of  pronation.  It  would  not  be  a  state  in
which  virtue  or  vice  could  even  be  exercised  at  all
— I  mean  that  large  class  of  virtues  and  vices,
which  we  comprehend  under  the  name  of  social
duties.  The  existence  of  these  depends  upon  the
existence  of  misery  as  well  as  of  happiness  in  the
world,  and  of  different  degrees  of  both ;  because
their  very  nature  and  difference  consists  in  pro-
moting or  preventing,  in  augmenting  or  diminish-
ing, in  causing,  aggravating,  or  relieving  the
wants,  sufferings,  and  distresses  of  our  fellow-
ereatores.  Compassion,  charity,  humanity,  bene-
volence, and  even  justice,  could  have  no  place  in
the  world,  if  there  were  not  human  conditions  to
excite  them;  objects  and  sufferings  upon  which
the  v  might  operate ;  misery,  as  well  as  happiness,
which  might  be  affected  by  them.

Nor  would,  in  my  opinion,  the  purposes  of  trial
be  sufficiently  provided  for,  by  a  state  in  which
happiness  and  misery  regularly  followed  virtue
and  vice ;  I  mean,  in  which  there  was  no  happi-
ness, but  what  was  merited  by  virtue ;  no  misery
but  what  was  brought  on  by  vice.  Such  a  state
.would  be  a  state  of  retribution,  not  a  state  of  pro-
bation. It  may  be  our  state  hereafter;  it  may  be
a  better  state ;  but  it  is  not  a  state  of  probation,  it
is  not  the  state  through  which  it  is  fitting  we
should  pass  before  we  enter  into  the  other ;  for
when  we  speak  of  a  state  of  probation,  we  speak
of  a  state  in  which  the  character  may  both  be  put
to  the  proof,  and  also  its  good  qualities  be  confirm-
ed and  strengthened,  if  not  formed  and  produced,
by  having  occasions  presented  in  which  they  may
be  called  forth  and  required.  Now,  beside  that,
the  social  qualities  which  have  been  mentioned
would  be  very  limited  in  their  exercise,  if  there
was  no  evil  in  the  world  but  what  was  plainly  a
punishment,  (far  though  we  might  pity,  and  even
that  would  be  greatly  checked,  we  could  not  ac-
tually succour  or  relieve,  without  disturbing  the
execution,  or  arresting,  as  it  were,  the  hand  of
justice ;)  beside  this  difficulty,  there  is  another
class  of  most  important  duties  which  would  be  in
a  great  measure  excluded.  They  are  the  severest,
the  sublimest,  perhaps  the  most  meritorious,  of
which  we  are  capable ;  I  mean  patience  and  com-
posure under  distress,  pain,  and  affliction;  a
steadfast  keeping  up  of  our  confidence  in  God,
and  our  dependence  upon  his  final  goodness,  even
at  the  time  that  every  thing  present  is  discourag-
ing and  adverse ;  and.  what  is  no  less  difficult  to
retain,  a  cordial  desire  Tor  the  happiness  and  com-
fort of  others,  even  then,  when  we  are  deprived  of
our  own,  I  say,  that  the  possession  of  this  tem-
per is  almost  the  perfection  of  our  nature.  But  it
is  then  only  possessed,  when  it  is  put  to  the  trial :
tried  at  all,  it  could  not  have  been  in  a  life  made
up  only  of  pleasure  and  gratification.  Few  things
are  easier  than  to  perceive,  to  feel,  to  acknowledge,
to  extol  the  goodness  of  God,  the  bounty  of  Pro-
vidence, the  beauties  of  nature,  when  all  things
go  well ;  when  our  health,  our  spirits,  our  circum-
stances, conspire  to  fill  our  hearts  with  gladness,


and  our  tongues  with  praise.  This  is  easy;  tint
is  delightful  None  but  they  who  are  sank  in
sensuality,  sottishneaa,  and  stupefaction,  orwhoae
understandings  are  dissipated  by  frivolous  par*
suits ;  none  but  the  most  giddy  and  insenriHeeui
be  destitute  of  these  sentiments.  Bat  this  »  not
the  trial  or  the  proof.  It  is  in  the  chambers  of
sickness;  under  the  stroke  of  affliction;  amid*
the  pinching*  of  want,  the  groans  of  pain,  the
pressures  of  infirmity;  in  gjief,  in  iiikfcruiue;
through  gloom  and  honor— that  it  will  he  seen
whether  we  hold  fast  our  hope,  our  confidence,
our  trust  in  God ;  whether  this  hope  and  confi-
dence he  able  to  produce  in  us  resignation,  ac-
quiescence, and  submission.  And  as  those  dispo-
sitions, which  perhaps  form  fJie  comparative  per-
fection of  our  moral  nature,  could  not  have  ten
exercised  in  a  world  of  unmixed  ^ratincatkm,  m
neither  would  they  have  found  their  proper  office
or  object  in  a  state  of  strict  and  evident  retribu-
tion; that  is,  in  which  we  had  no  suffering  to
submit  to,  but  what  were  evidently  and  manftat-
ly  the  punishment  of  our  sins.  A  men  sabnav
swn  to  punishment,  evidently  and  plainly  such,
would  not  have  constituted,  at  least  would  vov
imperfectly  have  constituted  the  disjxwtionwhka
we  speak  of,  the  true  resignation  of  a  Christian.

It  seems,  therefore,  to  be  argued,  with  wry
great  probability,  from  the  general  economy  of
things  around  us,  that  our  present  state  was
meant  for  a  state  of  probation;  because  pasitivdy
it  contains  that  admixture  of  good  and  evil  winch
ought  to  be  found  in  such  a  state  to  make  it  to-
swer  its  purpose— the  production,  exercise,  tod
improvement  of  virtue :  and,  because  negatively,
it  could  not  be  intended  either  for  a  state  of  abso-
lute happiness,  or  a  state  of  absolute  misery,  nei-
ther of  which  it  is.

We  may  now  also  observe  in  what  manner
many  of  the  evils  of  life  are  adjusted  to  this  parti-
cular end,  and  how  also  they  are  contrived  to
soften  and  alleviate  themselves  and  one  another.
It  will  be  enough  at  present,  if  I  can  point  oat
how  for  this  is  the  case  in  the  two  instances,  which,
of  all  others,  the  most  nearly  and  seriously  affect
us— death  and  disease.  The  events  of  hfe  and
death  are  so  disposed,  as  to  beget,  in  all  reflecting
minds,  a  constant  watchfulness.  "What  1  ay
unto  you  I  say  unto  all,  watch."  Hold  yourselves
in  a  constant  state  of  preparation.  "  Be  ready,  fcr
you  know  not  when  your  Lord  cometh."  Had
there  been  assigned  to  our  lives  a  certain  age  or
period,  to  which  all,  or  almost  all,  were  sure  of
arriving:  in  the  younger  part,  that  is  to  say,  in
nine  tenths  of  the  whole  or  mankind,  tlieiewonld
have  been  such  an  absolute  security  as  wonkl
have  produced,  it  is  much  to  be  feared,  the  omwat
neglect  of  duty,  of  religion,  of  God,  of  themsdvea;
whilst  the  remaining  part  would  have  been  too
much  overcome  with  the  certainty  of  their  fete,
would  have  too  much  resembled  the  condition  of
those  who  have  before  their  eyes  a  fixed  and  ap-
pointed dav  of  execution.  The  same  conseqneno*
would  have  ensued  if  death  had  followed  anv
known  rule  whatever.  It  would  have  produced
security  in  one  part  of  the  species,  and  despairm
another.  The  first  would  have  been  in  the  high-
est degree  dangerous  to  the  character ;  the  second,
insupportable  to  the  spirits.  The  same  observa-
tion we  are  entitled  to  repeat  concerning  the  two
cases— of  sudden  death,  and  of  death  brought  on
by  long  disease.  If  sudden  deaths  never  occuncd,


\


SERMONS  ON  SEVERAL  SUBJECTS.


601


those  who  found  themselves  free  from
would  be  in  perfect  safety;  they  would  regard
themselves  as  out  of  the  reach  of  danger.  With
all  apprehensions  they  would  lose  all  seriousness
and  all  restraint :  and  those  persons  who  the  most
want  to  be  checked  and  to  be  awakened  to  a  sense
of  the  consequences  of  virtue  and  vice,  the  strong,
the  healthy,  and  the  active,  would  be  without  the
greatest  of  all  checks,  that  which  arises  from  the
constant  liability  of  being  called  to  judgment.  If
there  were  no  sudden  deaths,  the  most  awful
warning  which  mortals  can  receive  would  be  lost:
That  consideration  which  carries  the  mind  the
most  forcibly  to  religion,  which  convinces  us  that
it  is  indeed  our  proper  concern,  namely,  the  pre-
eariousnees  of  our  present  condition,  would  be
done  awav.  On  the  other  hand,  if  sudden  deaths
were  too  frequent,  human  life  might  become  too
perilous:  there  would  not  be  stability  and  depend-
ence either  upon  our  own  fives  or  the  lues  of
those  with  whom  we  were  connected,  sufficient
to  carry  on  the  regular  offices  of  human  society.
In  this  respect,  therefore,  we  see  much  wisdom.
Supposing  death  to  be  appointed  as  the  mode
(and  some  mode  there  must  be)  of  passing  from
one  state  of  existence  to  another,  the  manner  in
which  it  is  made  to  happen,  conduces  to  the  pur-
poses of  warning  and  admonition,  without  over-
throwing the  conduct  of  human  amirs.

Of  sickness,  the  moral  and  religious  use  will  be
acknowledged,  and,  in  fact,  is  acknowledged,  by
all  who  have  experienced  it;  and  they  who  have
not  experienced  it,  own  it  to  be  a  fit  state  for  the
meditations,  the  offices  of  religion.  The  fault,  I
fear,  is,  that  we  refer  ourselves  too  much  to  that
state.  We  think  of  these  things  too  little  in
health,  because  we  shall  necessarily  have  to  think
of  them  when  we  come  to  die.  This  is  a  great
■mult ;  but  then  it  confesses,  what  is  undoubtedly
true,  that  the  sick-bed  and  the  death-bed  shall  in-
evitably force  these  reflections  upon  us.  In  that
it  is  right,  though  it  be  wrong  in  waiting  till  the
•Bason  of  actual  virtue  and  actual  reformation  be
past,  and  when,  consequently,  the  sick-bed  and
the  death-bed  can  bring  nothing  but  uncertainty,
horror,  and  despair.  But  my  present  subject  leads
me  to  consider  sickness,  not  so  much  as  a  prepa-
ration for  death  as  the  trial  of  our  virtues;  of  vir-
tues the  most  severe,  the  most  arduous,  perhaps
the  best  pleasing  to  Almighty  God;  namely,  trust
and  confidences  him  under  circumstances  of  dis-
couragement and  perplexity.  To  lift  up  the  fee-
ble bands  and  the  languid  eye;  to  draw  and  turn
with  holy  hope  to  our  Creator,  when  every  com-
fort forsakes  us,  and  every  help  foils;  to  feel  and
find  in  him,  in  his  mercies,  his  promises,  in  the
works  of  his  providence,  and  still  more  in  his  word,
•ad  in  the  revelation  of  his  designs  by  Jesus
Christ,  such  rest  and  consolation  to  the  soul  as  to
stifle  our  complaints  and  pacify  our  murmurs;  to
begat  in  our  hearts  tranquillity  and  confidence  in
the  place  of  terror  and  consternation,  and  this  with
simplicity  and  sincerity,  without  having,  or  wish-
ing to  have,  one  human  witness  to  observe  or  know
it,— is  such  a  test  and  trial  of  faith  and  hope,  of
patience  and  devotion,  as  cannot  fail  of  being  in
si  very  high  degree  well-pleasing  to  the  Author  of
our  natures,  the  guardian,  the  inspector,  and  the
rowarder  of  our  virtues.  It  is  true  in  this  instance,
as  it  is  true  in  all,  that  whatever  tries  our  virtue
strengthens  and  improves  it  Virtue  comes  out  of
the  fie  purer  and  brighter  than  it  went  into  it.


Many  virtues  are  not  only  proved  but  produced
by  trials:  they  have  properly  no  existence  with-
out them.  "  We  glory/  saith  St.  Paul,  "in  tri-
bulation also,  knowing  that  tribulation  worketh
tience,  and  patience  experience,  and  experience


ut  of  sickness  we  may  likewise  remark,  how
wonderfully  it  reconciles  us  to  the  thoughts,  the
expectation,  and  the  approach  of  death ;  and  how
this  becomes,  in  the  hand  of  Providence,  an  ex-
ample of  one  evil  being  made  to  correct  another.
Without  question,  the  difference  is  wide  between
the  sensations  of  a  person  who  is  condemned  to
die  by  violence,  and  of  one  who  is  brought  gradually
to  his  end  by  the  progress  of  disease;  and  this  dif-
ference sickness  produces.  To  the  Christian
whose  mind  is  not  harrowed  up  by  the  memory  of
unrepented  guilt,  the  calm  and  gentle  approach
of  his  dissolution  has  nothing  in  it  terrible.  In
that  sacred  custody  in  which  they  that  sleep  in
Christ  will  be  preserved,  he  sees  a  rest  from  pain
and  weariness,  from  trouble  and  distress :  Gra-
dually withdrawn  from  the  cares  and  interests  of
the  world ;  more  and  more  weaned  from  the  plea-
sures of  the  body,  and  feeling  the  weight  and  pres-
sure of  its  infirmities,  he  may  be  brought  almost
to  desire  with  St  Paul  to  be  no  longer  absent
from  Christ;  knowing,  as  he  did,  and  as  he  as-
sures us,  that  "  if  our  earthly  house  of  this  taber-
nacle were  dissolved,  we  have  a  building  of  God,
a  house  not  made  with  hands,  eternal  in  the  hea-
vens."


SERMON  XXXIV.

THE  KNOWLEDGE  OF  ONE  ANOTHER  IN  A  FUTURE
STATE.

Whom  we  preach,  warning  every  man,  and
teaching  every  man  in  all  wisdom,  that  we
may  present  every  man  perfect  in  Christ  Je-
sus.—Col  I  28.

These  words  have  a  primary  and  a  secondary
use.  In  their  first  and  most  obvious  view,  they
express  the  extreme  earnestness  and  anxiety  with
which  the  apostle  Paul  sought  the  salvation  of  his
converts.  To  bring  men  to  Jesus  Christ,  and,
when  brought,  to  turn  and  save  them  from  their
sins,  and  to  keep  them  steadfast  unto  the  end  in
the  faith  and  obedience  to  which  they  were  called,
was  the  whole  work  of  the  great  apostle's  ministry,
the  desire  of  his  heart,  and  the  labour  of  his  life :
it  was  that  in  which  he  spent  all  his  time  and  all
his  thought;  for  the  sake  of  which  he  travelled
from  country  to  country,  warning  every  man,  as
he  speaks  in  the  text,  and  exhorting;  every  man,
enduring  every  hardship  and  every  injury,  ready
at  all  times  to  sacrifice  his  life,  and  at  last  actually
sacrificing  it,  in  order  to  accomplish  the  great  pur-
pose of  his  mission,  that  he  might  at  the  last  day
present  his  beloved  converts  perfect  in  Christ  Je-
sus. This  is  the  direct  scope  of  the  text  But  it
is  not  for  this  that  1  have  made  choice  of  it  The
last  clause  of  the  verse  contains  within  it,  indirect-
ly and  by  implication,  a  doctrine  certainly  of  great
personal  importance,  and,  I  trust,  also  of  great
comfort  to  every  man  who  hears  me.  The  clause
is  this,  "  That  we  may  present  every  man  perfect
in  Christ  Jesus:"  by  which  I  understand  9t  Paul
51


SERMONS  ON  SEVERAL  SUBJECTS.


to  sapiess  Ins  hope  and  prayer,  that  at  the  genera!
jodguient  of  the  world,  he  might  present  to  Christ
the  fruits  of  his  ministry,  the  converts  whom  he
bad  made  to  his  faith  and  religion,  and  might  pre-
sent them  perfect  in  every  good  work.  Ana  if
this  be  rightly  interpreted,  then  it  afford*  a  mani-
fest and  necessary  inference,  that  the  saints  in  a
future  life  will  meet  and  be  known  again  to  one
another;  for  how,  without  knowing  again  his  con-
verts in  their  new  and  glorified  state,  could  St.  Paul
desire  or  expect  to  present  them  at  the  last  day  1

My  brethren,  this  is  a  doctrine  of  real  conse-
quence. That  we  shall  come  again  to  a  new  life ;
that  we  shall,  by  some  method  or  other,  be  made
happy,  or  be  made  miserable,  in  that  new  state,
according  to  the  deeds  done  in  the  body,  according
as  we  have  acted  and  governed  ourselves  in  this
world,  is  a  point  affirmed  absolutely  and  positive-
ly, in  all  shapes,  and  under  every  variety  of  ex-
pression, in  almost  every  page  of  the  New  Testa-
ment. It  is  the  grand  point  inculcated  from  the
beginning  to  the  end  of  that  book.  But  concern-
ing the  particular  nature  of  the  change  we  are  to
undergo,  and  in  what  is  to  consist  the  employ-
ment and  happiness  of  those  blessed  spirits  which
we  received  into  heaven,  our  information,  even
under  the  Gospel,  is  very  limited.  We  own  it  is
so.  Even  St.  Paul,  who  had  extraordinary  com-
munications, confessed,  "  that  in  these  things  we
see  through  a  glass  darkly."  But  at  the  same
time  that  we  acknowledge  that  we  know  little,  we
ought  to  remember,  that  without  Christ  we  should
have  known  nothing.  It  might  not  be  possible,
in  our  own  present  state,  to  convey  to  us,  by  words,
more  clear  or  explicit  conceptions  of  what  will
hereafter  become  of  us;  if  possible,  it  might  not
be  fitting.  In  that  celebrated  chapter,  the  15th
of  1st  Corinthians,  St  Paul  makes  an  inquisitive
person  ask,  "  How  are  the  dead  raised,  and  with
what  body  do  they  come  ?"  From  his  answer  to
this  question  we  are  able,  I  think,  to  collect  thus
much  clearly  and  certainly :  that  at  the  resurrect
tion  we  shall  have  bodies  of  some  sort  or  other:
that  they  will  be  totally  different  from,  and  greatly
excelling,  our  present  bodies,  though  possibly  in
some  manner  or  other  proceeding  from  them,  as  a
plant  from  its  seed :  that  as  there  exists  in  nature
a  great  variety  of  animal  substances;  one  flesh  of
man,  another  of  beasts,  another  of  birds,  another
of  fishes;  as  there  exists  also  great  differences  in
the  nature,  dignity,  and  splendour  of  inanimate
substances,  "  one  glory  of  the  sun,  another  of  the
moon,  another  of  the  stars ;"  so  there  subsist,  like-
wise, in  the  magazines  of  God  Almighty's  crea-
tion, two  very  distinct  kinds  of  bodies,  (still  both
bodies,)  a  natural  body  and  a  spiritual  body :  that
the  natural  body  is  what  human  beings  bear  about
with  them  now;  the  spiritual  body,  far  surpassing
the  other,  what  the  blessed  will  be  clothed  with
hereafter.  "  Flesh  and  Wood,"  our  apostle  teaches,
"cannot  inherit  the  kingdom  of  God;"  that  is,  is
by  no  means  suited  to  that  stale,  is  not  capable  of
it.  Yet  living  men  are  flesh  and  blood;  the  dead
inthe  graves  are  the  remains  of  the  same :  where-
fore to  make  all  who  are  Christ's  capable  of  en-
tering into  his  eternal  kingdom,  and  at  all  fitted
wit,  a great  change  shall  be  suddenly  wrought.
As  welTali  the  just  who  shall  be  alive  at  the
cwMng  of  Christ,  (whenever  that  event  takes
P*weJ.aa  those  who  shall  be  raised  from  the  dead,
K^m  the  twinkling  of  an  eye,  be  changed.
»*hes  they  snail  retain  still,  but  so  altered  uTSmi


and  reunion,  in  nature  and
corruptible  shall  put  on  incorruption ;"  what  ii
now  necessarily  mortal  and  necessarily  perissshs*,
shall  acquire  a  fixed  and  permanent  existence.
And  this  is  agreeable  to,  or  rather  the  same  thing
as,  what  our  apostle  delivers  in  another  epistle,
where  be  teaches  us,  that  "Christ  shall  change
our  vile  body,  that  it  may  be  like  his  glorious
body ;"  a  change  so  great,  so  stupendous,  that  be
justly  styles  it  an  act  of  omnipotence:  "accord-
ing, says  he,  "  to  the  mighty  working,  whereby
he  m  able  to  subdue  all  things  to  hinsaefe"  Sines,
then,  a  great  alteration  will  take  place)  in  the  frame
and  constitution  of  the  bodies  with  which  we  shall
be  raised,  from  those  which  we  carry  with  us  to
the  grave*  it  requires  some  authority  or  passass
of  Scripture  to  prove,  that  after  this  change,  and
in  this  new  state,  we  shall  be  known  again  toons
another;  that  those  who  know  each  other  oa
earth,  will  know  each  other  in  heaven.  1  do  al-
low, that  the  general  strain  of  Scripture  seems  to
suppose  it;  that  when  St.  Paul  speaks  "of  the
spirits  of  just  men  made  perfect,1'  and  of  their
"coming  to  the  general  assembly  of  saints,"  it
seems  to  import  that  we  should  be  known  of
them,  and  of  one  another;  that  when  Christ  de-
clares, "  that  the  secrets  of  the  heart  shall  be  dis-
closed," it  imports,  that  they  shall  be  dnclosed  to
those  who  were  before  the  witnesses  of  our  ac-
tions. I  do  also  think  that  it  b  sgreeable  to  the
dictates  of  reason  itself  to  believe,  that  the  suae
great  God  who  brings  men  to  life  again,  wiD
bring  those  together  whom  death  has  separated.
When  his  power  is  at  work  in  this  great  dispen-
sation, it  is  very  probable  that  this  should  be  a  part
of  his  gracious  design.  But  for  a  specific  text,  I
know  none  which  sneaks  the  thing  more  posi-
tively than  this  which  I  have  chosen.  St.  Paul,
you  see,  expected  that  he  should  know,  and  be
known  to  those  his  converts;  that  their  ielataos
should  subsist  and  be  retained  between  them ;  and
with  this  hope  he  laboured  and  endeavoured,  in-
stantly and  incessantly,  that  he  might  be  able  at
last  to  present  them,  and  to  present  them  perfect
in  Christ  Jesus.  Now  what  St.  Paul  appeared
to  look  for  as  to  the  general  continuance,  or  rather
revival,  of  our  knowledge  of  each  other  after
death,  every  man  who  strives,  like  St.  Pant,  to  at-
tain to  the  resurrection  of  the  dead,  may  expect,
as  well  as  he.

Having  discoursed  thus  for  concerning  the  arti-
cle of  the  doctrine  itself,  I  will  now  proceed  to
enforce  such  practical  reflections  as  result  from  it
Now  it  is  necessary  for  you  to  observe,  that  afl
which  is  here  produced  from  Scripture  concerning
the  resurrection  of  the  dead,  relates  solely  to  the
resurrection  of  the  just.  It  is  of  them  only  that
St.  Paul  speaks  in  the  15th  chapter  of  1st  Co-
rinthians. It  is  of  the  body  of  him,  who  is  accept-
ed in  Christ,  that  the  apostle  declares,  that  it  A'9
sown  in  dishonour,  but  raised  in  glory:  sown  in
weakness,  raised  in  power."  Likewise,  when  he
speaks,  in  another  place,  of  "  Christ's  changing
our  vile  bodies  that  they  may  be  like  his  gfcnoot
body,"  it  is  of  the  body  of  Christ's  saints  alone,
of  whom  this  is  said.  This  point  is,  1  think,
agreed  upon  amongst  learned  men,  and  is  indeed
very  plain.  In  like  manner,  in  the  passage  of  the
text,  and,  1  think,  it  will  be  found  true  of  every
other  in  which  mankind  knowing  one  another  is
a  future  life  is  implied,  the  implication  extendi
only  to  those  who  are  received  amongst  the


SERMONS  ON  SEVERAL  SUBJECTS.


603


Messed.  Whom  was  St  Paul  to  know?
those  whom  he  was  to  present  perfect  in  Christ
Jesus.  Concerning  the  reprobate  and  rejected,
whether  they  will  not  be  banished  from  the  pre-
sence of  Goo,  and  from  all  their  former  relations;
whether  they  will  not  bejost,  as  to  all  happiness
of  their  own,  so  to  the  knowledge  of  those  who
knew  them  m  this  mortal  state,  we  have,  from
Scripture,  no  assurance  or  intimation  whatever.
One  thing  seems  to  follow  with  probability  from
the  nature  of  the  thing,  namely,  that  if  the  wicked
be  known  to  one  another  in  a  state  of  perdition,
their  knowledge  will  only  serve  to  aggravate  their


What  then  is  the  inference  from  all  this?  Do
we  seek,  do  we  covet  earnestly  to  be  restored  to
the  society  of  those  who  were  once  near  and  dear
to  us,  and  who  are  gone  before? — It  is  only  by
leading  godly  lives  that  we  can  hope  to  have  this
wish  accomplished.  Should  we  prefer,  to  all  de-
lights, to  all  pleasures  in  the  world,  the  satisfac-
tion ef  meeting  again  in  happiness  and  peace,
those  whose  presence,  whilst  they  were  amonp  us,
made  up  the  comfort  and  enjoyment  of  our  lives?
—It  must  be,  by  giving  up  our  sins,  by  parting
with  our  criminal  delights  and  guilty  pursuits,
that  we  can  ever  expect  to  attain  4k  satisfaction.
Is  there  a  great  difference  between  the  thought  of
losing  those  we  love  for  ever:  of  taking  at  their
deaths  or  our  own  an  eternal  farewell,  never  to
see  them  more— and  the  reflection  that  we  are
about  to  be  separated,  for  a  few  years  at  the  long-
eat,  to  be  united  with  them  in  a  new  and  better
state  of  mutual  existence?  Is  there,  I  say,  a  dif-
ference to  the  heart  of  man  between  these  two
things  ?  and  does  it  not  call  upon  us  to  strive  with
redoubled  endeavours,  that  the  case  truly  may
turn  out  so?  The  more  and  more  we  reflect  upon
the  difference  between  the^onsequences  of  a  lewd,
unthinking,  careless,  profane,  dishonest  life,  and  a
fife  of  religion,  sobriety,  seriousness,  good  actions
and  good  principle^  the  more  we  shall  see  the
madness  and  stupidity  of  the  one,  and  the  true
solid  wisdom  of  toe  other.  This  is  one  of  the  dis-
tinctions. If  we  go  on  in  our  sins,  we  are  not  to
expect  to  awaken  to  a  joyful  meeting  with  our
friends,  and  relatives,  and  dear  connexions.  If  we
turn  away  from  our  sins,  and  take  up  religion  in
earnest,  we  may.  My  brethren,  religion  disarms
even  death.  It  disarms  it  of  that  which  is  its  bit-
terness and  its  sting,  the  power  of  dividing.those
who  are  dear  to  one  another.  But  this  blessing,
like  every  blessing  which  it  promises,  is  only  to
the  just  and  good!,  to  the  penitent  and  reformed,
to  those  who  are  touched  at  the  heart  with  a  sense
of  its  importance ;  who  know  thoroughly  and  ex-
perimentally, who  feel  in  their  inward  mind  and
consciences,  that  religion  is  the  only  course  that
can  end  well ;  that  can  bring  either  them  or  theirs
to  the  presence  of  God.  blessed  for  evermore ;  that
can  cause  them,  after  the  toils  of  life  and  struggles
of  death  are  over,  to  meet  again  in  a  joyful  deli-
verance from  the  grave;  in  a  new  and  never
ceasing  happiness,  in  the  presence  and  society  of
one  another.


SERMON  XXXV.

THE  GENERAL  RESURRECTION.

The  hour  i»  coming,  in  the  which  all  that  are  in


the  graves  shall  hear  his  voice,  and  shall  come,
fortti;  they  that  have  done  good,  unto  the  re-
surrection of  life  ;  and  they  that  have  done  evil,
unto  the  resurrection  of  damnation. — John  v.

<eO,  «!•

These  words  are  so>  important,  that  if  Jesus
Christ  had  never  delivered  any  other,  if  he  had
come  into  the  world  and  pronounced  only  this
simple  declaration,  and  proved  the  truth  and  cer-
tainty of  it  by  the  miracles  which  he  wrought,  he
would  have  left  enough  to  have  guided  his  follow-
eta  to  everlasting  happiness :  he  would  have  done
more  towards  making  mankind  virtuous  and
happy,  than  all  the  teachers  and  all  the  wisdom,
that  ever  appeared  upon  earth,  had  done  before
him.  We  should  each  and  every  one  of  us  have
owed  more  to  him  for  this  single  piece  of  intelli-
gence, than  we  owe  to  our  parents,  our  dearest
friend,  or  the  best  benefactor  we  have.  This  text
is  the  poor  man's  creed.  It  is*  his  religion:  it  is
to  be  imprinted  upon  his  memory,  and  upon  his
heart :  it  is  what  the  most  simple  can  understand :
it  is  what,  when  understood  and  believed,  excels
all  the  knowledge  and  learning  in  the  universe :
it  is  what  we  are  to  carry  about  with  us  in  our
thoughts;  daily  remember  and  daily  reflect  upon;
remember  not  oaty  at  church,  not  only  in  our  de-
votions, or  in  our  set  meditations,  but  in  our  bu-
siness, our  pleasures,  in  whatever  we  intend,  plan,
or  execute,  whatever  we  think  about,  or  whatever
we  set  about;  remember,  that  "they  that  have
done  good,  shall  come  unto  the  resurrection  of  life :
they  that  have  done  evil,  unto  the  resurrection  0/
damnation."

Reflect  what  great  things  this  short  sentence
contains.  It  teaches  us,  beyond  contradiction,
that  all  does  not  end  here :  that  our  happiness  or
misery  is  not  over  at  our  death ;  that  a  new  state
of  things  will  begin  with  every  one  of  us,  and  that
in  a  short  time.  This  point,  I  say,  our  Saviour
proves  beyond  contradiction ;  and  how  t  )e>/  he
prove  it  1  By  healing  the  sick,  by  restoring  sight
to  the  blind,  by  raising  the  dead,  by  various  as-
tonishing and  incontestihle  miracles;  and  above
all,  by  coming  himself  to  life  again,  after  being
three  days  dead  and  buried,  he  proved  that  God
Almighty'  was  with  him ;  that  he  came  from  God ;
that  he  "knew  what  passed  in  the  other  world :
that  he  had  God's  own  authority  to  say  and
promise  this  to  mankind.  Upon  the  faith  and
trust  of  this  promise,  we  know  that  we  shall  rise
again;  all  are  equally  assured  of  it,  from  the
highest  to  the  lowest.  Wise  and  learned  men
thought  indeed  the  same  thing  before ;  they  con-
cluded it  to  be  so  from  probable  argument  and
reasonings ;  but  this  was  not  like  having  it,  as  we
have  it,  from  God  himself;  or,  what  is  just  the
same  thing,  from  the  mouth  6f  a  person,  to  whom
God  gave  witness  by  signs  and  wonders,  and
mighty  deeds.  They  were  far  short  of  our  cer-
tainty, who  did  study  it  the  deepest.  There
were  but  few  who  oould  study  or  comprehend  it
at  all.  Blessed  be  God,  we  are  all  informed,  we
are  all,  from  the  most  learned  to  the  most  ignorant,
made  sure  and  certain  of  it.

Having  then  this  great  doctrine  secured,  that
we  shall  all  come  again  into  a  new  world  and  a
new  life{  the  next  great  point  which  every  serious
mind  will  turn  to,  the  second  grand  question
to  be  asked  is,  who  are  to  be  happy,  and  who  will
be  miserable  in  that  other  state  1 The  text  t  "


004


SERMONS  ON  SEVERAL  SUBJECTS.


Aes  m  completely  opon  this  head.  You  ask,  who
■hall  come  to  the  resurrection  of  fife?  The  text
replies,  they  that  have  done  good.  ^  Obeerve»well,
and  never  forget  this  answer.  It  is  not  the  wise,
the  learned,  the  great,  the  honoured,  the  professor
of  this  or  that  doctrine,  tne  member  of  this  church,
or  the  maintainer  of  that  article  of  faith,  but  he
that  doeth  good ;  he,  of  whatever  quality  or  con-
dition, "who  strives  honestly  to  make  his  life  of
service  to  those  about  him;  to  be  useful  in  his
calling,  and  to  his  generation ;  to  his  family,  to  his
neighbourhood,  and,  according  to  his  ability,  to
his  country,  and  to  mankind— "he  thai  doeth
good."  Ail  the  rest,  without  this,  goes  for  no-
thing :  though  he  understand  the  things  of  religion
ever  so  well,  or  believe  ever  so  rightly ;  though  he
cry,  Lord,  Lord ;  be  he  ever  so  constant  and  de-
vout in  his  prayers,  or  talk  ever  so  much,  or  so
well,  or  so  earnestly  for  religion;  unless  he  do
good;  unless  his  actions,  and  dealings,  and  beha-
viour come  up  to  his  knowledge  and  his  discourse,
correspond  with  his  outward  profession  and  belief,
it  will  avail  him  nothing;  he  is  not  the  man
to  whom  Jesus  Christ  hath  promised  in  the  text,
that  he  shall  come  to  the  resurrection  of  life.  The
issue  of  life  and  death  is  put  upon  our  conduct
and  behaviour  j  that  is,  made  the  tert  we  are  to  be
tried  by.

Again :  When  we  read  in  Scripture,  whan  we
know  from  positive  and  undoubted  authority,  that
•  misery  and  destruction,  ruin,  torment,  and  dam-
nation, are  reserved  for  some,  it  is  surely  the  most
natural,  the  most  interesting  of  all  inquiries,  to
know  for  whom.— The  text  tell* us,  "for  them
that  have  done  evil/'

Here  let  the  timorous  conscience  take  courage.
It  is  not  any  man's  errors,  or  ignorance ;  his  want
of  understanding,  or  education,  or  ability,  that
will  be  laid  to  his  charge  at  the  day  of  judgment,
or  that  will  bring  him  into  danger  of  tne  damna-
tion which  the  Gospel  threatens;  it  is  having'
doneevU;  having  wilfully  cone  about  to  disobey
what  he  knew  to  be  the  wift  and  command  of  his
Creator,  by  committing  mischief,  and  doing  wrong
and  injury  to  his  fellow-creatures.

Let  (he  bold  and  presumptuous  sinner  hear  this
text  with  fear  and  trembling.  Let  him  who  cares
not  what  misery  he  occasions,  what  evtfand  harm
he  does,  if  he  can  but  compass  his  purpose,  carry
his  own  end,  or  serve  his  wicked  lusts  and  plea-
sures 5  let  him,  I  say,  be  given  to  understand,  what
he  has  to  look  for;  "  he  that  doeth  evil  shall  come
to  the  resurrection  of  damnation ;"  this  is  absolute,
final,  and  peremptory ;  here  is  no  exception,  no
excuse,  no  respect  of  person  or  condition.

They  that  nave  done  good,  shall  come  again
unto  tne  resurrection  of  life.  But,  alas!  I  hear
you  amy,  What  good^can  I  do?  my  means  and  my


ojtpofMbities  aire  too  small  and  straitened  to  ttak
of  doing  good. — You  do  not  sufficiently  refect
what  doing  good  is.  You  are  apt  to  confine  the
notion  of  it  to  giving  to  others,  and  giving  hberal-
ly.  This,  no  doubt,  is  right  and  meritonoua;  bat
it  hi  certainly  not  in  evcej  man's  power;  compara-
tively speaking,  it  is  indeed  in  the  power  of  very
But  doin  -  - - •  -


few.'  But  doing  good  is  of  a  much  i
nature ;  and  is  in  a  greater  or  less  degree  4>raeti-
caMe  by  all ;  for,  whenever  we  make  one  human
creature  happier  or  better  than  he  would  have
bee  A  without  our  help,  then  we  do  good;  and,
when  we  do  this  from  a  proper  motive,  that  is,
with  a  sense  and  a  desire  of  pleasing  God  by  doing
it,  then  we  do  good  in  the  true  sense  of  the  text,
and  of  God's  gracious  promise.  Now  let  every
one,  in  particulaf ,  reflect,  whether,  in  this  sense,
he  has  not  some  good  in  his  power:  some  within
his  own  doors,  to  his  family,  fib  children,  ha
kindred ;  by  hie  labour,  his  ajithority,  his  example;
by  bringing  them  up,  and  keeping  them  in  the
way  of  pissing  their  lives  honestly,  and  quietly,
and  usefully.  What  good  more  important,  mora
practicable  than  this  is  1  Again,  something  may
be  done  beyond  our  own  household:  by  acts  of
tenderness  and  kindness,  of  help  and  compassion
to  our  neighbouas.  Not  a  particle  of  this  will  be
lost.  It  is  all  set  down  in  the  book  of  life;  and
happy  are  they  who  have  much  there.  And  again,
if  any  of  us  be  realty  sorry  that  we  have  not  so
much  in  our  j>ower  as  we  would  desire,  let  us
remember  this  short  rule,  that  since  we  can  do
little  good,  to  take  care  that  we  do  no  harm.  Let
us  show  our  sincerity  by  our  innocence;  that,  at
least,  is  always  in  our  power.

Finally,  Let  us  reflect,  that  in  the  habitations
of  life  are  many  mansions ;  rewards  of  various  or-
ders and  degrees,  proportioned  to  our  various  de-
grees of  virtue  and  exertion  here.  "He  that
soweth  plenteously,  shall  reap  pfenteously."  We
can  never  do  too  much ;  never  be  too  earnest  in
doing  good;  because  every  good  action  here  will,
we  are  certain,  be  an  addition  of  happiness  here-
after j  will  advance  us  to  a  better  condition  in  the
life  to  come,  whatever  be  our  lot  or  success  in  this,
God  will  net  fail  of  his  promise.  He  hath  com-
missioned his  beloved  Son  to  tell  us,  that  they
that  have  done  good  shall  enter  into  the  resurrec-
tion of  life.  Let  u»  humbly  and  thankfully  accept
his  gracious  offer.  We  have  but  one  business  in
this  world.  It  is  to  strive  to  make  us  worthy  of  a
better.  Whatever  this  trial  may  cost  us, — bow
long,  how  earnestly,  how  patiently  soever,—
through  whatever  difficulties, — by  whatever  toils
we  endeavour  to  obey  and  please  our  Maker,  we
are  supported  in  them  by  this  solid  and  never
ceasing  consolation,  "that  our  labour  is  not  in
vain  in  the  Lord."


THE  END.
