Palmerin of England (Southey 1807)
==================================
Robert Southey's 1807 English translation of Francisco de Moraes's Palmerin of England, all four volumes, chapters 1-171 complete. Scans of the 1807 London edition via Internet Archive (palmerinofenglan01-04hurtuoft).

PALMERIN OF ENGLAND
VOLUME I

^v'lmm


HANDBOLND
AT  THE


UNIVERSITY  OF
TORONTO  PRESS


^  G


jôalmerín  ofCnglanli,

IN     FOUR     VOLUMES.

CORRECTED    bV

ROBERT    SOUTHEY,

FROM    THE    ORIGINAL    PORTUGUEZE,


594987


W  Pople,  Printer,
22,  Oíd  Boíwell  Court,  Strand,


Essa  Olixa  íe  haga  luego  raxas,  y  se  quane,  que  aun
no  quedea  delia  las  cenizas,  y  esa  Palma  de  Ingala'
terra  se  guarde,  y  se  conserve,  como  a  cosa  nnica,  y
se  haga  para  ella  atra  ca.m,  como  la  que  hallo  Alex-
andro  en  los  despojos  de  Dário,  que  la  diputó  para
guardar  en  cila  las  obras  dei  poeta  Homero.  Este
libro,  sefior  Compadre,  tiene  auto7Ídaà  por  dos  cosas  ;
la  una,  porque  el  por  si  es  muy  bueno;  y  la  ofra,
porque  es  fama  que  le  compuso  un  discreto  Rey  de
Portugal.  Todas  las  aventuras  dei  castello  de  Mira-
guardfi  son  bonisimas,  y  de  grande  artificio,  las
razoncs  cortesanoá,  y  claras,  que  guardan,  y  yniran  el
decoro  dei  que  habla,  con  mucha  propiedad  y  entendi-
miento.  Digo  pues,  salvo  vuestro  bucn  parecer,
stnor  maese  Nicolas,  que  este,  y  j4madis  de  Gavla,
queden  libres  dei  fuego,  y  todos  los  demas,  sin  hacer
?nas  cala  y  cata,  perezcan.

Do>'  Quixote.


a  2i


This  Olive*,  let  it  be  hewn  in  pieces  and  burnt,
and  let  not  the  very  ashes  be  left;  and  this  Palm
of  England,  let  it  be  kept  and  preserved,  as  a  thing
unique,  and  let  another  casket  be  made  for  it,
such  as  that  which  Alexander  found  among  the
spoils  of  Darius,  and  set  apart  that  the  works  of
the  poet  Homer  might  be  kept  in  it.  This  book,
sir  Comrade,  is  of  authority  for  two  reasons  :  the
one,  because  it  is  a  right  good  one  in  itself;  and
the  other,  because  the  report  is  that  a  wise  king
of  Portugal  ccmposeo  it.  All  the  adventures  at
the  castle  of  Miraguarda  are  excellent,  and  ma-
naged \»ith  great  skill  ;  the  discourses  are  courtly
and  clear,  oliciving  with  much  propriety  and
judgnienc  the  occorum  of  the  speaker.  I  say
then,  beiving  yonr  good  pleasure,  master  Nicolas,
this  and  Amaais  of  Gaul  should  be  saved  from
the  iire,  and  ali  the  rest  without  farther  search  be
destroyed.


*  P  almerin  dc  Oliva,


PREFACE.


3.

The  earliest  edition  of  Palmcrin  of  England
which  I  find  mentioned,  bears  the  following-
title  :  Roman  du  le  preux,  taillant,  et  très
tertueui  Chevalier  Palmeirin  d' Anglaterre,
fils  du  Roy  D.  Eduardos  .  . .  traduit  du  Cas-
tillan en  François  par  Maistre  Jaques  Fiîicent
du  Cre&t-Arnauld  en  Dauphiné.
Mo7i  heur  viendra.
A  Lyon,  par  Thibauld  Payen,  1553.  It  is  de-
dicated A  très  noble  S)  vertueuse  Princesse
Diane  de  Poitiers.  A  copy  of  this  is  in  the
Advocates  Library  at'^  Edinburgh.  An
Italian  version  appeared  at  Venice  in  1555.


*  There  ib  a  Paris  edition  in  8vo.  of  1574,  reveue  ^  cor-
rigée mieux  qii'  auparavant,  and  said  by  De  Bure  to  be  in
higher  estimation.  Of  this  there  is  a  copy  in  the  British
Museum,  bût  it  %vants  both  title-page  and  preface.


VIU


According  to  Nicolas  Antoliio,  Lucio  Spi-
neda  was  the  translator,  and  it  purported  to
be  translated  from  the  Spanish.

The  book  appeared  in  Portugueze  1567,  with
what  title  I  know  not.  The  late  editor  could
discover  only  two  copies,  one  in  the  Library
of  the  Necessidades  at  Lisbon,  the  other  in
that  of  the  Collesre  of  S.  Bernardo  at  Coim-
bra,  and  both  wanted  the  title  and  dedica-
tion. The  first  of  these  copies,  is  defective
at  the  end  likewise,  but  the  other  supplies
this  colophon.  Foy  impressa  esta  crónica  de
Palmeirim  de  Inglaterra  na  muy  nobre  e  sem-
pre leal  cidade  de  Évora  em  casa  de  Atidree
de  Burgos,  impressor  e  Cavalleiro  da  Casa  do
Cardeal  IJfante.  Acabou  se  a  xxv.  dias
do  mes  de  Junho.  Anno  do  rtacimento  de
tiosso  Senhor  Jesu  Christ  o  de  mdlxvii.  This
edition  is  in  black  letter.

In  the  Library  of  S.  Francisco  da  Cidade  at
Lisbon  is  a  copy,in  common  letter.  By  length-
ening the  leaves  and  transcribing  what  was
wanting  (which  is  done  so  well  that  to  a  care-


IX


less  eye  it  appears  to  be  the  original  type)
the  book  •  has  been  made  compleat  and  in
excellent  condition  ;  but  it  is  impossible
to  say  when  or  where  it  was  printed,  and  no
other  copy  has  been  found  to  supply  this
information.  The  late  editor  suspected  that
it  was  not  printed  in  Portugal,  without  as-
signing his  reasons  lor  this  suspicion.

An  edition,  purporting  to  be  the  second,
appeared  at  Lisbon  lõ9~,  dedicated  by  tbe
Bookseller,  Afibnso  Fernandes,  to  Cardinal
Alberto,  the  then  Regent.  Fortunately  the
original  dedication  to  the  Ifi'anta  Dona  Ma-
ria, is  inserted  also.  It  is  by  Francisco  de
Moraes,  and  it  contains  tbe  ibllowing  pas-
sage. "  Í  was  in  France  some  time  ago,  in
the  service  of  Don  Francisco  de  Noronha,
Embassador  from  the  King,  our  Lord,  and
your  brother,  where  I  saw  some  French  and
English  Chronicles  :  among  them  I  perceived
that  the  princesses  and  dames  praised  migh-
tily that  of  Don  Duardos,  which  is  in  these
parts  translated  into  Castillian,  and  esteemed
by  many.     This  moved  me  to  see  if  I  could


find  any  other  antiquity  which  I  might  trans-
late ;  upon  which  I  conversed  with  Albert
de  Renés  in  Paris,  a  famous  Chronicler  of
these  times,  in  whose  possession  I  found  some
memorials  of  foreign  nations,  and  among
them  the  chronicle  of  Palmerin  of  England,
son  of  Don  Duardos,  so  defaced  by  time
that  it  was  sufficient  trouble  to  read  it.  I
translated  it,  thinking  that  for  the  love  of  his
father  he  would  be  esteemed  in  all  parts."
Notwithstanding  the  late  appeaiance  of  the
Portugueze  romance,  I  believe  it  to  be  the


original.


2.


Every  reader  of  romances  knows  how  com-
monly they  were  represented  as  translations
from  old  manuscripts.  What  therefore
Moraes  says  in  this  dedication,  instead  of
proving  that  the  work  was  translated,  affords
some  proof  that  it  is  original.  The  chronicle
of  Don  Duardos,  which  he  speaks  of  among
other  French  and  English  Chronicles,  as  a
t^-ue  history,  and  as  translated  itito  Castillian,


xl

is  the  romance  of  Primaleorij  which  (as  \vili
presently  be  shown)  was  translated  from
Castillian  into  Italian,  and  from  both  into
French.  The  reader  will  perceive  at  the
conclusion  of  Palmerin  how  gravely  the
author  appeals  to  imaghiary  historians,,  and
chuses  between  contradictory  authorities.
The  Castillian  Don  Duardos  is  represented  as
a  version,  to  keep  up  this  iiction.  Beyond  a
doubt  the  account  which  Moraes  gives  of
discovering  the  manuscript,  implies  that  the
story  is  his  own,  was  meant  so  to  be  under-
stood, and  was  understood  so.

The  solution  of  this  difficulty  is,  that  the
French  and  Italian  translations  of  his  work
Avere  printed  before  the  original.  Similar
instances  have  occurred  in  our  own  days.
Mr.  Coleridge's  admirable  translation  of
Wallenstein  was  made  from  a  written  copy,
and  published  before  the  German.  The  oii-
ginal  of  Vathek  is  still  unpublished.  That
Romances  sometimes  were  well  known  before
they  were  printed  appears  from  Bernai  Diaz,
who  more  than  once  says  that  the  Spaniards


Xll

in  Mexico  alluded  to  Amadisj  before  Mont-
alvo's  earliest  edition  had  appeared.  The
Conde  de  Linhares,  whom  Moraes  accompa-
nied,, went  to  Paris  in  1540.  There  is  no
improbability  in  supposing  that  he  wrote  the
book  in  France,  and  delayed  printing  it  till
he  returned  to  his  own  country,  and  that  in
the  mean  time  it  was  translated.

If  this  were  the  case,  it  would  be  well
known  at  the  time,  and  no  other  claim  to
originality  on  his  part  was  necessary,  than
what  his  fiction  of  the  ancient  memo-
rials implies.  And  if  this  had  not  been  the
case,  the  fraud  which  that  fiction  would
then  have  implied,  could  not  have  escaped
detection.  In  that  age,  books  circulated
throughout  Christendom  much  more  ra-
pidly than  they  do  in  this,  and  books  of  chi-
valry the  most  rapidly  of  all.  The  French
and  Italian  versions  could  not  possibly  have
been  unknown  at  Lisbon,  then  one  of  the
most  flourishing  and  most  learned  courts  in
Europe.  Both  these  versions  are  said  to  be
translated  from  the  Spanish,    without  any


fiction  of  old  manuscripts.  But  this  kind
of  acception  was  not  common,  nor  was  there
any  purpose  to  be  answered  by  it  ;  if  too
there  had  been  no  common  original,  we  may
be  sure  the  Italian  version  would  have  been
professedly  from  the  French.  Why  the
French  translator  should  say  from  the  Cas-
tillian,  I  do  not  understand, — had  the  general
word  Spanish  been  used  instead,  I  should  have
had  no  doubt  that  it  was  used  generically,  as
Spain  is  for  the  whole  peninsula — thus,  the
Portugueze  call  Camoens  the  Prince  of  the
Poets  of  Spain.  In  all  likelihood  he  has
used  the  word  blunderingly  as  synonimous
with  Spanish.  The  Spaniards,  however,  as
far  as  I  can  discover,  lay  no  claim  to  the
romance,  nor  have  I  seen  any  proof  that  it
exists  in  their  language.  îsicolas  Antonio
affords  no  information  upon  the  subject.  In
one  place  he  gives  it  with  a  Spanish  title  to
an  anonymous  author,  upon  the  faith  of  the
Italian  translator,  from  whom  indeed  he
seems  to  have  translated  the  title,  as  no
date  of  time  or  place  is  affixed  to  it.
In  another  he  ascribes  it  to  Moraes,  to
b


XJV

whom  be  assigns  Amadis  in  the  same  arti-
ticle,  with  palpable  absurdity.     Nicolas  An-
tonio seems  to  have  thought  the  books  of
chivalry  unworthy   of    attention,    and    liis
work   which,  valuable  as  it   is,  is  far  more
imperfect  than  it  is  generally  supposed   to
be,  is  peculiarly  so  upon  this  head.     If  there
were  really  a  Spanish  original  it  could  not
by  any   possibility  have   been  unknown  at
Lisbon  ;  that  of  which  Cervantes  speaks  was
certainly  Portugueze,  because  he  mentions
the  opinion  that  it  was  written  by  a  king  of
Portugal.  Manoel  de  Faria  e  Sousa  observes,
that  some  persons  supposed  it  to    be    the
work  of  Joam  li.  but  that  Moraes  was  the
author.    -A  host  of  contemporary  evidences
to  the  same  purport  might  be  adduced  if  it
were  needful.     The  Portugueze  writers  all
believe  Moraes  to  have  been  the  author,  ex-
cept the  last  editor,  who  finding  the  earlier
dates  of  the    translations  in    De  Bure,  ad-
mitted them  to  be  conclusive  without  farther
thouffht.


XV


There  is  internal  evidence  that  Palmerin  of
England  is  the  work  of  a  Portugueze,  and
that  that  Portugueze  is  Francisco  de  Moraes.
The  castle  of  Almourol,  which  is  the  great
scene  of  adventures  in  the  romance,  is  still
standings  and  in  the  situation  there  described.
I  have  been  within  an  hour's  ride  of  it  and
did  not  visit  the  spot,  not  being  aware  that  it
would  ever  interest  me,  nor  that  it  was  ro-
mantic ground.

Moraes  had  formed  an  attachment  in  France
to  a  lady  of  the  French  Court  whom  he
calls  Torsi  ;  this  appears  from  the  Desculpa
<Ic  Jiujis  amores, pnnied  with  his  other  works.
Towards  the  close  of  Pahnerin  there  are
eleven  chapters  introduced  to  compliment
this  lady  and  three  others  of  the  same  court.
They  are  so  clumsily  inserted,  and  so  little
interesting,  that  I  have  omitted  them,  not
merely  as  being  unconnected  with  all  which
b  2


XVI


goes  before,  and  all  which  follows,  biiL  as
clumsily  iuternipting  the  story  :  they  are  not
grafted,  but  nailetl  on.  Tliis  I  should  have
considered  as  certain  proof  that  Moraes  had
not  written  the  rest  of  the  book,  if  they  had
not  occnrred  in  the  French  also:  they  must
therefore  have  been  in  the  copy  from  which
Jaques  Vincent  translated.


Di  fièrent  places  have  been  named  as  the  birth-
place of  Moraes  ; — it  appears  most  proba-
ble that  he  was  a  native  of  Bragan'/^a;  the
year  of  his  birtli  is  not  known.  He  was
treasurer  to  Joain  HI.  and  professed  in  the
order  of  Christ,  April  17,  \5GG,  in  which
he  w'as  a  Commendador.  He  died  a  violent
death  in  Evora  L372,  by  what  accident  is
not  stated.  His  descendants  say  that  iie
married  Barbara  Madeira,  and  from  the  man-
ner in  which  this  is  repeatcl,  it  appears  that
there  was  some  reason  for  suspecting  the
truth  of  the  assertion.  He  left  however  a
jarge  family.     One  of  his  grand-daughters


XVll

married  John  Tilly,  an  Englishman,  who
altered  his  name  to  Tellez,  and  Balthezar
Tellez,  who  wrote  the  well-known  history  of
Abyssinia,  and  the  Chronicle  of  fhe  Jesuits
in  Portugal,  was  their  son.  He  calls  his  an-
cestor a  Braganzan.  jMoraes  was  called  the
Pahnerin,  and  many  of  his  descendants  re-
tained the  appellation.  In  1624,  a  little
volume  of  his  remains  was  printed  at  Evora,
containing  three  Dialogues,  a  letter  written-
for  Don  Ignacio  de  Noronha  to  the  king,  be-
seeching him  that  he  might  renounce  the  title
of  Linhares  in  favour  of  his  brother,  and  the
Desculpa  dehuns  amores.  These  pieces  were
added  to  the  lasteditionof  Palmerin,  in  three
small  quartos,  1786.  It  is  said  that  a  copy
of  the  Romance  was  wanted  for  the  king  of
England's  Library,  and  as  one  could  not  be
found,  this  edition  was  printed.

5.

Palmerin  of  England  is  the  third  of  a  series

of  Romances,  beginning  with  Palmerin  de

Oliva.     Mr.  Heber's  library  '^my  usual  stor«-

b  3


XVI 11

house)  has  supplied  a  copy  of  the  originai
Spanish,  with  this  title,  Paimerin  de  Oliva
y  sus  grandes  fechos,  Is  uevanieiite  empri  mido .
At  the  end  it  says,  Kniprimido  en  Jenetia por
Gres[orio  deGrczoriis,  a  xxiii.  del  mes  de  No^
viembre  m.d.xxvi.  This  edition  isaddiessed
in  a  Prologue  al yl:ustrey  muy  manij co  senor
S.  Cesar  Trim'sci,  who  was  at  that  time  learn-
ing Spanish  ;  the  editor  therefore  thought
proper  to  re-print  this  book  in  Italy  po/' ser
de  gentil  estillo,  and  to  correct  the  many  er-
rors which  had  crept  into  it.  How  far  he
may  have  succeeded  in  this  I  cannot  say,  but
the  edition  has  many  of  those  errors  which
show  that  the  compositors  were  not  familiar
with  ihe  language  which  they  were  setting
up.  Such  ior  instance  as  Segnora  for  S^nna.
I  have  seldom  seen  a  book  with  so  man}-
contractions:  the  illustrious  AIagnfico,Mh\\e
he  was  learning  Spanish,  must  often  have
heen  puzzled  to  unriddle  them.

This  romance  was  written  by  a  woman  ;  thus
much  may  be  understood  from  some  Latin
verses  at  the  end,  addressed  to  the  reader


XIX

by  Jo.  Auger.  Transmerensis,  and  it  is  not
easy-  to  iin.icrstand  any  thing  else  from  them,
îsicolas  xAntonio  says  the  Portugueze  claim
her  as  their  countrywoman  ;  her  name  how-
ever is  not  to  be  found.     Asa  woman's  pic-
ture of  female  morals,  this  book  is  tiuly  cu-
rious; the  utter  want  of  all  decent   feelincr
which  it  manifests,  is  surprizing  even  to  a
reader  of  romances.     It  is  not  that  the  book
is  obscene — far  from  it;  the  lady  authoress
commits  ever}'  other  crime  as  coolly  as  she
does  murder.    The  chronology  is  ascertained
with  noble  conteniptot  history.  Palmerin  de
Oliva,    so  called  because   he  was    exposed
in  an  olive  tree  amid  a  grove  of  palms,  is
the  grandson  of  Reymicio,  eighth  emperor
of  Constantinople  after  Constantine,  which
said  Reymicio  used  to  war  upon  the  Moors,
tih  he  grew  indolent  for  love  of  his  wife,  the
daughter  of   the  king  of  Hungary.      Cer-
vantes \\as  for  le  wing  this  Olive  down,  and
casting  it   into  the  fire  and  scattering  its
ashes;  nor  was  the  sentence  a  severer  one
than  it  deserves.     Yet  this  book  v,as  once
greatly  celebrated.


XX


i\ír.  ïleber  has  this  French  translation  also
in  his  collection.  L'Histoire  de  Palme-
rill  (T  Olive,  filz  du  roy  Floreiidos  de  Ma-
ceduue,  et  de  la  belle  Griane,  jille  de  Remi-
ti us  Empereur  de  Constantinople,  discours
plaisant  et  de  singulière  recreation,  traduit
Jadis  par  un  Auteur  incertain  de  Castillan  en
Fratiçoï/s,  mis  en  lumière  et  en  son  entier,  selon
7tostre  vulgaire,  par  Jan  Maugin,  dit  le  pe-
tit Angevin.  Reveu  et  emende  par  le  mesme
Auteur.

Probe  et  Tacite*.
A  Paris.     Pour  Vincent  Sertenas,  ê^c.  1553,
folio.

I  recognize  in  this  edition  many  of  the  same
})rints  as  are  used  in  the  small  French  edi-
tion of  Amadis  of  Greece,  p.  2.  a  copy  of
xvhich  I  possess — but  have  not  at  hand  to
give  its  date.  In  fact  tiiey  did  for  any  ro-
mance; a  lady  in  child-bed  at  the  begining,


*  In  the  privilege  s  included  une  autre  histoire  traduite  de
l<jiigage  Picard  fort  ancien  en  ceste  nostre  Umgue,  intituir
ï Orgueilleuse  d^ Amours,  by  the  same  Author.


XXI


— her  trnsty  damsel  íioinG;  out  of  the  door

.1  .

^ith  a  chiid  in  her  arms^  in  one  compart-
ment ;  anc.  in  another  a  man  riding"  away  to
expo.^e  H*  ;  a  battle  on  horseback;  a  battle
on  loot;  a  battle  at  sea;  a  knight  and  lady
kissing;  another  birth  like  the  first;  and  at
last,  the  son  kneeling  for  his  parents'  bles-
sing when  the  secret  is  discovered.  This
set  of  prints  must  have  been  first  engraved
for  Amadis  of  Gaulf  That  in  this  edition
of  Palmerm  d'Olive  ff.  2?,  is  certainly  meant
for  the  adventure  of  the  Endriasro.


*  When  Cardin  returns  from  exposing  Palmerin  oe
Oliva,  the  mother  asks  whai  he  has  done  with  the  infant.
Think  no  more  about  him,  he  rephed  :  he  is  in  God's  hands,
who  can  save  him  ;  and  it  not,  he  is  christened  and  must
go  to  Heaven  ^-t".  s.

•f  There  is  however  one  (f.  2251  which  relates  exclusively
to  the  place  where  it  appears,  represti  ting  the  whole  ad-
venture in  which  Falmerin  dc  Oliva  wins  the  enchanted
bird,  with  the  castle  and  the  :en  perrons.  I  take  th  s  op-
portunity of  co'recting  an  erroneous  explanation  of  the
vord  Padron,  given  in  my  translation  of  Amadis,  vol.  ^*
p.  87  5  any  sort  of  pillar  or  monument  is  meant.


XXll


Le  Petit  Angevni  had  nol  lhe  orÍ2:inal  before
him.  He  says,  je  me  mis  a  revoir  une  vieille
'/niíiuti',  prise  de  V auteur  Espaigiiol  du  Palms-
rill  d'Olive,  tant  pource  que  je  la  trouvay
assez  ample,  que  pour  autant  quelle  estûit
2)lcine  d'argument  amoureux,  Ò;  contes  de  re^
gretz  lamentables  ( matières  au  temps  qui  court
sur  touies  auties  pratiquées)  toutes/ois  si  cou-
faz,  mal  ordonnez  ò,'  indisposez,  quonques  la
statué  que  desc/it  Horace  au  commencement  de


l  will  correct  here  also  an  error  in  the  preface  to  that  book.
The  sonnet  there  quoted  from  the  collection  of  Antonio  Lou-
renço Caminha,  is  not  genuine  I  had  perceived  that  it  could
not  possibly  have  been  written  by  either  of  the  princes  to
whom  it  was  ascribed,  but  relying  upon  the  editor,  and  the  far
weightier  authority  of  Manoel  de  Faria  e  Sousa,  believed  it  to
be  as  old  as  was  pretended.  It  was  however  written  by  An-
tonio Ferreira,  as  also  was  the  other,  referred  to  in  the  same
place,  but  which  I  had  not  then  seen,  nor  knew  where  to
find.  This  poet  died  iu  1569,  and  his  poems  were  pub-
lished 1598.  by  his  son.  "  My  father,  he  says,  made  these
two  sonnets  i.a  the  language  which  was  used  in  this  king-
dom in  the  days  of  king  D.  Dioiz,  which  is  the  same  in
Kvhich  the  history  of  Amadis  of  Gaul  was  composed  by
Vasco   de   Lobeira,  a  native  of  the  city  of  Porto,  whose


XXlll


son  art  poétique,  ne  fut  composée  de  la  sorte.
.  .  .  Et  à  Jin  (Sei^neu)s)  que  soi/ez  aiertiz  de
■ma  mu)neie  d'  esciire,  je  ri  uy  pris  de  foiginal
que  la  matière  principale,  sa}is  m  assujettir  aux
propoz  du  traducteur  antique  mal  entendnz,  Sj
piremcnt  poursuytiz.  Les  discours  des  apairs
ay  abrégez  le  plus  snccintement  quil  m'  a  este
possible.  Les  guei  res  selon  leur  forme  ancienne,
sans  canoiis  ou  harquebuzes  ;  0;  les  amours  a  la
7noderne,  sauf  les  foies,  pour  ce  que  je  les  cuyde


original  is  in  the  house  of  Aveiro.  They  were  produced  in
the  name  of  the  Infante  Don  Affonso,  eldest  ton  of  king
D.  Diniz,  that  prince,  as  appears  in  the  history,  having
been  ill  pleased  that  the  fair  Briolania  should  be  so  ill  treated
in  her  love."  After  Miguel  Leyte  Ferreira  had  thus  related
the  history  ci  these  sonnets,  it  is  singular  that  one  so
laarnetl  in  the  literature  of  his  own  country  as  Faria  e  Sousa
should  have  believed  them  genuine.

The  argument  still  to  be  adduce'l  from  them  is,  that  Vasco
Lobeira  was  known  to  be  the  author  of  Amadis,  in  the  mid-
dle of  the  16th  century,  and  it  appears  fron.  the  son's  autho-
rity that  the  original  was  then  preserved  j  strong  evidence
thatLobeira  was  the  author,  if  any  additional  evidence  can
be  needed  after  the  explicit  and  decisive  testimony  which  I
had  the  satisfaction  of  finding  in  Gomes  Eannes.


XXIV

faintes,  dy  quil  iien  sait  point  de  semblables.
Et  si  en  jjassant  fai/  usé  de  métaphores,  sitni-
litudes  ê)'  comparisons,  S^  alegue  fables^  poésies,
histoires,  S^-  invente  vers,  excusez  le  désir  que
fay  eu  demonstrer  quen  cest  endroit  le  Fran-
coys  y  est  plus  propre  que  VEspaignol.  Au
reste,  si  prenez  plaisir,  6i  tant  soit  peu  vous
contentez  de  ce  mien  labeur,  suportant  mon  ra-
7nage  Angevin  (lequel  l'impossible  est  qu  au-
cunes fois  je  ne  sente)  je  me  tiendray  pour  plus
qu   assez  satisfoit.

This  praciice  of  disregarding  an  original,
and  modiiying  the  translation  to  the  fashion
of  the  times,  has  prevailed  in  most  countries  ;
a  better_,  or  more  truly  a  worse  instance
cannot  be  mentioned  than  Pope's  Homer.
The  translator  prided  himself  upon  the  liber-
ties he  had  taken,  and  his  friends  compli-
mented him  in  commendatory  verses  which
vilified  the  author.  Le  petit  Angevin  says
he  has  abridged  his  materials;  his  book  how-
ever contains  at  least  a  fourth  more  than  the
Spanish,  though  it  is  divided  into  \2^  chap-
ters instead  of  175.     Les  amours  he  has.  a?


XXV

Kc  says,  altered  a   la  moderne — like  a  true
Frenchman.

Aiiihony  Munday  announces  his  intention  of
translating  this  romance  in  that  part  of  Pal-
merin  of  England  wherein  the  death  of  the
emperor  is  related.     "  Of  this  bird/'  he  says,
"you  may  read  more  at  large  in  the  notable
and  famous  history  of  the  emperor  Palme-
rin's  life,   which    book    is  called  Palmerin
D'Oliva^a  history  plentifully  stored  with  dis-
courses of  singular  delight,  being  for  the
worthiness  thereof  esteemed  of  many  nations,
as  this  history    is  likewise:  and  therefore,
for  the  excellency  of  this  aforesaid  history,
and  in  respect  it  dependeth  onmatters briefly
touched  in  this  book,  so  that  it  is  account-
ed as  a  parcel  of  this  history,  I  entend  (God
nyding  me)  to  publish  it  shortly,  when  (I
doubt  not)  but  the  gentle  reader  shall  find
it  worthy  of  the  commendations  that  I  have
used  of  it  in  this  place."    This  translation,
wiiich  was  first  published  15S8,  4to.  bJ.  1.  I
l»avc  never  seen.

c


XXVI


The  next  in  the  series  is  Libro  que  trata  de  loi
valerosos  liechos  en  annas  de  Primaleon,  hijo
del  Emperador  Paluierin,  y  de  su  hermano
Polendos,y  de  Don  D  nardos  Piincipe  de  hi-
glaterra,  y  de  otrospreciados  Cavalier  os  dela
corte  del  Empcrador  Palmerin  :  Nicolas  An-
tonio says  this  was  printed  in  1516.  A  Seville
edition  of  1ÕC4,  is  in  the  national  library  at
Paris,  naevo/nente  emendado  por  Francisco
Vasquez, -and  entitled  Libro  segundo  de  Palme-
rin, See.  A  Venice  edition  of  1534,  wasin
Mr.  Croft's  collection,  and  in  tlie  colophon
it  was  said  to  be  translated  from  the  Greek,
according  to  the  customary  fiction.  There
is  an  edition  of  Bilvan  (Bilboa)  1585,  and
one  of  Lisbon  1593.  It  was  first  translated
into  Italian,  then  into  French;  both  versions
are  in  the  British  Museiira;  the  titles  are
subjoined  :

Primaleone,  nel  quale  si  narra  a  pieno  I'liis-
toria-  di  suet    valorou  /alii,   ij-   di   Polende


x.xvn

5:/')  fiiiti'Ilo  ;  traJotto  duUa  lingua  Spngjuf"
ola,  nclla  nostra  buona  Italiana.  Nuovamcntc
da  jiioiti  crrori  correlto  6^  ristampato.

Venetia  1509-

J^'Jfistoire  de  Piimaleon  de  Grèce  continu-
ant  celle  de  Pahneiin  d'Olive  Empereur  de
('omtantinnpie,  son  père,  naguère  tiric  tant
de  r Italien  corn  ne  de  Espagnol,  4"  '^''a^  en
umtrc  vulgaire  par  François  de  Vernassaî
QiUTcinois.     Avec  le  Tems.

Lj/on.   157'2.


JVançoi-,  de  Fernassal  aux  lecteurs  des  na-
tion.- dont  il  a  tire  l'argument  de  ceste  his"
toirc.

Al  Tuscano.
Qui  non  penii  Icggcr  l'huonio  gentile
I'nr,iuli;on  lai  ch'  el  Tuscan  l'ha  latto,
I\t  v\\r:  mancando  un  poco  n'el  suo  stile,
('online  esso  cl  dava,  io  cosi  l'ho  aconciatto.
Chc  nif  par  nio  (n'el  pacse  fertile
De  bonni  ingogni)  dover'  ser  stampatto  ;
Per  dinionstrar  quanto  è  leggiadro  e  bcllo
Kostro  volgar,  cbi  l'ba  ben'  in  cervello.


xxxvn

his  princesses  cold  as  ice,  and  never  to  re-
move the  iron  bars  from  their  windows.

It  is  amusing  to  observe  the  nakedness  of
female  vanity  in  all  these  books.  Lobeira
tinges  it  with  a  little  suspicion  and  a  little
jealousy,  enough  to  make  Oriana  a  very
woman  ;  yet  never  enough  to  make  the
reader  forget  that  she  is  one  of  the  sweetest
of  her  sex.  Moraes,  true  to  tha  wretched
opinion  which  he  had  formed  of  womankind,
combines  it  wiih  envy:  his  heroines  have
nothing  but  their  beauty  to  recommend
them,  and  one  is  tempted  to  wish  them  the
small-pox  as  a  ht  reward  for  all  their  other
qualities.  It  may  be  well  supposed  that  one
who  thus  regarded  women  would  be  incapa-
ble of  de:icriljlng  love.  His  heroines  are
without  it,  and  in  his  men  it  is  perfect  idol-
atry. They  say  their  prayers  to  their  mis-
tresses before  tliey  go  into  battle.

The  battles  in  Amadis  and  Palmerin  are  of
a  totally  different  character.     Lobeira  was  a
knight  himself,  and  bore  a  part  ia  one  of
VOL.  I.  d


xxxyiu

lhe  most  gloriovis  aud  iinpottant  victoiie.i
thate^er  any  people  atctiieved..  .When  he.,
has  a  coaiuiil  to  describe,  he  fah"]y  fights  it  ;
in  tiiis  he  exceeds  all  ppets  and  ali  roman-
cers ;  even  Ariost.o  and  Tasso  are  far  in fe.-
rior  to  him.     Were  Annadis  lo^  be  danced  .
upon  the  stage,  when.. th^,ppiibrmers  came
to  combat  thpy  inig.bt,  foUoiv.  every  blo.vv.  .
Lobeira    ii^.esjy.our  .  attention  .  upon    the.
champions,     j^lpraes,  ou  the  contr;iry,  sela  .
every  thing  else  before  y qu.i;  eyes,;  he  piiitits
the  li^ts  and  the  spectators,  arid  enters-  into
the  feelings  both  of  those  who  are  engí^ged  -
and  of  those  who  look  on.  ,5  ^nt-jfjf

His  masic  is  not  Q;ood.  The  cup  of  tears
is  il  poor  and  puerile  fiction  compared  with
the  garland  which  blossoms  out  upon  the
head  ,pf  Oriana.  It  has  also  this  great  de-  ,
feet,  that  where  so  much  is  done,  there  is
no  reason  why  more  should  not.  When  the
plank  cracks  under  Palmerin  there  is  no
reason  why  it  should  not  break  ;  he  has  no
speU  to, save  him,  no  countcrmagic  is  at
vvorJi,  and  fatalism  is  not,  the  cx^oA  of  the  .


fable.  In  all  the  love-lamentations"  there  i-î
a  sort  of  pastoral  whine,  which  perhaps  led
the  wnv  to  the  pastoral  romance  ;  here  also
the  author  falls  short  of  Lobeira, — when  ill
Patin  and  Bruneo  of  Bonaraar  are  over-
heard soliluqaizing  in  the  Vt'oods,  the  situa-
ations  are  highly  interesting,  and  lead  to
somethins:."  Neither  has  Moraes  the  wit  of
his  great  predecessor  :  old  JMacandan  jests
better  than  the  damsel  of  Thrace.

On  thé  other  hand,  all  his  characters  speak
with  a  courtliness  and  propriety,  of  which
there  is  perhaps  no  other  example  in  rç-
mance.  If  be  has  not  succeeded  in  his  per-
fect knight,  he  has  in  his  perfect  emperor.
Florian  is  always  admirably  supported  ;  he  is
a  more  prominent  personage  than  Galaor  ;
but  Lobeira  had  made  libertinism  only  a
subordinate  feature  of  Galaor,  that  vrhich
stands  foremost  is  his  high  sense  of  chival-
rous honour.  Florian  has  his  wit,  his  good-
humour,  and  his  courage  to  excuse  him, — >
these  arc  not  stifficieht, .  and  he  is^riever
respected  by  the  reader  as  "Galaor  is  ;  what
d  Q


Í9  excused  in  the  one  as  a  weakness,  is  con-
demned in  the  other  as  a  vice.  This  is  un-
fortunately managed,  for  as  he  is  the  cause
of  the  final  war,  his  character  should  have
been  clearer: — had  Targiana  been  the  sister
instead  of  the  wife  of  Albayzar,  it  would
have  been  felt  that  the  Turks  were  in  the
right,  and  as  it  is  they  are  not  so  manifestly
in  the  wrong  as  the  author  should  have  made
them.  Albayzar  and  Miraguarda  are  both
dramatically  conceived  ;  the  adventures  at
the  castle  of  the  latter  give  a  coherence  and
unity  to  the  story  of  the  second  part,  which
the  reader  hardly  expects  till  he  discovers  it.
I  know  no  romance  and  no  epic  in  Avhich
suspence  conccining  the  conclusion  is  so
successfully  kept  up.


9.


The  family  history  of  the  Palmerins  has
been  twice  continued  in  Portugucze  from
the  point  to  which  Moraes  brings  it.  Diogo
Fernandez  de  Lisboa  added  the  third  and
fourth  parts,    Lisbon   1604,  and  Balthazar


Gonzalez  Lobnto  a  fifth  and  sixth.  I  have
never  been  ibitnnate  enough  to  meet  with
either.  The  former  is  greatly  esteemed,
and  has  I  believe  been  translated,  doubt-
less through  the  usual  French  medium,  by
Anthony  Munday  and  his  associates.

As  the  two  preceding  Romances  of  this  fa-
mily are  in  Castillian,  and  the  two  succeed-
ing in  Portugueze  (languages  as  nearly  akim
as  English  and  Scotcli)  a  presumptive  proot:
is  afforded  that  the  intermediate  one  is  the
growth  of  the  same  peninsula.*

10.  v..

The  old  collection  entitled  JVitt's  Recréa-
tions^,  has  this  epitaph  on  M.  Munday.

Hallowed  be  the  Sabbath,
And  farewell  all  worldly  pelfe  :
The  weeke  begins  cu  Tuesday
For  Munday  hath  bang'd  himself.


*  Containing  630  Epigrams,  160  Epitaphs,  vriety  of
Fancies  and  Fan^ds^icks.  Good  for  ir.eljncholy  humours,
1S41.

d  3


xlii

Whether  it  was  old  Anthony  who  occasioned
this  confusion    in   the  days  of  the  week  I
know   not  ;  hut  if  he   had  hanged   himself
before  he  translated  Palmerin  of  England,
he  would  have  saved  me  a  great  deal  of  la-
bour, of  which  I  had  no  expectation  when
I  beííiin  to  revise  his  version.     He  bei;an  it
with  some  care,  but  he  soon  resigned  the
task  to   others  less  qualified  than   himself;
for  certain  it  is,  that  at  least  three-fourths
of  the  book  were  translated  by  one  who  nei-
ther understood  French,  nor  English,  nor
the  story  which  he  was   translating.     For
instance,    damsel  is   used    continually    for
dame,   where  the  difference  is  precisely  that
between  maid  and  matron:  and  nephew  and
niece  are  as  constantly  used  instead  of  grand-
son  and    grand-daughter.     Spear  is  always
used  for  sphere;  which  occurs  often  as  a  dc-
vice,  to  a  i*ortugueze  a  familiar  one,  having
been  that  of  their  great  king  Emanuel. —
Printin:!  had  no  sooner  been  invented  than
authorship  became  a  trade — Martin  Luther
speaks  of  the  price  per  sheet  in  his  days, —
and  this  Palmerin  is  decisive  proof  either


xliii

that  Anthony  Monday  sold  his  name  to  the
booksellers,  or  had  established  a  manufac-
tory of  translations  himself,  and  set  his  mark
upon  what  was  produced  in  it^  as  being  well
known  in  the  market.  This  will  account  for
the  rapidity  with  which  his  publications  suc-
ceeded each  other.

These  faults  are  not  the  worst.  The  manner
in  which  the  story  is  debased,  flattened,  and
vulgarised  as  soon  as  it  was  left  to  the  jour-
neymen to  proceed  with,  is  perhaps  unex-
ampled. All  the  pictures  of  the  original  are
blotted  out,  and,  literally  and  strictly  speak-
ing, every  beauty  of  every  kind  totally
destroyed.  Sometimes,  by  way  of  making
amends  for  what  has  been  expunged,  a  little
is  added  :  in  one  place  Palmerin  is  repre-
sented after  he  has  killed  a  giant,  as  cutting
his  legs  off,  and  hammering  him  about  the
head  with  the  hilt  of  his  sword  till  he  has
beaten  out  the  teeth  and  the  eyes!  Wher-
ever this  old  translation  represents  the  ori-
ginal, and  wherever  it  is  not  worse,  it  is
prestirved  ;  but  every  picture  and  every  trait


xliv

of  costume,  however  minute,  is  reátored,
and  considerably  more  than  half  the  book
is  re-translated.  AVhatever  discrepancy  of
style  may  be  perceived  in  consequence,  is
far  less  than  will  be  found  in  the  ol  I  copies.
The  edition  b}'  which  it  is  corrected  is  the
last  Lisbon  one,  and  the  parts  and  chapters
are  divided  in  conformity  to  it.

11.

It  is  j)erhaps  becau?e  these  Spanish  histories
of  chivalry  were  so  villirinously  rendered
that  they  produced  so  little  eiiect  upon  our
literature  ;  for  the  French  Romances  (by
which  term  1  mean  those  of  the  school  of
Calprenade)  and  which  were  better  trans-
lated, became  tiic  great  store-house  of  our
middle  dramatists.  I  will  however  mention
here  one  remarkable  exception.  One  of
the  Spanish  Romances  has  had  the  singu-
lar fortune  to  be  imi  ated  bv  the  three  çreat-
est  writers  of  Elizabeth's  age.  In  Amadis
of  Greece  may  be  found  theZelmanc  of  the
Arcadia,  the  Masque  of  Cupid  of  the  Faery


xlv

Qaeeiij  and  the  Florizel  of  the  Winter'»
Tale.  These  resemblances  are  not  imagi-
nary (Florizel  indeed  is  there  with  the  same
name) — any  person  who  will  examine  will
be  convinced  beyond  a  doubt  that  Sidney,
Spenser,  and  Shakespere,  each  of  them  imi-
tated this  book, — was  ever  book  honoured
by  three  such  imitators! — other  parts  of  the
same  romance  have  been  copied  in  the  Spa-
nish poem  of  Bernardo  del  Carpio,  a  con-
tinuation of  Ariosto,  by  Agustin  Alonso,
(a  book  which  Nicolas  Antonio  had  never
seen,  but  a  copy  of  which  is,  in  phrase
Bibliographical,  penes  me,)  and  in  the
Amadigi  of  the  elder  Tasso.


THE

FIRST     PART

OF    THE    NO    LESS    RARE    THAN     EXCELLENT    AND

STATELY    HISTORY    OF    THE    FAMOUS

AND    FORTUNATE    PRINCE

PALMERIN  OF  ENGLAND;

DECLARING
THE  BIRTH  OF  HIM  AND  OF  PRINCE

FLORIAN  OF  THE  DESERT,

HIS    BROTIIIiR,
IX    THE     FOREST     OF     GREAT     BRITAIN.

THE  COUHSE  OF  THEIR  LIVES  AFTERV.'ARD,  IN

PURSUING    KNIGHTLY    ADVENTURES,

AND    DOING    INCOMPARABLE

DEEDS    OF    CHIVALRY.

IVherein  Gentlemen  may  find  choice  of  szceet

Inventions,  and  Gentlewome/i  be  ratified

in  Courtly  Expectations.

Translated  out  of  French  by  A.  ^I.  one  of  the

Messengers  of  Her  ÎMajesty's  Chamber.

Putere  ant  abstins.


xlix

''  To  the  Right  Worshipful  and  his  approved
good  Friend,  Mr.  Francis  Young,  of  Brent-
Fellam,  in  the  County  of  Hertford,  Esq.
and  to  the  most  kind  Gentlewoman  Mrs.
Susan  Young,  his  loving  IVife,  and  my
Mistress,  as  much  happiness  wiskethj  as
their  own  hearts  can  desire,

"  Should  I,  (Right  Worshipful,)  as  flatterers
are  wont  to  do,  set  down  a  catalogue  of  your
commendations,  and  enter  into  a  labyrinth
of  love  toward  you,  I  know  your  wit  is  so
good,  that  you  would  quickly  espy  it  ;  and
I  confess  mine  ovvn  nature  such,  as  I  heartily
hate.     My  present  purpose  then  at  this  time,
is  neither  to  rehearse  your  many  kind  fa-
vours, Avhich  I  know  you  rather  love  pri-
vately to  enlarge,  than  listen  publickly   to
hear  laid  open,  nor  report  mine  own  un-
thank fulness,  which  I  am  sorry  hath  been
so  much,  yet  you  will  forget,  although  it
were  far  more  :  but  as  a  dutiful  remembrance
of  both  these,  though  not  able  to  be  sha-
dowed in  one  subject,  yet  sufficient  (in  your
conceits  I  know)  being  but  in  part  acknow-


i

Jeclged,  Í  send  you  this  honourable  History
of  Prince  l^ahnerin  of  England,  which  cost
ine  no  more  pains  in  writing,  than  I  hope  it
will  be  pleasing  to  you  in  reading.

"  This  first  part  is  but  to  relish  your  taste,
how  ye  can  like  of  such  worthy  knights  loves
and  rneinordble  adventures,  whereof  at  my
last  being  with  you  in  the  country,  I  sawye
use  no  rnislike.  Tiien  linuing  such  geiulc;
enterîainment,  as  Í  make  no  question  of,
the  second  part  shall  be  with  you  very
speedily  after.

"  So  committingyour  worship,  and  ray  sweet
mistress  your  v.'itc,  to  the  heavenly  pro-
tection,, 1  remain  yours  to  my  uttermost,

"  A.llundiif:'


*'  To  the  Ladies  and  Gentlewomen  of  En^J an  d
the  Author  wisheth  such  a  courteous  ntcdc:  -
ation  injudgj/ient,  that  his  labours  be  nu-
hastili/ reproached,  nor  hatejidly  receivod.

"  Among  ihe  best  choice  of  ííowers,  fiir  l:\-
dies^ali  are  not  sweet:  where  is  most  varivv


of  rneclicíncs,  some  are  not  soveieigrt:  so
iimongst  ail  the  conceits  you  sliall  find  in
tliis  book,  all  are  not  pithy,  tijotigh  the  most
pretty.  When  tlie  iion  roareîh,  lhe  lamb
irembieth;  when  the  captain  takcih  his  lance,
the  coward  feareth  his  life  ;  even  so,  the
bravery  of  the  learned  is  so  great  a  bleinisli
to  him  that  hath  little,  that  he  feareth
to  proceed,  not  daring  to  step  a  foot  without
a  pardon.  Such  are  the  ingenious  inven-
tions (right  noble  minded  and  courteous  la-
dicb)  so  plentifully  sent  to  your,  perusing,
that  (were  it  not  the  bountiful  respect  of
your  gentle  judgment  did  assure  me  to  taste
of  your  friendly  favour)  Í  should  convert  my
studies  into  so  great  despair,  as  the  very
thought  v.'ere  suiticient  to  kili  him  that  dieth
every  hour,  fearing  to  displease.  But  as
mercy  doth  al\Vay  accompany  your  noble
s<'X,  îiiîd  mildness  repress  any  choierick
chance,  so  know  I,  that  rigour  cannotdweli
where  is  no  desire  of  revenge,  but  as  all  men
are  faulty,  I  shall  be  forgiven  for  company.

«  A.  M."

e  2


lii

In  the  former  editions  the  parts  are  divided
after  chapter  98,  so  as  to  make  them  of
equal  length,  without  regard  to  the  natural
division  of  the  stor}'.  To  the  lirst  part  this
postcript  is  added:

*'  Thus  Gentlemen,  you  have  heard  the  first
part  of  our  English  Princes  lahours,  wherein
if  you  find  the  translation  altered,  or  the
true  sense  in  some  place  of  a  matter  impaired,
let  this  excuse  answer  his  default  in  that  case.
A  work  so  large,  is  sufficient  to  tire  so  sim-
ple a  workman  as  himself  :  and  beside,  the
Printer  may  in  some  place  let  an  error  es-
cape. So  between  these  two  reasons,  let
the  author  pass  uncontrouled,  which  will
hasten  him  the  sooner  to  send  you  the  se-
cond part  :  wherein  he  dare  promise  you
such  plentiful  variety  of  choice  conceits,  as
cannot  be  so  long  expected,  as  they  will  be
thought  worthy  of  a  welcome.  Meanwhile,
he  reposeth  himself  on  your  wonted  cour-
tesies :  desiring  to  hear  nothing  that  may
dishearten  him  from  his  intent,  or  hinder
you  from  the  end  of  so  brave  a  history.
"  Aiithoiiij  Munday.
"  Patere  aut  abstine."


Hií


Epistle  Dedicatory  to  the  Second  Part.

"  To  tl/e  Right  J  J  orshipfulMr.  Francis  Young,
of  .Bn'nt-Pe//ain,  in  the  Conntij  of  Hert-
ford, Esquire,  and  to  the  most  kind  Gen-
tlewoman, Mrs.  Susan  Young,  his  hving
Jl  ife,  and  vuj  Mistress;  as  much  happiness
ziisheth,  as  their  oicn  hearts  can  desii e.

"  Right  Worshipful,
"  Alpho'.isus  king  of  Naples,  renowned  in
sundry  vokunes  of  antiquit}-  for  his  .wis-
dom, bounty,  and  aiiability  of  nature,
lying  very  sick  in  the  city  of  Capua,
having  tried  the  very  utmost  cunning  his
physicians  could  use  on  him,  yet  all  would
not  help  to  recover  his  health  ;  deter-
mined V. itli  himself  to  take  no  more  medi-
cines; but  for  his  recreation  caused  the
story  of  Quintas  Curtias  (concerning  the
Jeeds  of  Alexander  the  Great)  to  be  read
bji'ore  hiin,  at  the  hearing  whereof  he  con-
cei\cd  such  wcmderfui  pleasure,  as  nature
gathered  strength  by  it,  and  chased  away
tiie  liowarcuiets  of  his  disease.
e  3


liv

"  Whereupon  ia  some  sort,  having  soon  re-
covered his  liealth,  he  discharged  his  phy-
sicians with  these  words:  Feast  me  no  more
with  Galen  and  Hippocrates,  sith  all  their
skill  could  not  assuage  my  sickness  ;  but  zoell-
J'ure  Quintius  Curtias,  that  did  so  soon  help
me  to  my  health.

''  By  this  example  may  be  gathered  (Right
A\'orsliipful)  how  necessary  it  is  (oftentimes)
to  read  histories,  whicli  in  the  judgment  of
the  wise,  aie  esteemed  as  healthful  to  the
mind,  as  physic  is  accounted  wholesome  for
the  body  ;  yea,  oftentimes  more,  for  that
the  sudden  inward  conceit  of  delight  (where-
with liistories  are  plentifully  enriched)  mav
sooner  break  and  qualify  the  extremity  of
a  painful  disease,  than  the  long  and  labour-
some  a[)plying  of  physical  receipts.  Yet,
not  to  condenm  the  one  nor  extol  the  other
more  than  it  deserveth,  I  allow  of  both  very
well:  but  I  must  needs  thus  confess  with
Aristotle,  that  history  is  the  school-mistress
of  Princes,  and  the  only  trumpet  that
soundeth  in  the  ears  of  all  noble  person-


Iv

ages,  the  famous  deeds  of  their  worthy  pro-
genitors.

*'  Plato  likewise  affirmeth,  that  the  name  of
history  was  given  to  this  end,  that  hy  re-
cording matters  of  antiquity,  our  fleeting
memories  might  be  stayed,  that  otherwise
would  soon  be  lost  and  retain  little.

"  Seeing  then,  that  histories  carry  such  credit
among  the  learned  sort,  and  have  not  been
a  little  esteemed  of  both  emperors,  kings,
and  famous  potentates:  as  a  testimony  of
my  unfeigned  affection,  and  duty  to  your
worship,  I  ofi'er  you  the  second  part  of  tliis
excellent  and  famous  history,  which  how
bad  the  rude  translation  thereof  may  seem
to  dainty  ears,  I  know  ;  but  how  singular
it  is  of  itself,  no  belter  description  than  the
readina;  over  can  be  made.

o

"  I  presume  therefore.  Master  Young,  as  the
Romans  did,  who  were  wont  to  place  the
pictures  of  their  special  fxiends  at  the  very
entrance  into  their  stately  palaces,  thereby


Ivi

to  declare  their  zealous  and  unspotted  affec-
tion to  tliein.  In  like  manner  have  I  stampt
your  worship's  name  in  the  face  of  this  his-
tory, as  well  to  countenance  the  book  with
such  a  worshipful  personage,  as  to  credit
myself  with  your  wonted  and  favourable
good  liking:  For  I  account  myself  and  my
labours  ùee  from  the  reproach  of  wounding
tongues,  being  allowed  but  the  least  moiety
of  your  gentle  judgment.  It  shall  be  need-
le.ss  for  me  to  wade  into  tedious  circum-
stances, when  to  the  wise  and  learned,  a
word  is  sufficient.  Thereiore  Palmerin  re-
poseth  himself  on  your  kind  conceit,  and
wisheth  such  happy  continuance  to  you,
your  wife,  my  gentle  mistrçss,  and  whole
issue,  as  the  woild  being  partaker  of  your
virtues,  myself  acquainted  with  your  favour-
able opinion,  and  ir.y  book  deicnded  by  your
worthy  self,  you  may  remain,  as  m  years,
so  in  happiness  :  and  the  longer  your  course,
the  larger  your  couifovt,

"  A.  Mundaijr


CONTENTS.


VOL.    I.


Chap.  Pagt

1.  How  Don  Duardos  going  to  hunt  in
the  forest  of  the  desert  lost  himse/f,

'f  and  went  to  the  castle  of  Dranni-
ziando,  where  he  was  treacherously
made  prisoner  -  -         \

*1.  Shewing  who  the  £-iant  was  into  whose
hands  Don  D  nardos  had  fallen      -       18

3.   Of  what  hefel  Flerida  when  she  saw
that  Don  Duardos  did  not  return         26

?'4.  Of  the  great  lamentations  which  were
made  in  the  city  of  London  for  the
loss  of  Don  Duardos  -  -       38

5.  Of  what  the  Savage  did  with  the  in-
fants whom  he  carried  away,     jiinl    ,

how  Ar^olante  reached  Constantin-

o

ople  -  -  -       4Í


CONTENTS.
Chap.  Pag*

6.  Qfzí^hat  bejel  Primaleon  in  the  quest

of  Don  Duardos         -        -         -      53

7.  Shewing  the  reason  why  Patidricia
led  this  life,  and  of  the  children  in

the  cave  -  -  -       63

8.  Of  what  the  Savage  did,  seeing  that

he  of  the  Desert  did  not  return       -       73

9.  Of  what  befel  Fernão,  prince  of  Jl-
lemaigne,  with  a  knight,  in  the  dis-
astrous forest  in  England  -       81

10.  IIozo  the  giant  Dramuziando  placed
guard  in  his  castle,  and  how  Pri.na-
leon  arrived  there,  and  of  what  befel     89

1 1 .  How  the  emperor  of  Greece  knighted

Palmerin  and  all  the  other  youths  of
the  court  _  -  _     103

12.  How  they  held  a  tourney  that  day,
and  of  what  happened  with  tzm
knights  in  green  armour,  who  came
thereunto  -  -  -      108

Î3.  How  a  damsel  came  to  the  court  of
the  emperor,  complaiiiing  of  the
knigtit  oj  the  Savage,  and  of  what
enisued  -  -  -116


CONTENTS.
Chap.  Tngrn

14.  Shewing  who  the  sage  Daliarte  of  the
Dark  Valley  was  -     124

15.  Giving  account  of  what  hefel  Belcar
and  Vernao  after  they  were  healed  of

'  their  wounds  -  -  -     131

16.  Of  zchat  happened  to  Recindos  king
of  Spain,  and  Arnedos  king  of
France,  with  two  other  knights,  at

the  castle  of  Draniuziando      -       -     142

17.  Of  the  talk  which  Palmcriu  held  with
Polinarda,  and  how  he  left  the  court  143

18.  IIow  Palmerin  of  England  left  the

court,  calling  himself  the  knight  of
Fortune,  and  of  zchat  bejel  -     loS

19.  Shewing  irho  the  knight  was  whom
the  knight  of  Fortune  found  there,
and  zihy  he  lived  in  that  place       -     159

£0.  Of  what  befel  the  knight  of  Fortune

at  the  pass  of  the  bridge         -        -     l64

21.  Of  what  befel  the  knight  of  the  Sa-
vage in  the  Sorrowful  l^ alley,  with
the  knight  who  kept  it         -  -     171


CONTENTS.

Chap.  Pagt

íi'2.  How  Floramun,  prince  of  Sardinia,
came  to  the  court  of  the  emperor
l'aimer  in,  and  of  what  passed  there     177

C3.  Of  what  passed  the  second  day  of

Floramaiis  Jousts  -  -     184

24.  Of  what  hefel  the  knight  of  Fortune
after  he  left  Pompides  -       -     192

25.  Hoïi)  the  knight  of  Fortune  heard
from  a  damsel  the  news  of  the  court,

and  of  what  he  did  -  -     201

36.  How  there  was  a  ball  that  night,  and
how  the  empress  went  on  the  morrow
to  see  F/oramans  tent  -         -     209

27 .  Of  what  befel  the  knight  of  the  Sa-
vage after  he  lift  Blandidon  in  the
kingdom  of  Lacedemonia  -    21 J

28.  How  the  damsels  came  to  the  knight
of  the  Savage,  and  hy  their  help  he
was  healed  -  -  -     ggS

29.  How  the  damsel  Lucenda  came  to  the
court  of  the  emperor,  and  of  the  news

she  gave  .  -  -     22$


CONTENTS.
Chap.  Tagc

30.  Of  the  defiance  between  Tremoran
and  a  strange  knight  concerning  him

of  Fortune  -  _  _     23i

31.  Of  what  hefel  the  knight  of  Fortune
going  to  England  -  -     242

32.  Of  what  the  knight  of  Fortune  did
after  he  left  the  cave  of  the  Savage     248

33.  How  the  knight  of  Fortune  met  Da-
liarte  of  the  Dark  Valley,  and  how

he  lost  his  shield  of  the  Palm  -     256

34.  How  the  knight  of  the  Savage  came
to  the  court  of  England,  and  of  what
hefel  there  .  _  >     26<

35.  How  Daliarte  healed  P latir  and
the  other  knights,  and  he  of  Fortune
took  his  leave  -  -        -    277

56.  How  the  knight  of  Fortune  entered
London,  and  of  what  passed  between
him  and  the  knight  of  the  Savage      290

57.  Shewing  who  the  dame  was  that
brought  the  knight  of  Fortune  to
the  court,  and  of  what  befel  some
knights  who  were  in  the  English
court  ...     307

f


CONTENTS.
Chap.  Page

38.  Of  the  cruel    battle   between  these

knights,  and  how  it  ended       ~        -     318

59-  Of  ukat  Eutropa  did  after  taking
these  knights,  and  hozo  the  knigiit  of
the  Savage  came  to  the  castle         -     3-8

40.  Of  zchat  hefel  the  knight  of  Fortune
after  he  was  healed  of  the  wounds
which  he  received  in  London,  when
he  did  buttle  with  the  valiant  knight

of  the  Savage  -  -        -     343

41.  Of  what  bt fel  him  of  Fortune  after

he  left  Don  Rosiram  -         -     352

PART    II.

42.  How  prince  Floranian,  bij  counsd  of

these  knights,  departed  for  London

to  visit  the  queen  and  Fieiida         -     SG7

43.  How  these  personages  departed  for

London,  and  of  what  Eutropa  did       377

44.  How  Trineo,  emperor  of  Allemaigne,

came  to  the  court  of  England,  and

of  the  feasts  which  were  held  there     333

45.  How  Argolante  arrived  at  the  court

of  Constantinople,  and  delivered  his
embassage  .  -  _     393


CONTENTS.
Chap.  Page

46.  Of  the  famous  tourney  zchich  zcas
held  by  those  kiïights  -  -     402

47.  How  the  three  knights  zcho  came  to
the  tourney  were  knozcn,  and  how  it
was  known  whose  so)is  Fahnerin  and

his  brother  were  -  -     410

48.  Hozv  it  was  known  who  Blayididon,

Pompides,  and  Daliarte  were,  and
how  the  emperor  and  the  kings  left
the  court  -  -        -     421

49.  How  these  personages   came  to    the

castle  of  the  giant  Dramuziando,
and  of  what  liappened  there  -     427

ÒQ.  How  after  the  jousts  were  ended  they
all  zcent  into  the  castle,  and  of  wh.it
they  did  there  -  -     440

51,  Of  what  bef el  the  knight  who  jousted
on  the  bridge,  and  now  called  himself

the  Trisful  Knight,  with  Prinialeon  AAl

52.  Of  what  befel  Primaleon  with  Pau-
dricia,  and  how  he  came  to  Constan-
tinople, where  nezrs  came  that  the  feet

of  the  solda n  of  Babylon  was  scattered  4  37


THE

FIRST    PART

OF    THE    XO    LtSS    RAKE    TII.VX     EXCELT.ENT    ANO

STATELY    HISTORY    OF    THE    FAMOUS

AXD    FORTUNATE    TRIXCE

PALMERIN  OF  ENGLAXD,


CHAPTER  1


After  that  Don  Dnardos^  son  to  the  a^ed
Fadrique  king  of  England,  had  finished  his
long  desired  marriage  with  Fierida,  daughter
to  the  renowned  Palmerin  dc  Ohva,  emperor
of  Constantinople,  (not  only  to  his  ov.n  good
liking  but  also  to  the  content  of  his  friends
and  familiars)  he  took  his  voyage  from  the
empire  of  Greece  fas  it  is  at  large  mentioned

VOL.    I.  B


ill  the  book  entitled  Primaleon  of  Greec<i)
toward  the  realm  of  England,  accompanied
with  the  princess  Flerida,  his  espoused  lady,
beside  a  train  meet  to  attend  on  so  puissant
a  person.  13cinii  arrived  at  the  English
court,  to  the  no  little  joy  of  the  knight's
father,  and  great  delight  to  his  kinsfolk  and
friends,  they  were  Avelcomed  as  beseemed
their  royal  estates,  and  joyfully  received  to
their  hearts'  content.  It  chanced  in  short
space  after,  the  princess  Flerida  waxed  great
with  child;  a  thiuir  of  no  small  comfort  to
the  aged  king,  nor  of  little  pleasure  to  the
young  prince.

Now  is  the  tediousness  of  their  travail,  the
wearisome  labour  of  their  long  journey,  clean
cast  out  of  remembrance  as  of  no  account,
and  the  joyful  prince  Don  Duardos,  (being
still  as  dearly  enamoured  of  her  as  he  had
been  in  those  days  when  he  called  himself
Julian*)  deviseth  each  dainty  delight,  and


*  Thi5  passage  is  so  strangely  mistranslated  by  Anthony
Munday,  that  it  is  evident  he  was  at  that  time  unacquainted
•with  the  Romance  to  vrhicli  it  allude?.    By  omitting  one


each  gallant  attempt,  that  either  might  pro-
cure the  princess  to  pleasure,  or  by  any
means  give  her  occasion  of  pastime.  And
for  because  the  pinching  pangs,  which  alvvav-s
frequenteth  one  in  her  case,  might  either
cause  doubt  of  her  good  delivers',  or  danger
in  her  well  doing,  (her  person  being  some-
what overcharged  with  sickness)  the  young
prince  was  as  caireful  in  preventing  such  ill
chance,  as  circumspect  in  providing  to  shun
any  such  change.  Leaving  the  court,  he
walked  with  her  into  the  forest,  where  the
king  his  father  had  a  royal  palace  :  for  that
he  supposed  the  sight  of  the  spreading  trees,
and  pleasant  passages  through  the  grassy
groves,  would  be  an  occasion  of  the  unmind-
ing  her  former  iits,  and  drive  out  of  memory
the  sudden  assaults  that  were  incident  unto
her  feeble  nature.


paragraph, and  altering  another,  it  has  been  made  consistent
and  intelligible.  Under  the  name  of  Julian,  Don  Duardos
worked  as  a  gardener  in  the  gardens  of  the  emperor  of  Con-,
stantinople,  and  won  the  love  of  his  daughter  Flerida. — -■
Primakoii,  Part  2.


B   2


The  princess  Ilcridn,  perceiving  the  cour(c-
ous  care  and  diligent  endeavour  that  her
royal  spouse  Don  Duardos  used  for  her
greater  delight,  so  lovingly  lahouring  to
avoid  that  motion,  that  either  might  seem
to  her  person  displeasant,  or  by  any  sinister
means  to  make  shew  of  her  disprofit,  desired
Tiiin  to  appoint  such  provision  for  her,  that
there  she  might  discharge  her  hcav}'  bur-
ihen,  and  not  to  dc[>art  before  she  saw  the
fruits  of  her  labours.  To  which  reasonable
jequest,  the  })rinec  right  courteously  con-
sented, being  right  glad  to  fulfil  that  occa-
sion that  might  be  to  her  content  ;  and  for
that  cause  as  yet  he  refused  the  governing
•  )f  the  kingdom,  appointing  the  whole  affairs
thereof  to  the  wise  discretion  of  king  Fa-
<3rique  his  father,  until  such  time  as  he  saw
the  princess  in  better  estate  of  her  health.
Eut  fortune,  who  till  now  had  favoured  him
in  all  things,  either  wearied  with,  or  repent-.
5ng  of  so  many  bounties  as  she  had  shown
liim,  now  to  use  her  accustomed  and  natural
office,  turned  the  wheel,  causing  him  to  know
that,  though  she  had  holpen  him  long  she
"was  minded  to  hurl  him  down  at  last,    .Thu<5


it  befel,  tliat  Don  Duardos  going  out  one
day  to  hunt  in  the  desert,  which  lay  from
thence  about  four  leagues  off  towards  the
sea,  took  with  him  Flerida  and  her  ladies,
and  ordered  their  tents  to  be  pitched  in  a
green  meadow  beside  a  brook,  which  with
its  clear  running  waters  might  have  glad-
dened hearts  not  disposed  to  gladness.     On
a  sudden  the  cry  of  huntsmen  was  heard  in
a   thicket  of  trees  near  adjoining  ;  to   see
what  it  might   be   the  prince  mounted  on
horseback,   and   rode   to  the  place,   where
casting  his  eyes  aside,  he  espied  a  wild  and
mighty  boar,  which  sight  the  prince  was  not
a  little  glad  of,  but  with  divers  of  his  noble
lords  made  present  pursuit  after.  Don  Duar-
dos still  rid  after  the  game,  that  the  other
had  quite  lost  the  sight  of  him,  which  they
sought  again  to  recover,  but  all  was  in  vain  ;
for  that  boar,  not  being  natural  but  a  fan-
tastic shape,  the  one  who  formed  kuc-vv  how
to  sruide  it  at  will,  so  that  the  dav  bein-j;
clean    spent,  and  waxing   somewhat   dark,
caused  them  to  give  over  the  pursuit.

The  strayed  prince  being  thus  allured  by  for-
B  3


6

tune,  affect cth  his  game  A\itb  such  great  de-
iight,  that  he  never  minded  the  princess's
distress,  but  gave  himself  wholl}'  to  his  pre-
sent pastime,  not  fearing  nor  foreseeing
what  might  be  the  pcriL  Ilis  steed  with
tediousness  of  travail,  Avaxeth  \veary  in  his
hmhs,  which  caused  tlie  prince  to  stay  and
alight  ;  for  the  darksomeness  of  the  night
had  lost  his  game,  and  the  fainting  of  his
horse  required  to  have  rest.  Don  Duardos
unbridled  the  horse  and  let  him  feed,  and
resting  himself  at  the  foot  of  a  tree,  began
at  last  to  call  to  mind  the  desolate  estate  of
the  princess  I'lerida,  and  the  grief  his  lords
would  conceive  for  v.ant  of  his  company.
Fain  he  would  have  slept,  but  could  not,  for
still  the  doubts  that  assailed  his  mind,  one
while  for  the  princess,  another  while  for  the
peers,  first  to  think  how  liis  absence  would
cause  her  to  judge  somewhat  of  his  unkind
dealing,  then  how  his  lords  would  stand  in
fear  of  his  danger  :  these,  and  a  thousand
more  tristful  terrors,  withheld  him  from  re-
ceiving that  sweet  rest  he  gladly  looked  for.
Alas  !  (thought  he)  liow  hard  is  his  hap  to
whom  fortune  is  adverse  !  how  contrary  hiij


good  luck  that  av.-aiteth  lior  liberality!  Thç
one  is  a  thing  ever  to  be  doubted,  and  the
other  ought  at  no  time  to  be  desired.  The
night  is  spent  in  these  and  such  like  cogita-
tions, and  at  the  appearance  of  the  da^-^  his
eyes  began  to  wax  heavy,  as  commonly  it
happeneth  unto  tiiose,  whom  conceived  sor-
row denieth  the  required  rest  ;  at  last  very
gnefof  itself  constraineth  them  to  slumber.

This    careful   prince,  having   obtained  such
quietness  as  the  extrejnity  of  his  pain  would
permit  him,  sti-etching  forth  his  arms,  call-
eth  again  into  question  the  reckless  regard
he  had  of  himself,  so  lightly   to  leave'' his
lady,   and  so  ungently  to   forsake  his  com-
pany, which   although  it  happened  against
his  will,  he  judged  they  would  not  acJept  it
.so  HI  worth.     Then  mounting  upon  horse-
back, rode  on  to  find  his  company,  so  unad-
visedly lost;  but   fortune  still    denying  his
pretended  purpose,  by  how  much  lie^steem-
ed  himself  near  to  his  comfort,  bv  so  much
the  further  off  she  set  him  to  the'  contrary  ;
yet  hasting  on  in  hope,  at  last  he  arrived'ij
41  great   grove   of  trees,  the  thicknoss  and


8

height  whereof,  caused  him  to  fall  into  ad«
miration  with  himseir.

Through  this  grove  ran  a  fair  and  clear  river,
so   deep  that  in  no  part  could  it  he  forded,
and  so  clear  that  ^vhosoever  walked  on  its
banks  might  count  the  uhite  stones  at  the
bottom  :  the  sight  hereof  somewhat  assuaged
the  eagerness  of  his  grief  ;  likewise  the  even-
ing ^^  as  calm,  and  the  pleasant  rattUng  ot  the
green  leaves,  with  the  melodious  harmony  ot
the  pretty  chirping  birds,  caused  hun  to  re-
member the  gladsome  time,  wherein  he  spent
his  labour  to  gain  his  best  beloved,  in  the  gar-
dens* of  the  emperor  Palmcrin,  where  first
he  named  himself  Julian.     These  recollée
tions  renewed  his  regret,  and  he  went  along
the  river  in  such  absent  mood  that  he  had
neither  eyes  to  enjoy  the  contentment  ot
that  valley,  nor  forethought  to  fear  the  dan-
ger wherein  he  then  stood  ;  but  giving  the


•  During  the  wars,  say  the  former  editions: -Another
proof  that  A.  Munday,  and  perhaps  the  translator  whom  he
followed,  was  not  sufficiently  read  in  this  true  histo^r.


9

rohis  to  his  horse,  guided  him  unto  tluit  phice
^hioh  iorti'nc  had  decreed.  In  this  manner
he  came  to  the  foot  of  a  tower  which  was
placed  in  ih.e  middle  of  the  river  upon  a
great  bridge,  rarely  edified  and  strong,  fair
also  to  behold,  and  of  such  semblance  that
the  perils  which  were  within  might  well  be
doubted.  It  v.as  surrounded  Avith  tall  pop-
lars, whichx  rose  so  thickly  from  the  bed  of
the  river,  that  they  well  nigh  hid  the  tower
from  any  wlio  should  look  through  them,
'i'he  entrance  on  cither  side  was  by  the
bridge,  the  which  was  so  large  and  spacious
that  four  knights  might  easily  have  combated
tlicreon.  Don  Duardos  recoverino;  from  his
Ibríretful  mood,  and  seeinir  the  noveltv  of
this  castle,  and  the  strength  thereof,  beat
upon  the  rings  of  iron  which  were  in  the
gate.  It  was  not  long  before  a  man  appear-
ed upon  the  battlements,  who  seeing  him
unarmed,  opened  unto  him  ;  of  him  he  de-
sired to  know  whose  that  dwelling  was,  to
which  the  porter  made  answer  that  he  should
know  above.  But  as  his  heart  never  feared
dangers  before  he  saw^  them,  he  fearlessly
icotered  the   court  vard^  and   from  thence


IO

ascended  into  a  hall,  where  he  was  received
by  a  lady^  whose  presence  represented  her
to  be  a  person  of  worth,  being  of  appear-
ance and  authority  which  bound  every  man
to  treat  her  with  more  respect  than  her
works  merited.  She  was  accompanied  with
dames  and  damsels,  and  in  this  guise  came
forward  to  welcome  him  with  such  cheer,  as
the  pleasure  which  she  felt  at  having  him  in
her  power  enabled  her  to  show.  Don  Duar-
dos,  after  making  to  her  the  courtesy  which
seemed  her  due,  said  to  her.  Lady,  Í  am  so
dismayed  at  what  1  see  here,  that  I  would
fain  know  who  you  are,  and  whose  is  this
castle  so  hidden  from  all,  yet  such  that  it
should  be  hidden  from  none.  The  lady  took
him  by  the  hand  and  led  him  to  a  window
which  hung  over  the  river,  and  then  made
answer.  Both  this  castle  and  the  governor
thereof,  resteth  at  your  command  to  what
you  shall  desire,  and  if  it  shall  hke  you  to
accept  of  one  night's  lodging  here,  not  for
the  good  cheer  you  shall  find,  but  for  your
good  company  which  we  fancy,  you  shall  be
resolvîd  in  every  doubt,  and  to-morrow,  or
when  you  please,  you  may  depart.     Doa


11

Duardos  perceiving  her  courteous  offer,
thought  it  stood  with  his  honour  to  accept
it,  and  against  his  honesty  to  refuse  it  ;  and
while  they  were  using  the  time  in  these  and
such  hke  familiar  speeches,  the  tables  were
covered,  and  every  thing  provided  to  a  brave
and  sumptuous  banquet,  which  in  cost  ex-
ceeded, and  in  delicate  fare  surpassed  ;  that
in  the  king  his  father's  court,  he  could  not
be  more  gallantly  served.

Tlieir  banquet  finished  and  the  tables  with-
drawn, courtesy  on  all  sides  artificially  offer-
ed, he  was  conducted  into  a  notable  fair
chamber,  the  sumptuousness  whereof  sur-
passed ;  where  preparing  him  to  bed-ward,
he  conveyed  his  good  sword  under  his  pil-
low ;  which  sword*  was  of  such  great  virtue,
that  while  it  was  3.bout  him  no  enchantment
could  prevail,  or  by  any  means  annoy  him.
Being  in  bed,  he  called  to  mind  the  great


*  This  sword  Don  Duardos  won  in  a  great  a'iventure.  Pri~
malcon,  P.i.  C.  19.  its  virtue  is  of  signal  u?e  throughout  that
Romance.


1^

distance  of  place  between  his  beloved  l''U:-
rida  and  his  sorrowfid  self;  but  at  Icnoth
convinced  with  heaviness  of  sleep,  for  that
the  nij^ht  before  he  enjoyed  no  rest,  turned
him  to  the  wall,  to  receive  the  charge  which
v.as  toward  him.  The  lady  of  the  castlc
being  marvellously  skilled  in  magic,  and
knowing  by  her  art  that  the  prince  was
sound  asleep,  sent  a  damsel  to  his  chamber
to  steal  away  his  sword,  which  while  he  had,
she  could  not  accomplish  her  desire.

The  damsel  in  all  respects  fulfilled  her  lady's
mind,  and   having   brought  it  to    her,    she
commanded    her  to    go    unto    her    nephew
Dramuziando,  and  desire  him  with  all  speed
to  haste  him  thither,  lor  now   he  may  take
severe  revengement  on  the  prince  Don  Du-
ardos,  for  the  death  of  his   father,  he  being
grandson  and  son-in-law  to  those  who  slew
him.     The  damsel  went  speedily  and  did  her
message,  returning    with    the    young    giant
whom  the  lady  sent  for  ;  w  ho  having  under-
stood the  full  mind  of  his  aunt,  entered  the
chamber  of  Don  Duardos,  where  taking  the


13

sword  of  tlíc  prince  in  his  hand,  he  brake
forth  into  these  speeches  :

Sometime  thou  didst  remain  in  the  service
of  a  man  no  less  famous  than  fortunate,  who
'little  knows  now  that  thou  art  in  my  keep-
ing ;  but  since  my  hap  hath  been  so  good'
to  sain  thee,  1  dare  avouch  to  make  thee
more  redoubted,  homaged,    and   esteemed,
than  when  thy  lord  Don  Duardos  did  gird
thee  about  him  ;  so  putting  it  up  again  into
the  sheath,  he  approached  unto  the  bed,  and
spake  in  this  order.     Don  Duardos,  awake  !
hard  was  thy  hap  to  light  in  my  hands,  and
froward  thy  fortune  to  approach  this  place  !
bid  now  adieu  thy  former  delight,  and  con-
tent thvsclf  to  live  in   endless   dolor  ;  the
court  of  England  was   sometime  thy  plea-
sure, but  now  this  castle  of  mine  must  be
thy  prison  ;  all  the  youthful  aaections,which
were  wont  to  be  thy  solace,  thou  must  for-
sake, and  pass  the  remainder  of  thy  days
in  sorrow.     I  rue    thy  case,   but  can   give
thee  no  comfort  ;  I  sorrow  to  think  on  thy
icisery,  and  can  give  thee  no  remedy  :  blood
c


u

will  have  blood  again,  and  cruelty  will  have
the  like  reward.

The  prince  hearing  the  giant  use  such  words
of  fury,  put  up  his  hand,  Avhere  he  thought
to  find  his  sword;  but  failing  of  his  purpose,
he  presently  said.  Certes,  I  now  believe  that
in  the  fairest  appearance  there  hes  the
greatest  falsehood.  Dou  Duardos,  replied
the  giant,  the  vengeance  which  I  desire  to
take  upon  thy  race  is  so  cruel  that  it  will
not  be  satisfied  with  thee  alone.  More  I
shall  not  say,  as  thou  wilt  know  hereafter
who  I  am.  Then  he  caused  him  to  be  car-
ried into  his  strongest  prison,  which  was  in
the  top  of  the  castle,  and  clapped  a  great
pair  of  gyves  on  his  legs,  minding  in  this
fury  never  while  he  lived  to  take  them  off
again.  Don  Duurdos  thus  suddenly  changed
from  princely  pomp  to  present  penury;  from
the  court  of  his  father  to  the  cabin  of  his
foes  ;  from  the  presence  of  his  lady  to  the
loathing  of  his  life  ;  enclosed  in  a  castle  so
admirable,  in  a  prison  so  uncomfortable,  and
in   a  dungeon  so    despairable,    closing  his


15

arms  tosrether,  entered  into  these  sorrowfui
moans  :

Oh  poor  prince  !  is  thy  hope  thou  hatlst  of
so  great  courtesy,  now  so  soon  changed  into
extreme  cruehy  1  Didst  thou  credit  fair
words  to  be  such  troth,  and  now  dost  thou
find  them  quite  turned  to  treason  !  Alas  \
who  sooner  deceived  than  the  well-mean-
ing man,  and  who  more  quickly  beguiled
than  he  that  means  most  honestly  ?  Hath
fortune  hitherto  allowed  thee  honour,  and
will  she  now  leave  thee  to  taste  this  horror  :
Hath  all  thy  life  hitherto  been  spent  in  de-
lÍ2,ht,  and  shalt  thou  now  end  thv  davs  in
this  doleful  distress  r  Alas  !  thou  hast  no  help
to  the  contrary,  wherefore  thou  must  hold
thee  content  ;  there  is  none  near  to  suc-
cour thee,  wherefore  sup  up  thy  sorrow.
Thy  aged  fatner  will  miss  thee,  thy  loving
lady  will  lack  thee,  and  all  thy  courtly  com-
panions will  sorrow  for  thy  want.  And  what
of  that  ?  O  iny  dear  Flerida  !  when  thou  shalt
call  my  kindness  into  question,  and  my  last
departure  from  thy  presence  into  a  woman's
opinion,  I  know  thy  care  will  no  less  trouble
c  2


16

thy  mind,  tlian  my  want  of  thy  comfort
causeth  my  misery.  Alas  !  though  I  have
thus  left  thee  by  folly,  yet  think  not  but  I
still  love  thee  faithfully  ;  and  although  thy
grief  (as  I  know)  is  great,  for  my  loss,  yet
think  not  but  thy  sorrow  putteth  me  to  ex-
tremity of  my  life  :  iiï  that  this  j)rison  so
iimatcth  me  with  sadness,  as  I  am  of  opi-
nion, never  again  to  see  you,  without
whose  company  my  life  cannot  long  en-
dure, but  either  to  despair  upon  ni}'  liard
adventure,  or  presently  die  in  so  sharp  aa
assault.

O  brave  Primalcon,  what  grief  will  you  abide
for  loss  of  your  brother,  and  what  sorrow
v>  ill  you  conceive  for  your  dear  friend  !  Vou
will  not  be  he  who  least  will  feel  my  loss.
My  friends  Soldan  of  Niquea,  Mayortes,
Gataru,  king  Tarnacs,  what  will  you  do?
that  in  which  ye  Avould  help  me  is  not  in
your  hand,  for  this  place,  as  far  as  I  see,
is  known  by  none  but  those  ivhom  its  lord
pleases.  Then  again  thinking  of  Flcrida
he  exclaimed.  It  is  not  this  prison  which
will  destroy  me,  it  is  grief  for  you  which


17

will  be  always  with  me,  and  will  be  my
worst  enemy.  In  this  way  did  he  pass  the
night  :  remembering  however  how  he  had
been  taken.  Certes,  said  he,  it  never  can  be
said  of  me,  that  using  my  strength  I  was
conquered  to  my  shame.


^


18


CHAPTER  %


That  you  may  know  who  this  giant,  was,  the
history  doth  discourse  unto  us^  how  Pahne-
rin  de  Ohva,  heing  then  an  errant  knight,
came  to  the  court  of  the  king  of  England,
the  grandfather  of  Don  Duardos,  accom-
panied with  Trineo  the  emperor  of  Allc-
maignc's  son,  who  for  the  love  of  fair  Agri-
ola,  the  king's  daughter,  left  his  native
country,  and  behaved  himself  so  valiant,
that  she  might  esteem  him  as  one  of  hor  be-
favoured  knights.  And  in  sooth,  not  to
diminish  his  praise,  or  hold  back  one  tittle
of  his  brave  behaviour,  the  exploits  both  of
him  and  Palmerin  (being  both  unknown)
were  such  as  the  king  of  England,  with  all
his  courtly  assistants,  not  only  commended
their  valour,  but  also  gave  them  entertain-
ment, agreeable  to  their  bounty  and  magna-


19

nimity.  For  he  perceiving  that  their  daily
endeavours  tended  botli  to  the  safeguard  of
his  person,  and  honour  of  his  whole  realm,
gave  them  that  preferment  in  court  •which
they  deserved  in  chivalry,  and  that  honour  iu
name  which  they  both  argued  to  have  in
nature;  whereby  they  were  encouraged  to
attempt  the  hardest  adventure,  and  so  be  ho-
noured in  their  knightly  behaviour.  At  length
tjiey  obtained  the  full  issue  of  their  enter-
prise ;  which  was  to  have  with  them  the  prin-
cess Agriola,  who  on  a  day,  through  leave  ob-
tained of  the  king,  went  with  the  queen  her
mother  into  the  fields,  not  far  distant  from  th«
court,  accompanied  with  divert  noblemen  and
gentlemen,  as  you  may  read  more  at  large  in
the  history  of  Palmerin  de  Oliva;  which  sai  th,
that  sporting  themselves  there  on  the  top  of  a
hill,  on  a  sudden  (altogether  unlocked  for)
there  came  a  giant  named  Franarque,Avcll  at-
tended on,  with  twenty  fighting  men  :  who
perforce  took  the  queen  and  her  daughter
Agriola  from  them,  neither  respecting  the
woeful  moan  of  the  ladies,  nor  gentle  intreaty
of  the  knights,  who  had  no  defence  to  rescue
them,  nor  company  enough  to  resist  them.


^0

But  at  that  time  Palmerin  and  Tiineo(who
had  been  with  the  kins:  in  walkins:)  arrivinsr
therCj  and  hearing  of  his  loss,  encom'aged.
them  as  well  as  they  might,  offering  them-
selves to  die,  ere  they  would  put  up  this  in-
jury. So  willing  them  all  to  provide  them
presently,  for  that  a  rash  encounter  might
turn  to  an  hard  adventure,  they  proceeded
in  pursuit  afler  the  giant,  and  overtaking
him,  behaved  themselves  so  v.orthily,  that
he  was  slain  by  the  hands  of  Palmerin.  Then
the  young  prince  Trineo,  as  well  that  his
lady  Agriola  might  perceive  his  hardness,
as  also  the  queen  her  mother  might  give  his
deeds  commendation,  so  valiantly  menaced
his  courage,  that  by  the  help  of  other
knights,  all  the  giant's  train  were  vanquished,
so  that  the  queen  and  her  daughters  had  suf-
fered no  spot  of  dishonour  by  their  cruelty,
which  greatly  they  stood  in  fear  of*.


♦  Palmerin  de  Oliva,  Cap.  57.  The  ad\enture  is  imitated
from  that  of  Famongomadan  and  Basagante  in  Amadis  of
Gaul,  B.  -i.  C.  13,  and  is  but  a  feeble  copy,  as  indeed  arc
all  the  imitations  of  Amadis  in  that  miserable  Romance^


21

Tliis  giant  had  a  sister  named  Eutropa^,  so
cunning  in  magic,  that  not  all  the  other  ma-
gicians of  her  time  were  in  this  deviUsh  art
comparable  to  her  ;  by  help  whereof  she  had
knowledge  of  the  death  of  her  brother,  which
entered  so  deep  into  her  heart,  that  she  vowed
her  revengement  should  exceed  this  cruel
mischance.  And  having  in  her  castle  with
her  a  nephew  of  hers,  the  son  of  this  giant
Tranarque,  named  Dramuziando,  by  whom
she  me;mt  to  seek  her  sharp  revenge,  she
took  liim  in  her  arms,  and  entered  into
these  rueful  complamts  :  Ah,  sweet  nephew  !
albeit  thou  art  fatherless,  vet  art  thou  not
friendless  ;  and  though  in  thy  tender  time,
fortune  hath  framed  thy  mishap,  yet  respect
a  further  time,  which  my  art  shall  begin,
and  thy  manhood  finish  :  and  he  that  hath
thus  cruelly  murdered  thy  fadier,  both  he
himself,  his  lineage,  friends  and  familiars,
T.ill  I  persecute  with  extreme  rigour.  After
these  and  such  like  speeches  uttered,  she  pro-
vided to  fortify  and  make  strong  her  castle,
lest  the  kins  of  England  should  seek  both
the  ruin  of  it  and  destruction  of  the  giant's
kiudredj  when  once  it  came  to  his  car  the


treason  sîie  pretended  against  liira  ;  where-
fore she  armed  herself,  with  all  those  of  her
kindred,  knowing  that  to  resist  the  power  of
a  king,  asked  no  small  defence.  And  for  a
farther  remedy,  lest  worse  should  happen,
she  enchanted  the  forest  round  ahout,  .so
that  none  could  enter  her  fortress  without
her  leave,  until  such  time  as  the  young  giant
Dramuziando  were  ahlc  to  bear  armour,  and
receive  the  order  of  knighthood.  In  pro-
cess of  time,  the  young  giant  grew  able  to
bear  arms,  and  then  his  heart  begun  to  thirst
for  revenge  of  his  father's  death  ;  the  which
to  accomplish,  he  was  very  desirous  in  travel
to  adventure  his  strength,  according  as  his
heart  desired.

But  Eutropa  perceiving  the  courage  of  his
mind  to  exceed  the  strength  of  his  person,
desired  him  to  stay  his  journey,  and  she
would  yield  into  his  hands  such  a  one  on
whom  he  might  sufficiently  revenge  the
death  of  his  father.  Thus  and  with  these
persuasions,  she  changed  the  mind  of  Dra-
muziando,  until  the  hard  fortune  of  th,e
prince  Don  Duardos  brought  him    to  her


çastie,  where  lie  entered  without  any  danger^
for  that  his  good  sword  kept  the  force  of  all
enchantments  from  him;  hut  having  lost  it
by  her  devilish  deceit,  remained,  as  I  have
expressed,  in  unspeakable  miser}-.

Leaving  this  matter,  it  shall  not  he  amiss
to  speak  somewhat  of  the  state  and  condition
of  Dramuziando,  who  albeit  he  were  a  giant,
which  commonly  are  of  rough  and  impatient
nature,  yef  was  he  endowed  both  with
civility  of  life,  and  honesty  in  behaviour^
exempting  cruelty,  and  surpassing  all  of  his
stock  and  parentage  in  courtesy.  In  all
things  of  nature  he  was  well  endowed  ;  his
limbs  and  features  well  proportioned,  and
not  of  unreasonable  greatness  like  other
giants  ;  of  greater  strength  than  his  mem-
bers seemed  to  possess  ;  noble  of  condition,
and  courageous  above  all  men;  less  proud
than  became  a  giant  ;  pleasant  in  discourse  ;
excellently  skilled  in  all  weapons,  and  above
all,  the  best  knight  of  all  the  giants  of  hi?
time.  He,  after  he  had  a  long  space  kept
Don  Duardos  in  prison,  and  not  only  per-
ceived his  princely  qualities,  but  also  the  so-


í24

bricty  ancî  great  gentleness  of  his  life.  Ire
caused  his  fetters  to  he  taken  from  his  feet,
and  gave  him  leave,  for  reereation,  to  walk
about  the  castle,  upon  condition  that  he
would  not  pass  beyond  his  limits,  without
his  consent.  The  courteous  prince  gave
him  his  hand  and  oath,  that  he  would  not
pass  one  foot  further  than  his  licence  should
permit  ;  yet  notwithstanding  for  all  that,  he
gave  charge  unto  divers  to  respect  liis  walk-
ing abroad,  in  that  he  respected  his  aunt  Eu-
tropa's  promise,  which  was,  that  many  va-
liant knights  would  adventure  their  lives  in
the  search  of  this  strayed  prince,  whom  she
doubted  not  but  to  have  also  <is  prisoners  in
the  castle.

Thus  passed  the  young  giant  his  time  in
pleasure,  and  Don  Duardos  acquainted  him-
self with  his  former  sorrows,  (as  it  ehanceth
luito  those,  who  of  long  time  arc  kept  frojn
the  sight  of  them  they  most  desire)  as  well
for  the  want  of  his  espoused  lady,  as  also  the
grief  the  king  his  father  would  conceive  for
his  ill  luck.  But  yet  the  gentle  pastiine  that
Dramuziando  would   often  use    with   him.


25

caused  him  to  spend  tlic  time  in  ploasnrej
that  else  he  would  have  wasted  in  mourning-
Thus  leaving  the  captive  prince  in  his  forced
content,  we  will  return  to  the  princess  Fle-
rida,  whom  we  left  in  the  forest,  sorrowfully
expecting  the  glad  return  of  her  lord  Doh
Duardos.


26


CHAPTER  3.


While  tlic  princess  Flerida  remained  in  the
forest,  expecting  that  which  came  not,  as
well  to  abandon  divers  choleric  humours
that  overcharged  lier  impatient  mind,  as
also  to  exile  the  eager  passions  which  were
still  approaching  her  weak  nature,  she  busied
herself  in  gathering  flowers,  for  it  was  the
month  of  May,  accompanied  v.ith  the  fair
Artada,  and  divers  ladies  and  gentlemen  ;
for  that  this  time  of  recreation  was  more
correspondent  to  her  good  liking,  than  here-
tofore she  could  conceive  the  opinion  to  like
any.  Thus  she  waited  for  the  return  of  her
lord  Don  Duardos,  whose  long  absence  she
admitted  to  some  misfortune,  or  else  ungen-


27

tleness  in  himself  disdained  her  presence.
In  which  of  these  to  resolve  herself  she  was
doubtful,  for  that  in  the  one  she  might  con-
vict herself  of  rash  belief,  though  in  the
(Other,  she  might  stand  upon  good  occasion.
Between  these  cogitations  she  spent  this
whole  day,  yielding  her  complaints  like-
wise to  the  uncomfortable  night  approach-
ing :  which  indeed  seemed  to  her  more  ob-
scure, more  grievous,  and  more  desperable,
than  any  night  passed  to  her  remembrance.
So  that  upon  this  hard  motion,  she  fell  into
a  resolute  opinion,  never  to  hear  good  tidings
of  her  lord  Don  Duardos,

The  huntsmen  returned,  he  was  not  with
them.  The  lords  and  ladies  perceiving  these
passions  to  be  more  extreme  upon  her  than
any  heretofore,  began  to  cast  with  themselves
w^hether  they  might  dejprt  and  leave  her  in
these  fits,  or  stay  still  with  her,  which  was
to  their  great  grief:  at  length  they  conclud-
ed, by  order  of  the  duke  of  Wales,  to  wait
till  the  following  morning.  This  uncomfort-
able  night  gone,  the  duke,  as  soon  as  day
dawned,  sent  them  all  to  search  the  forest
p  2


28

through,  bidding  them  all  return  to  the  tents
with  what  speed  they  might  hap,  for  Flerida
had  resolved  not  to  depart  from  thence  till
some  tidings  were  known.

The  noble  gentlemen,  of  no  less  loyalty  to
their  prince  Don  Duardos,  than  love  they
bare  to  the  princess  Flerida,  addressed  them-
selves presently  to  fulfil  this  request.  Among
whom.  Prides,  eldest  son  to  the  duke  of
Wales,  and  chief  gentleman  attendant  on
the  prince,  rode  along  the  sea-shore,  where
he  met  with  two  of  his  companions,  wiio
likewise  endeavoured  themselves  in  the
search  of  Don  Duardos;  from  Avhom  he  re-
ceived sorry  comfort,  so  that  he  was  past
hope  of  any  good  success.

Nevertheless,  to  avoid  the  evil  conceit  of  the
princess,  and  the  angry  mood  of  his  aged
father,  he  left  them,  and  rode  on  very  soli-
tar}',  sometime  exclaiming  on  fortune  for  his
hard  hap,  and  then  again  blaming  his  folly,
when  he  perceived  no  remedy.  In  this  man-
ner he  went  on  without  the  hope  of  succeed-
ing in  his  search,  and  thinking  that  the  wild


^9

beasts,  by  %vhoni  that  forest  was  peopled,
would  devour  him,  because  he  was  unarmed.
In  this  sorrowful  mood,  letting  the  reins  lie
upon  the  neck  of  his  horse,  he  made  his  la-
mentation aloud,  which  echoed  among  the
caverns  of  the  shore,  seeming  as  if  the  rocks
assisted  him  to  lament  with  his  own  words  of
lamentation.

A  good  while  he  continued  these  careful
complaints,  and  longer  would  have  done,
had  not  the  presence  of  a  damsel  caused  him
to  forget  them,  who  was  mounted  on  a  black
pali'rey,  and  attire-d  likewise  in  black  gar-
ments, yet  so  well  attired  in  them,  that  not
only  was  she  fair  by  nature,  but  her  attire
made  her  appear  fair;  who  coming  still  to-
ward sir  Pridos,  m.ade  him  somewhat  amaz-
ed; yet  took  he  courage  again,  in  hope  to  be
certified  by  her  of  some  glad  tidings,  as  con-
cerning the  strayed  prince  Don  Duardos.
The  damsel  behaving  herself  very  courteous-
ly, with  no  less  audacity  of  wit,  than  exqui-
site qualities  of  maiden  civility,  taking  sir
Pridos's  horse  by  the  bridle,  saluted  him  with
these  speeches  ;

J>  3


30

Sir  knight^  if  my  presence  do  argue  a  pro
sumption,  or  my  boldness  to  break  off"  3'our
silent  cogitations  seem  not  maidenly  in  me,
or  more  than  modesty  in  your  eye,  let  hum-
ble entreaty  pass  for  the  one,  and  the  tidings
I  bring  crave  pardon  for  the  other.  The
pains  you  take  are  to  very  small  purpose,  and
the  grief  you  overload  your  mind  withal,  to
as  little  avail;  for  proof  whereof  give  ear  to  *
my  words,  which  fchall  somewhat  ease  your
mind,  and  here  ,make  an  end  of  my  travail.
Don  Duardos  your  prince,  whose  nobleness
hath  ever  been  more  famous  than  his  late  ad-
ventures hath  proved  fortunate,  he  livetli,
yet  deprived  of  his  liberty,  and  captive  to
him  whose  anger  will  not  be  assuaged  of
long  time,  which  he  must  stay  to  his  grief
and  my  sorrow.  Wherefore,  on  thy  knight-
hood I  charge  thee  to  certify  the  princess
Flerida,  how  dangerous  it  is  for  her  to  use
such  great  impatience,  as  may  cut  off  her
time,  yet  not  abate  his  troubles;  and  how
she  might  manifest  a  princely  magnanimity
of  mind,  in  conquering  this  grief  by  valour
of  her  patience,  because  fortune  is  prepared
to  another  mishap,  which  because  it  will  hap-


31

pen  too  soon,  I  refer  it  to  her  that  shall  feel
it,  and  to  you  that  shall  know  it.  And  there-
fore give  her  to  understand,  her  grief  is  as
needless  as  his  state  is  helpless,  until  the  ap-
pointed time,  when  all  extreme  sorrows  shall
finish  with  unspeakahle  joys.  And  thus  say,
that  Argonida  sendeth  her  these  tidings  ;
to  whom  her  loss  is  as  displeasant  as  to
herself.

Tlie  damsel  ending  here  her  tale,  gave  bridle
to  her  palfrey,  and  left  sir  Pridos,  into  whose
remembrance  the  knowledge  of  this  lady
presently  came.  That  she  was  the  daugh-
ter of  the  lady  enchantress,  of  the  isle  where
the  eagle  carried  Primaleon's  dwarf  Risdeno,
at  the  time  when  such  excellent  triumphs
were  made,  after  the  battle  fouiiht  for  the
knight  of  the  unknown  isle.  And  of  this
Argonida  Don  Duardos  had  a  son,  named
Pompides,  as  it  is  at  large  rchtarsed  in  the
book  of  Primaleon*,  v.hicli  i  will  let  pass.


*  I  have  no  other  cop)'  of  Primaleon  than  A.  Munday's
translation,  who  in  his  blundering  way  has  missed  the  chap-
ter or  chapters,  in  v.hich  the  first  iiiteiview  of  Duardos  aud


and  return  to  sir  Pridos;  who  "haviîig  well
noted  the  tale  of  Argonida^  rcturneth  to  the
place  where  he  left  the  princess^  and  declar-
ing  unto  her  all  that  had  happened,  she  be-
came more  sorrowful  than  before,  for  that
she  desired  nothing  more  than  his  company,
which  living  she  ought  to  have,  and  yet  he
alive  could  not  have.  Her  sorrows  took  so
deep  a  persuasion  in  her  heart,  that  imme-
diately she  fell  into  labour,  which  the  ladies
perceiving,  and  the  gentlemen  giving  place,
as  was  their  duty,  after  many  grievous  pangs
(which  are  incident  to  those  in  that  taking)
she  was  happiiy  delivered  of  two  goodly  men
children,  so  fair  and  well  limbed,  that  in
their  first  hour  they  gave  good  promises  of
the  feats  which  they  afterwards  atchieved.
The  lady  Artada  receiving  the   two  young


Argonida  is  related.  It  should  come  after  the  fourth  chapter
of  the  third  part, — but  he  goes  on  with  the  fifth,  never  per-
ceiving the  chasm  in  the  story.  The  adventure  of  the  eagle
and  dwarf  occurs  in  Primaleon,  P.  3.  C.  22.  of  the  English
veision.  It  is  not  always  easy  to  guess  at  old  Anthony's
blunders  :  instead  of  saying  "  where  the  eigle  carried  I'rima-
leon's  dwarf  Risdeno,"  he  has  it  "  where  the  earl  lavished
Aideldcgno  begotten  by  Primaleon."


princes,  wrapped  them  in  rich  and  costly
clothes,  and  then  presented  them  to  the
princess,  holding  opinion  that  the  sight  of
them  v.ould  somewhat  mitigate  her  great
vexation  of  mind;  and  she  taking  them  in
lier  arms,  mixing  her  talk  with  tears,  declar-
ing motherly  affection,  thus  said:  Oh  sons
without  a  father,  how  much  happier  did  I
think  your  birth  would  have  been  !  But  in-
stead of  the  rejoicings  which  he  had  provid-
td  for  that  day,  I  shall  die  uitli  grief,  and
you  will  remain  without  him,  and  without
me,  and  without  years  to  feel  so  great  a
loòs.

Forthwith  a  chaplain  ^vho  was  then  pre-
sent baptized  them,  and  she  being  demanded
how  she  w  ould  have  them  named,  willed  that
the  first  might  be  called  Pahnerin,  after  the
name  of  her  father,  for  that  the  effect  of  this
misfortune  might  be  well  compared  to  his
before*  passed.     The  other,  for  because  they


♦  Palme;  in  de  Oliva,  like  Amadis,  was  illegitimate,  and  ex^
pobcd  in  an  olive  tree  upon  a  mountain  abounding  with
palms,  from  which  he  was  named,  C.  9.


34

were  born  in  the  forest,  she  desired  that  his
name  might  have  relation  to  the  place  of  his
hirthj  which  was  thus  determined,  Florian  of
the  Desert,  because  the  forest  wherein  he  was
born  was  called  the  Desert  Forest,  and  be-
cause the  field  was  covered  with  flowers,  and
he  so  fair  thiit  the  name  Florian  seemed
worthy  of  him,  and  he  of  the  name.  The
ceremonies  accomplished  which  were  re-
quired in  this  matter,  the  princess  received
the  two  infants  upon  her  lap,  one  while  with
mournful  tunes  to  still  their  crying,  another
while  feeding  them  v.ith  the  milk  of  her
breast,  and  her  tears  which  ran  down  and
mingled  with  it,  ever  minding  the  hard  mis-
fortune of  her  dear  lord,  and  never  ceasing  to
deplore  the  miseries  of  her  life;  esteeming  the
one  to  excel  all  in  hard  hap,imd  the  other  to
be  above  all  in  unlooked-for  mischance.  But
as  commonly  it  happeneth,  no  pleasure  is
"without  his  pain  adjoined,  nor  no  quiet  calm,
but  by  some  accident  or  other  is  converted
into  a  rough  tempest  ;  even  so  this  careful
princess,  whose  extreme  grief  and  mishap
aided  a  persuasion  of  mind  that  fortune
had  done  her  worst,  and  executed  her  utteu


35        ^

most  spite  :  so  that  what  wanted  to  accom-
pliáh  her  quiet,  a?  concerning  the  absence  of
her  loving  Don  Duardo-s,  she  determined  a
resolute  opinion  (albeit  far  incomparable  to
her  loss,  yet  as  nature  willed  her  by  a  forced
content)  to  assuage  her  urgent  passions,  on
the  presence  of  the  two  young  princes;  by
whom  in  time  she  had  good  hope  to  end  lier
grief,  and  on  whom,  as  present  occasion  did
serve,  she  was  somewhat  satisfied.  Bat
mark  how  unkindly  it  happened.

In  this  forest  of  lonç  time  remained  a  sava2;e
man,  who  not  using  the  company  of  reason-
able creatu'es,  became  unreasonable  of  him-
self; as  the  course  of  his  life  being  brutish
and  beastly,  his  diet  on  the  herbs  and  roots
of  the  ground,  his  apparel  framed  of  the
skins  of  wild  beasts,  shewed  that  he  was  a
man  in  name,  but  not  in  nature.  Tliis
savage  man  walking,  as  was  his  wont,  along
the  forest,  leading  in  his  hands  a  couple  of
hons,  whom  he  used  sometime  to  kill  the
game  that  would  serve  for  his  nourishment,
unhappily  espied  the  princess  and  her  train ,
which  moved  him  to  withdraw  himself  into  a


.       '36

tlùcket  of  trees  near  adjoining;  where  at
pleasure  he  beheld  the  ceremonies  used  at
the  baptizing  ot"  the  children.

Now  had  fortune  determined  the  second  mis-
liap  of  the  princi^ss  :  for  that  she  urged  the
savage  man  to  go  take  the  two  infants,  who
were  sweetly  sleeping  on  the  mother's  lap,
and  give  ihem  for  food  unto  his  lions,  that
all  that  day  had  received  no  sustenance.
I'orth  from  among  the  trees  he  comes,  to  the
no  little  astonishment  of  the  princess  (whose
sorrowful  mind  was  subject  to  any  moiety  of
fear),  and  the  great  dismaying  of  her  courtly
attendants  ;  who  at  this  presence  of  so  grim
<i  sire  betook  themselves  to  flight,  not  one  re-
ceiving the  courage  of  heart  to  abide  by  the
princess  but  the  lady  Artada,  Avho  never
shrunk  one  foot  from  her,  but  would  have
iidventured  her  death  in  the  princess's  dc-
leiice,  had  her  might  been  answerable  to  her
good  stomach.  When  the  princess  saw  her-
self subject'  to  so  hard  a  mischance,  that  the
old  duke  of  Wales  and  all  the  other  being
unarmed  were  glad  to  fly,  which  indeed  was
î.beir  b<"st  lielp,  she  wished  for  sir  Pridos  :


^1

but  he  was  <leparted  to  London^  to  fetch  a
chariot  to  bring  her  to  the  court_,  which
urged  her  thus  to  content  herseh":  Let  it
suthce  thee,  poor  Flerida,  that  thou  art  the
only  she  born  unto  all  misfortune.  Then
approached  to  her  the  savage  man,  and  took
from  her  the  two  young  princes,  neither  using
any  words,  or  offering  any  harm  to  her,  but
departed  presently  to  his  cave,  leaving  the
princess  overcome  with  a  trance,  whereout
the  lady  Artada  h^'  her  dihgent  means  re-
covered her.  But  when  she  was  recovered
she  began  to  lament  anew,  <  desiring  death  a
thousand  times,  because  only  in  death  could
she  be  at  rest  from  so  manv  troubles.


vei.  :.


ss


CHAPTER    4.


After  that  sir  Pridos  had  seen  the  birth  of
the  two  princes,  he  resolved  to  depart  from
thence  to  London,  to  the  end  that  he  might
cause  a  chariot  to  be  brought  into  the  forest,
to  convey  the  princess  unto  the  court  of  her
father  king  Fadriquc  ;  who,  leaning  in  his
chamber  window,  espied  sir  Pridos  come
riding  in  great  haste,  which  caused  him  to
cast  a  doubt  of  some  evil  news  approaching  ;
in  that  he  judged  a  show  of  more  sadness
to  be  in  him  at  that  instant,  than  before
time  he  could  perceive  in  him  the  like.
Whereof  to  be  resolved,  he  presently  sent
for  sir  Pridos,  to  know  the  cause  of  his  so
sudden  arrival;  whose  grief  could 'not  con-
ceal the  loss  of  Don  Duardos_,  but  in  tears


39

laid  open  a  discourse,,  wuich  grieved  the
aged  king  to  hear  it,  and  galled  his  heart  to
recount  it.  The  king,  at  tlu.se  unlooked  for
news,  tell  into  such  extreme  passions,  both
Avith  the  tears  that  bedewed  his  aged
beard,  and  grievous  sighs  that  issued  from
his  heart,  that  sir  Pridos  could  hardly  keep
Jife  in  him,  or  by  entreaty  use  any  means  of
a  patient  persuasion;  for  the  aged  king  was
strucken  into  such  a  debility  of  hope,  that
between  the  impatient  assaults  of  doubt  and
danger,  he  thus  began  to  use  speech  ^vith
himself  ;

0  m\-  Don  Duardos,  nature  wills  me  to  de-
plore thy  loss,  and  entire  affection  makes
ine  die  for  thy  lack  ;  Avhose  presence  was
the  staff  of  mine  aged  diys,  and  whose
absence  is  the  sword  that  wounds  me  to  the
death.  Alas  !  no  certainty  can  be  looked
for  at  the  hands  of  fortune,  whose  fickleness
is  seen  in  change,  and  v.  hose  frowardness
in  chance.  Too  long  have  I  trusted  her,
and  too  late  hath  she  deceived  me  :  the  one
my  folly,  the  otlicr  her  fashion.     Yet  doubt

1  not,  ]jut  if  thou  enjoy  thy  life,  the  sub-»

K  '2


40

stance  of  thy  valour  shall  exceed  the  sharp-
ness of  her  vengeance,  which  will  be  no  less
welcome  to  thee  than  long  wished  of  me.
But  alas  !  Avell  may  I  hide  my  grief,  but
never  heartily  forget  it  ;  well  may  I  awhile
brook  it,  but  for  no  long  time  bear  it  :  for
that  the  want  of  my  comfort  will  cut  oft'  my
days,  and  the  doubts  I  conceive  bring  mc
in  greater  distress,  where  if  thou  were  pre-
sent my  mind  would  be  satisfied,  and  in
spite  of  fortune  award  all  mischances.  V^'hilc
the  king  continued  in  this  great  agony  of
mind,  the  queen  entered  ;  who  likewise
understanding  the  loss  of  her  son,  began  to
add  another  stratagem  of  grief,  bewraying
her  motherly  afiecfion  both  in  tears  and
heavy  complaint,  which  to  appease,  the  aged
king  thus  began  :

IVladam,  the  honour  of  a  noble  r^iind  is  tried
in  adversity  ;  whenas  the  extremity  of  grief
is  conquered  by  patience  of  the  mind.  But
the  mind  being  impatient,  and  not  kept
within  tho  limits  of  a  moderate  government,
the  least  cross  that  happeneth  is  too  weighty
in  pain,   when   the  sense  is  far  too  weak  in


41

reason.  It  pleased  the  Almighty  to  give  U6
a  son,  in  whom  we  reeeived  no  Httle  com-
fort, and  by  whom  our  fame  hath  been
knighth'  advanced  :  and  now,  to  try  how  we
can  brook  a  moiety  of  his  displeasure,  he
hath  caused  some  accident  to  happen,  to
keep  him  from  ui»  \\liom  we  most  of  all
desired,  yet  not  depriving  us  of  hope  ;  but
as  to  our  grief  we  have  lost  him,  so  to  our
comfort  we  shall  see  him  again.  In  mean
time,  let  us  tolerate  this  sharp  affliction  on
his  two  princely  children,  v/ho  till  wc  enjoy
the  sight  of  the  father  again,  shall  with  their
noble  mother  comfort  our  sorrows,  and  we  also
endeavour  to  abate  their  moans.  So  one
with  another  shall  bear  an  equal  share  of
adversity,  and  be  partners  also  in  good  for-
tune, if  any  chance  to  happen.

Thus  the  king  and  the  queen  remirmed  one
while  in  a  persuasion  of  patience,  another
while  wholly  vanquished  with  the  force  of
their  grief;  whose  passions  I  refer  to  the
judgments  of  those  that  have  tasted  the
honour  of  fame,  and  hatred  of  fortune.
Return  we  now  to  sir  Prides,  who  in  this
e3


42

time  bad  caused  his  brother  to  ride  with  à
chariot  to  the  forest,  that  the  princess  might
be  brought  to  the  court  ;  who  being  placed
in  the  chariot,  and  ready  to  depart,  she
gave  so  heavy  a  farewcl  to  the  place,  as  well
for  her  lord  Don  Duardos  as  misfortune  of
her  children,  that  her  attendants  seemed  as
it  were  drowned  in  sadness,  to  see  the
princess  overcome  with  such  sorrow.  Being
come  to  the  city  of  London,  the  citizens,
^vho  at  her  coming  tVòm 'Greece  did  not
only  excel  in  variety  of"  devices,  but  also
discovered  their  joy  in  singular  triumphs,
now  with  a  sorrowful  disposition  they  be-
Avrayed  the  terror  of  their  loss,  and  yet  with
an  intermeddled  show  of  joy  did  assuage  the
the  dolor  of  the  princess.

When  she  came  to  the  court,  and  perceived,
the  great  cliange  of  wonted  disports,  both
in  the  king  and  queen,  as  also  in  all  the
nobility,  who  likewise  understanding  the
mishap  of  the  two  young  princes,  altogether
begin  a  world  of  lamentations  :  the  king
dismaying  of  any  good  hope  ;  the  queen  de-
spairing in  double  extremity  ;  the  lords  and


45

ladies,  both  in  apparel  and  gesture,  wholly
exclaiming  on  the  cruelty  ot"  fortune  ;  the
inhabitants  throughout  the  whole  realm  of
England,  whose  delight  was  many  times  to
sit  and  conceive  marvellous  opinions  of  the
no  less  knightly  than  famous  adventures  of
the  prince  Don  Duardos,  now  sit  sighing,
v.ringing  their  hands,  and  pulHng  their
bonnets  over  their  e3'es,  using  as  it  were  in
u  general  voice  amongst  them.  Oh,  none
but  v.e  unhappy  Î

The  king  having  thus  passed  this  night,  in
no  less  grief  of  mind  than  sickly  assaults  of
his  aged  person,  the  queen  and  the  princess
-Flerida  equally  considered,  on  the  morrow
he  determined  to  send  a  knight  of  his  court
named  Argolante,  son  to  the  duke  of  Ortam,
and  brother  to  Troendos  (who  also  had  been
amourous  of  the  princess  Flerida),  to  the
emperor  Palmerin  at  Constantinople,  to  let
him  understand  the  late  misfortune  of  Eng-
land. He  being  ready  to  depart,  as  he  rode
thorough  London  the  streets  were  adorned
with  black,  and  the  citizens  were  arrayed  in
black  and  mourning  manner^  bringing  him


44

to  the  ^ea  shore,  Avhere  he  look  i^hipping  and
departed.

The  princess  Flerida  hecame  very  feeble  of
person,  insomuch  that  there  was  doubt  of
her  good  recovery  ;  bat  (iod  not  suffering
her  to  end  as  she  wiUingly  would,  gave  her
strength  again  by  little  and  little,  and  she
comforted  herself  best  when  she  was  forth
of  all  company;  which  caused  many  knights
to  leave  the  court,  and  live  in  search  of  the
strayed  prmce  Don  Duardos,  pitying  her
case  and  his  absence.  Thus  remained  fair
Flerida,  not  failing  one  jot  in  true  and
faithful  love,  though  she  daily  contemned
the  adverse  estate  of  her  life.  And  he  like-
wise failed  not  in  constant  loyalt}',  justly
fulfilling,  that  neither  distance  of  place  nor
extremity  of  fortune  could  part  in  sunder
their  n^utual  conjunction  of  spotless  amity.


45


CHAPTER  5,


Now  return  we  to  the  savage  man,  wlio^  aâ
the  history  declareth^  hastened  to  his  cave
with  the  two  young  princes  in  his  arms  ;  his
wife  there  waiting  the  return  of  her  husband,
having  in  her  arms  her  own  child,  being
about  the  age  of  one  year.  He  being  come
to  her  presented  her  the  two  young  princes,
declaring,  that  all  tliat  day  he  had  found  no
other  dinner  for  themselves  and  the  lions
than  these  two  infants,  whom  he  willed
might  presently  be  dismembered  in  pieces,
for  that  his  hungry  stomach  required  to  have
meat.  The  vvife,  in  whose  heart  motherly
pity  excelled  savage  cruelty,  for  that  indeed
women  by  nature  do  bear  a  more  estimation
of  mercv  tlian  is  requisite  iu  men  ;  she  usect


4()

such  kind  persutasions  \vith  lier  husband^  as
also  finding  the  means  to  provide  other  ne-
cessaries for  him,  that  she  saved  the  lives  of
the  infants,  and  satisfied  the  hungry  appe-
tite of  her  husband  :  so  that  lovingly  she
became  their  second  mother,  and  as  care-
fully nourished  them  as  had  they  been  the
fruit  of  their  own  body.  Where  we  will
leave  them  a  while,  to  God  and  good  for-
tune :  being  not  forgetfid  of  Argolantc,
whom  we  left  sailing  toward  Constantinople.
After  so  long  being  on  the  seas  as  is  required
in  so  long  a  journey,  he  arrived  at  the  fa-
mous cit^'  of  Constantinople  on  a  Sunday
morning,  where  he  perceived  as  gallant
triumphs  in  preparation  as  were  at  the  re-
nowned marriages  of  Primaleon,  and  the
prince  Don  Uuardos.  The  cause  whereof
was  for  joy  of  the  birth  of  the  daughter  of
the  prince  Primaleon,  whom  the  emperor
gave  to  name  Polinarda,  in  token  that  her
beauty  and  good  fortune  should  excel  any
lady  living  at  that  day.  In  honour  of  this
joy  the  triumphs  were  proclaimed  ;  which
procured  the  assembly  of  many  noble  per-
sonages,  among   whom    was  Tarnaes,    the


47

king  of  Lacedemoiiia  ;  Poleiido?_,  king  of
Thessaly  ;  and  Belcar,  the  duke  of  Durago  :
tlie  presence  of  these  states  being  no  small
honour  to  the  emperor,  and  fame  to  the
court  of  Constantinople.

Argolante,  attired  all  in  black  armour,  rode
through  the  city,  and  in  short  time  arrived
at  the  emperor's  palace,  where  beholding
the  valiant  behaviour  of  each  courageous
knight  to  win  honour  in  this  triumph,  with
an  heavy  sigh  he  called  to  memory  the  un-
looked-for sorrow  of  the  court  of  England,
which  was  adorned  with  no  less  grief  than
was  the  emperor's  court  with  gladness  ;
which  persuaded  such  an  unkind  conceit  in
the  heart  of  the  gentle  knight  Argolante,
who  esteemed  the  loyalty  of  friendship  to
serve  as  an  especial  remedy  to  the  afflicted
mind,  that  he  feared  his  news  were  not  of
force  sufficient  to  change  their  exceeding
mirth  ;  albeit  his  expectation  was  deceived
in  that  point.  Then  approached  he  the
place  where  the  emperor  sat  at  dinner,
where,  with  no  less  civility  of  gesture  than
modest  behaviour  of  personage,  he   vailed,.


48

liis  helmet,  ofîering  to  kiss  the  emperor's
hanch  which  might  not  be  permitted,  in  that
he  was  ignorant  of  whence  he  was.  Which
he  perceiving,  began  in  presence  of  them
all  to  declare  his  ambassat^e,  not  forirettinc:
the  place  and  person,  which  in  every  point
he  handled  with  duty.  The  emperor  well
noting  the  sad  tale  of  Argolante,  the  mis-
Ibrtue  of  his  son  Don  Diiardos,  and  heavi-
ness of  the  English  court,  he  withdrcv.'  him-
self from  the  table  into  his  chamber,  where,
as  patiently  as  his  grief  would  suffer  him,  he
began  to  use  his  speeches  in  this  manner  :

I  know  not  whether  the  Gods,  in  granting
me  a  prosperous  course  in  youth,  have  de-
termined to  ruinate  my  days  in  mine  age,
or  fortune  holding  me  then  in  favour  beyond
all  men,  hath  allowed  my  misfortue  now  to
be  above  any.  If  so  it  was  appointed,  I
would  my  life  had  ended  then  in  tranquillity,
when  I  feared  no  endamagement,  than  pro-
longing my  days  in  hope  of  an  answerable
age,  to  be  subject  to  the  misery  of  time,  and
abject  from  the  honour  of  a  noble  heart.
/\^'ell,  that  hath  passed  to  thy  high  good  hap.


49

and  what  is  present,  the  no  small  angiush  of
tîiy  heart  ;  let  the  remembrance  of  the  one
extinguish  the  fame  of  the  other,  and  the
cruelty  of  chance  root  up  the  inestimable
praise  of  thy  conquests.  These  and  sundry
other  heavy  complaints  were  uttered  by  the
emperoi*;  and  the  triumphs  "were  now  of
small  estimation,  for  that  thorough  the
"whole  court  these  sorrowful  tidinofs  luid
stnicken  a  sudden  alteration.  But  most  of
all  in  the  heart  of  the  noble  Primaleon,  who
understanding  the  misfortune  of  his  dear
friend  and  brother  Don  Duardos,  stood  not
to  cast  doubt  of  this  matter,  or  that  acci-
dent, either  how  fortune  might  favour  him
or  endamage  his  sudden  enterprise  ;  but  as
covertly  as  he  might  he  departed  from  Con-
stantinople, refusing  father,  mother,  wife,
children,  lands,  -living,  and  all  ;  that  the
loyalty  he  bare  to  his  friend  might  declare,
he  preferred  his  safety  before  his  own  solace.
And  that  his  deeds  might  be  answerable  to
his  good  intent,  he  vowed  to  travail  the
course  of  his  life,  to  search  in  every  desolate
and  unfrequented  place,  bat  he  would  find
F


50

his  clear  friend  Don  Duardos,  whose  welfare
he  as  heartily  desired  as  his  own  life;  for
that  he  had  found  the  like  trusty  and  un-
spotted affection  in  him,  when  through
bis  valour  he  delivered  him  from  the  t^-raut
Gataru*.

Tlie  emperor  was  advertised  of  his  depar-
ture, by  the  unaccustomed  pensivencss  of
his  espoused  lady  Gridonia,  as  also  by  the
great  sadness  of  the  empress  his  rnotlier  ;
whom  neither  the  gentle  persuasion  of  the
emperor  might  satisfy,  nor  endeavour  of  Ikít
courtly  ladies  might  win  any  means  to  pa-
cify. Who  used  the  more  diligence  in  the
matter,  only  for  the  affection  they  bare  to
the  princess  Flerida,  by  whose  virtuous  and
princely  behaviour  of  life  (which  had  not
only  ravished  the  minds  of  all,  but  obtained
the  good  liking  of  every  one,  in  that  virtue


*  PrlmaUon,  Book  2.  C.  30.  Primalcon  was  enchanted,
and  Don  Duardos  delivered  him,  because  his  sv/ord  prescivid
him  froin  all  enchantments.


is  the  chief  ornament  of  noble  or  ignoble,)
they  were  all  eucouraged  to  attempt  any  oc-
casion to  set  the  empress  at  quiet.

^Hien  the  emperor  perceived  her  great  dÍ5-
quietness,  that  the  speeches  of  the  ladies  as
also  of  himself  were  bestowed  to  small  eflect,
he  began  to  use  commendations  of  the  va-
hant  attempt  of  his  son  Primalcon,  in  that
his  courage  of  mind  urged  him  to  so  famous
au  enterprise.  Desiring  her  to  consider  the
loss  of  the  prince  Don  Duardos,  their  son-
in-law  ;  and  that  the  good  fortune  of  Pi  ima-
leon  might  bring  inestimable  comfort  to  all
kingdoms  in  Christendom,  so  that  the  ho-
nour of  his  hardy  attempt  deserved  rather  a
general  rejoicing  than  such  sad  complaints
as  they  seemed  to  bewray.

The  knights,  who  had  likewise  been  partners
in  the  triumph,  and  bare  great  good  will  to
the  prince  Don  Duardos,as  also  to  the  noble
Pnmaleon,  withdrew  themselves  to  their
lodgings,  and  armed  themselves  presently,
posting  with  all  speed  they  might  after  the
adventurous  Primaleon,some  taking  one  way
f  2


52

and  some  another.  As  well  tliose  that  used
the  triumphs  for  then-  ladies'  sakes,  us  also
those  whose  rcdouhted  behaviour  had  both
won  the  honour  of  the  field  and  dignity  of
fame.  All,  with  a  mutual  consent,  adven-
tured hmb  and  life,  that  the  report  of  their
deeds  might  manifest  the  renown  of  their
knighthood.

And  because  you  shall  have  knowledge  who
behaved  themselves  most  wortliy  commen-
dations in  this  no  less  famous  than  rare  ad-
venture, I  w  ill  bewray  some  of  them  to  you,
that  your  gentle  opinion  of  their  pains  may
yield  them  in  recompence  part  of  a  condign
praise.  Polendos,  king  of  Thessaly,  son  to
the  emperor  ;  prince  Detred,  son  to  Frisol
the  king  of  Hunga,ria,  accompanied  with  his
brother  Belcar  ;  the  prince  of  Allemaigne,
son  to  the  emperor  Trineo,  named  Vernao,
who  honoured  the  beauty  of  fair  Basilia,
daughter  to  the  emperor  Palmerin,  to  whom
he  was  newly  married,  and  stood  in  doubt
how  to  proceed,  lest  fortune  should  not  be
so  favourable  to  him  as  he  expected,  which
paused  some  slackness  in  good  will.     Never-


53

thcless,  after  he  had  considered  honour  and
love,  how  the  one  was  lasting  in  iamc^  and
the  other  Hnked  to  an  effeminate  fancv,  he
determined  to  follow  his  companions^  driv-
ing into  oblivion  the  pleasant  conceits  that
he  often  esteemed  in  his  best  beloved,  using
this  persuasion  with  himself  :  That  he  which
vanquished  himself  with  the2vanit3''of  fanc}',
and  3-ieldeih  the  liberty  of  his  will  to  fond
affection,  is  more  meet  to  handle  a  lute  than
a  lance,  and  better  to  court  a  lady  than  de-
serve the  brave  name  of  a  captain.  Tn  this
persuasion  he  departed,  intending  so  knight-
ly an  opinion  in  his  mind,  that  the  honour
of  his  name  should  express  his  nobleness,
and  valour  of  his  bounty  be  esteemed  of  his
fair  Basilia»

Thus  was  the  city  of  Constantinople  (as  it
■were)  desolate,  wanting  the  noble  knights
which  were  then  departed;  which  caused  the
emperor  to  visit  the  chiefest  places  in  the
cit}',  to  the  no  small  content  of  himself  and
joy  of  the  citizens,  who  little  minded  the
absence  of  the  noble  gentlemen,  in  that  the
emperor  so  lovingly  vouchsafed  them  his
F  3


54

company.  Then  departed  Argolante  from
the  court  of  Constantinople  toward  the
realm  of  England,  bcarhig  answer  of  I  lis  am-
bassage  from  the  emperor,  to  his  lord  and
sovereign,  how  the  loss  of  the  prince  Don
Duardos  was  blazed  in  the  courts  of  divers
noble  princes,  as  in  the  court  of  Arncdos,
kinir  of  France,  his  cousin,  and  son-in-law  to
the  emperor  of  Constantinople;  as  also  m
the  court  of  Recindos,  king  of  Spain  ;  in  the
court  of  Belzagri,  the  soldan  of  Niquea;
with  tiie  noble  JMayortes,  the  Great  Khan  ;*
and  many  princes  more,  to  whom  the  loss  of
the  Englisli  prince  was  as  grievous  as  to  him-
self. For  proof  whereof,  the  employed  pains
of  divers  noble  minds  migiit  remain  as  wit-
ness, who  walked  the  lorosts  and  unknoAvn
passages  in  many  countries,  that  martial  be-
haviour was  never  more  esteemed  than  it


■*  Mayortes  was  the  first  person  who  assumed  this  title,
which  he  took  because  for  many  years  he  had  been  en-
chanted in  the  shape  of  a  dog;  in  which  character  he  makei
a  fefcat  figure  as  the  Gran-Caa  (the  Great  Dog)  of  Doa
Duardos.     Priinahon.


63

•was  during  the  search  of  tliis  strayed  prince.
Argolante  being  departed  from  the  emperor^
after  many  days  travel  he  arrived  at  die
English  court,  whereas  to  the  kingFadriquc,
the  queen,,  and  the  princess  Flerida,  he  deli-
vered the  answer  of  his  message,  who  were
greatly  satisfied  in  hearing  the  noble  at-
tempts of  the  Grecian  knights,  by  whose  en-
deavoured pains  they  had  good  hope  of  a
glad  and  prosperous  success.


^


CHAPTER  6.


Now  Primaleon  determining  his  secret  escape
from  the  city  of  Constantinople,  as  I  have
before  declared,  commanded  liis  esquire  to
bring  his  courser  and  armour  closely  behind,
the  garden  of  his  sister  Flerida,  for  that  none
should  be  privy  to  his  intent  but  only  he.
The  esquire  failed  not  to  accomplish  the
pleasure  of  his  lord.  And  being  come  to  the
appointed  place,  he  armed  the  prince,  except
his  shield  and  helmet,  which  he  bare  him-
self; so  mounting  on  horseback  they  both  de-
parted, vowing  to  rest  in  no  place  till  he
might  recover  some  wished  tidings  of  his
brother  and  friend  Don  Duardos,  without
whom  he  would  never  return  to  Greece  again.


57

LoiTT  he  travelled  before  he  encountered  anv
adventure  worthy  the  rehearsal.  But  at
length  arriving  in  the  bottom  of  a  valley  in
Laoedcmonia^  when  the  sun  was  declined  to
the  west  parts,  he  was  disccuraged,  for  that
the  night  was  so  obscure  upon  him,  beside
the  thickness  of  the  trees  made  his  passage
more  tenebrous  than  else  it  would  have  been,
so  that  very  hardly  he  could  find  his  way.
Wandering  on  still,  using  his  mind  with  se-
veral imaginations,  at  last  to  the  comfort  of
Piimself  and  joy  of  his  esquire,  who  sorrowed
to  see  his  lord  so  suddenh'  pensive,  he  espied
a  gallant  troop  of  ladies,  bearing  in  their
hands  lighted  torches,  each  one  well  mount-
ed on  a  lusty  steed,  attired  all  in  black,  and
framing  their  voices  to  great  lamentations.
Primaleon  surprised  with  great  grief  of  mind,
to  see  such  fair  ladies  wear  the  habits  of
mourners,  took  the  boldness  of  himself  to
behold  what  they  were;  and  drawing  him-
self nearer  to  them,  perceived  the  chief  lady
and  mistress  of  them,  her  palfrey  trapped
with  black  velvet,  her  vesture  of  the  same,
and  four  ancient  knights  in  the  midst,  bear-
ing a  funeral  covered  all  with  black  velvet.


58

Primaleon  perceiving  tlieir  heavy  lamenta-
tions, and  that  they  were  nothing  abashed  at
his  presence,  but  held  on  their  journey  as
though  they  had  not  seen  him,  he  took  such
an  earnest  desire  in  himself,  that  he  must
needs  demand  the  cause  why  they  mourned
in  that  manner-  Then  presenting  himself
before  the  chiefest  ludy^  whose  fair  face  had  .
sustained  a  great  blemish  by  tlie  abundance
of  tears  that  issued  from  her  eyes,  in  this
manner  he  prepared  himself  to  give  the
onset:

Fair  lady,  impute  it  not  to  flattery  that  I
call  you  so,  nor  to  folly  insomuch  as  you  are
so  ;  why  frequent  you  this  solitary  place,  and
why  do  you  accompany  this  funeral  with
such  heavy  complaints.  Knew  I  you  Uiad
sustained  injury  at  the  hands  of  any,  I  would
either  cause  him  to  recant  what  he  hath  done
you  in  dishonour,  or  constrain  a  revenge  on
his  dearest  blood.

The  lady  having  well  noted  the  courtesy  of
Primaleon,  as  well  his  knightly  offer,  as  the
good  opinion  she  conceived  of    perform-


59

ancc,  satisfied  his  request^  with  this  -i-entle
reply:

Sir  knight,  less  I  judge  you  not  to  be,  and
more  (being  ignorant  of  your  estate)  I  may
not  term  ye  ;  nevertheless  if  I  l\iil  in  the  one,
let  friendship  yet  forget  the  other.     Let  it
suffice,  that  I  am  one  whom  fortune  hath
injured  every  way  by  mishap,  and  advantaged
no  way  by  any  good  luck  ;  so  that  to  answer
your  demand,  1  am  the  only  lady  who  may
compare  with  all  for  misfortune.     As  touch-
ing my  name,  which  may  urge  you  to  re-
member my  moan  when  you  are  not  ignorant
«f  me;  understand  that  I  am  called  Paudri-
cia,  daughter  to  the  famous  king  of  Lacede-
monia,and  though  at  this  present  in  this  un-
comfortable wilderness,  yet  am  I  governor
of  his  princely  dominions.     And  here  by  in
a  castle   I   pass   forth  my  unfortunate  life,
having  no  other  company  than  these  whom
you  may  behold,  who  bear  part  in  my  moan
and  mishap.     As  for  the  estimation  of  my
hfe,  the  joy  is  so  small  and  the  grief  so  well
acquainted,  that  I  am  rather  desperate  to  end
it  than  desirous  to  endure  it.    And  now  I


60

make  my  return  to  my  careful  castle,  the
which,  for  that  it  is  not  unprovided  of  fair
ladies,  such  as  you  see  here  present,  I  have
termed  it  the  Garden  of  Damsels,  wherein  I
receive  as  much  solace  by  mourning,  as  any
lady  tasting  mj'  mishap  can  obtain  in  mirth.
I  am  sure  if  you  have  travelled  countries,  you.
are  not  ignorant  how  the  king  Ti^-naes  my
brother,  who  after  the  death  of  my  father,
was  enchanted  in  the  castle  of  the  Black
Birds,*  until  such  time  as  by  the  valiancy  of
the  famous  prince  Don  Duardos,  he  was  deli-
vered out  of  so  grievous  perplexity".  This
prince  afterward  remaining  with  my  brother
in  Lacedemonia  so  long  as  him  pleased,
where  were  such  triumphs  ordained,  as
might  gratify  such  an  honourable  pei-son-
age,  I  (the  more  unfortunate  1)  conceived
so  good  opinion  of  his  valiant  behaviour,
that  I  chose  him  as  the  honour  of  my  life,
and  patron  of  my  love,  esteeming  all  other


*  Primalicfty  Part  3.     This  is  the  adventure  whjch  A.  Mon-
day has  omitted  in  his  traosjation.


6\

but  base  in  respect  of  him^  and  he  to  be  as
far  beyond  them  all  as  I  was  deceived  far
from  mv  hope.  But  my  labour  was  spent  to
loss  ;  for  that  long  before  he  had  vowed  his
service  to  the  fi\ir  damsel  FIcrida,  to  whom
he  was  espoused.  Thus  was  my  love  de-
spised, myself  disgraced,  and  she  honoured
w  ith  that  frallant  w  horn  I  loved  too  soon,  and
lost  too  late  ;  which  causeth  me  refrain  all
courtly  company,  taking  me  to  the  sorrow  of
my  folly,  that  mist  the  good  hap  I  desired  in
faith.  And  yet  behold  in  remembrance  of
this  unkind  Don  Duardos,  I  have  reserved
this  image  as  the  chief  ornament  of  my  cham-
ber, imagining  the  person  present,  when  God
knows  he  is  far  from  me  in  distance  of  place,
but  farther  off  in  good  will  of  heart.  Yet
often  do  I  blame  the  picture  for  the  master's
sake  ;  whom  had  I  but  half  so  much  power
of  as  I  have  of  this  portrait,  he  should  know
my  love  is  more  than  he  can  possible  de-
sire, and  so  much  that  he  can  never  live  to
deserve.  But  now  certain  tidings  are  come
to  Laccdemonia,  that  he  who  hath  occasion-
ed me  this  life  hath  lost  his  own.  iNIy  grief
then  became  so  great  that  1  could  no  longer


62

beguile  it  as  heretofore,  and  now  I  go  to  a
house  of  mine  which  is  nigh  at  hand,  and
which  I  have  called  the  House  of  Sadness,
to  solemnize  the  funeral  of  this  image,  which
to  see  accomplished  this  careful  company,  as
yon  may  perceive,  are  ready  to  assist  mc  in
this  heavy  travel.  And  therefore,  courteous
knight,  if  you  please  to  sec  my  funerals  and
picture  of  the  ungrateful  prince  Don  Diiar-
dos,  lift  up  the  hearse,  and  your  eyes  shall
hear  witness  what  I  have  given  you  in  words.
Paudricia  concluding  her  discourse  with  a
heavy  sigh,  the  prince  Primalcon  lifted  up
the  hearse,  where  he  heheld  the  lively  image
of  his  dear  friend  Don  Duardos,  so  artificially
made,  that  he  doubted  Avhethcr  he  had  been
slain  thereabout  or  no  :  under  his  head  were
two  pillows  of  black  velvet,  and  on  either  side
of  the  body  two  burning  tapers,  which  en-
forced the  prince  to  turn  his  talk  into  tears  ;
and  there  he  bare  Paudricia  company  for
all  that  night,  endeavouring  her  comfort:
but  her  vowed  sorrow  would  not  suffer  any
persuasion  in  this  case.  Yet  would  not  Pri-
maleon  depart,  but  bare  her  company  into
another  valley.     Through  this  valley  ran  a


63

black  and  ugly  river,  bcict  whli  hiu:Ii  trees
round  about,  which  made  it  very  obscure
and  unpleasant  to  the  beholders.  The  sound
of  the  waters  was  so  loud  and  learful  that  it
dismayed  all  who  heard,  and  the  trees  were
dark  and  mournful,  and  the  air  filled  v.iih
rooks  who  had  their  nests  upon  them.  In
the  midst  of  this  ri\'er  was  an  isle,  wherein
was  placed  an  ancient  mansion,  with  many
pinnacles  and  battlements,  covered  all  over
w  ith  black  ;  which  declared  small  pleasure  to
those  who  remained  there,  and  great  occa-
sion of  sadness  to  any  that  should  come  there.
The  entrance  was  dark,  and  such  as  to  fill
any  one  with  rear;  the  chambers  of  this  so-
litary place  were  adorned  with  many  pic-
tures, as  witnesses  of  the  great  misfortunes
that  h.ad  happened  to  many  lovers  :  as  the
tragical  motion  of  Hero  and  Leander,  the
sorrowful  end  of  Pyramus  and  Thisbe,  ac-i
companied  with  the  mouniful  PhiLomela.
Then  next  her  stood  the  unhappy  queen
Dido,  having  the  blade  of  Eneas  pierced
through  her  harmless  heart  :  the  workman-
ship so  cunningly  ordered,  that  you  would
]p.ave  judged  the  fresh  blood  to  drop  from,


64

her  fair  body.     ^ledea,    Progne,  Ariadne,
Pliaidia,  and    Pasiphae,    were  all   worthily
painted,  with  the  whole  discourse  of  their
lives.    There  stood  Orplieus,  wrapped  about
in  the  fire  of  hell,  having  in  his  hand  his
harp,  which  in  times  past  could  recover  him
his   wife  Eurydice.     Acteon  bare  company
with  these  unfortunate  lovers,  in  the  shape  of
an   hart,  and    torn    in    pieces  by  his    own
hounds  ;  by  him  stood  Narcissus,  and  divers
other,  which  I  omit  for  brevity,  as  also  fearful
to  be  too    tedious.      Paudricia   beins:  now
come  to  the  door  of  this  foresaid  mansion,
she  caused  the  damsels  to  bear  in  the  funerals
of  the  prince  Don  Duardos  ;  then  turning  to
Primalcon,    gave   him    tîiis    farewell  :     Sir
knight,  lo  !  here  the  rest  of  my  misfortunes,
and  last  sepulchre  of  my  heavy  travels  ;  Í
shall  request  3'our  company  no  further,  for
that  none  must  enter  here,  but  he  that  vows
to  be  partner    m  our  pensiveness,  and  can
abandon  the  name  of  all  pleasures,  to  ex-
press his  mishapá  in  bemoaning  my  funerals.
She  entering,  tlie  knights  closed  the  door,
so  that  Primaleon  had  not  the  tune  to  an-
swer her  ;  nevertheless  he  staid  to  hear  the


63

sorrowful  clamours  they  made  within,  which
was  no  less  irksome  to  his  heart  than  had  he
seen  the  perfect  interring  of  his  dear  brother
Don  Duardos.  At  )ast  he  departed,  direct-
ing his  course  into  such  places  where  he
thought  soonest  to  hear  tidings  of  his  strayed
friend.  So  travelling  on  in  good  hope,  we
will  leave  him  a  while,  and  declare  more
at  large  the  cause  of  Paudricia  her  great
mourning  \  as  also  what  fortuned  to  the  two
young  princes,  nourished  in  the  cave  of  the
«avage  man,


G  3


66


CHAPTER  7.


The  occasion  why  Paudricia  bare  such  great
affection  to  the  prince  Don  Duardos  is  at
large  declared  in  the  book  intitled  Primaleon.
How  that  after  the  prince  had  delivered  her
brother  Tarnaes  out  of  the  enchanted  castle,
wherein  his  father  had  devised  the  way  to
enclose  him^  and  then  came  home  with  him
into  Lacedemonia,  she  often  seemed  to  move
good  liking  on  her  behalf  to  the  prince  Don
Duardos;  but  he  by  no  means  could  direct
his  fancy  after  her  course,  for  that  his
promise  before  passed  to  the  princess
Florida,  withheld  the  consent  she  gladly
looked  for.


67

To  avoid  therefore  what  might  happen,  he
refused  to  use  her  company  in  talk,  as  before
he  was  wont  :  but  her  company  did  not  dis-
please Belagriz,  who  was  afterwards  sold  an
of  Niquea,  after  the  death  of  IMaulerim  his
eldest  brother.  For  he  understanding  the
secret  aftection  and  great  good  will  that  she»
entirely  bare  to  the  noble  prince  Don  Duar-
dos,  adventured  to  try  fortune  ;  who  so  fa-
vourably prospered  his  intent,  that  under  the
title  of  Don  Duardos  he  entered  her  cham-
ber, where  acquainting  himself  .with  her  to
his  desire  and  her  deceit,  time  brought  tlieir
pleasure  to  a  goodly  son  named  Blandidon*,
of  whom  hereafter  you  shall  be  more  largely
certified.

But  Paudricia  giving  credit  to  herself,  tliat
the  noble  Don  Duardos  had  received  the
estimation  of  her  honour,  grounded  such
firm  affection  on  him,  as  was  more  than  she
ought,  and  more  than  he  would  grant.  So
keeping  his  picture  in  his  absence,  and  uu-


*  Primalecju  P.  3.  C.  5.


6s

derctanding  of  his  supposed  death,  she  usedi
iùiA  &ale.mnity  in  honour  of  his  funeral,  and
aitired  herself  according  as  became  her  mis-
fortiiuc;  departing  from  the  Garden  of  Dam-
sels to  her  House  of  Sadness,  supposing  there
tá)  end  her  life  a\  ith  the  loss  of  her  love.
So  remaineth  she  in  place,  where  she  shut
the  door  against  the  prince  Priraaleon,  who
is  likewise  endeavouring  himself  in  his  ad-
ventures. Reti;rn  we  now  to  the  two  young
princes,  whom  the  savage  man's  wife  had
carefully  nourished  up,  as  had  they  been  her
own  children  she  could  not  have  used  morç
motherly  compassion.

In  short  time  they  grew  to  such  estate,  that
their  whole  delÍ2;ht  was  to  hunt  the  savage
beasts  in  the  forest  ;  whereunto  Florian  had
more  afFection  than  his  brother  Palmerin,  for
he  used  every  day  to  hear  his  bow,  and  lead
the  two  lions,  that  he  became  more  expert
than  the  savage  man  himself:  and  thus  for
ten  years  space  hved  these  two  young  princes,,
beloved  well  of  him  who  before  was  their
greatest  enemy.


G9

It  fortuned  on  a  Sunday  mornin'jc  that  Florian
wandered  about  the  forest  with  his  hons,
which  he  tied  up,  meaning  to  take  by  force
the  first  wild  beast  that  should  appear  in
his  sight.  Having  long  staid  without  any
prey,  he  determined  to  return  ;  but  at  last
he  espied  a  mighty  hart  in  a  grove  of  trees,
whereat  he  let  fly  an  arrow  with  such  force,
that  it  passed  clean  thorough  the  body  of
the  beast.  Tiie  hart  feeling  herself  wounded
presently  took  flight;  which  he  perceiving
let  slip  the  lions  after  him,  but  all  in  vain,
for  the  swiftness  of  the  hart  out  reached  the
speedy  pace  of  the  lions.

And  Florian  strayed  so  far  that  he  had  lost
the  sight  of  the  lions  and  the  hart,  as  also  the
way  to  the  savage  man's  house;  which  caused
him  to  wander  in  heaviness,  till  the  dark
night  overshadowed  him,  when  he  espied
two  shepherds  making  a  little  fire  of  sticks
to  warm  them,  because  the  night  was  ex-
ceeding cold.  Florian  being  there  arrived,
he  sat  him  down  by  a  river's  side,  in  the  very
same  place  that  his  mother  brought  him  into
the  world  ;  where  t:itting   a  pretty  while  he


70

espied  a  knight  come  ridings  attired  in  blaclc
armour,  spotted  with  red,  bearing  in  his
shield  the  image  of  a  griffon,  with  a  certain
poscy,  which  was  vinknown  to  any,  his  lady
and  himself  excepted.  This  knight  was
named  sir  Pridos,  who  still  advanced  him-
self in  the  search  of  the  noble  prince  Don
Duardos;  and  he  rode  very  pensive  and  sad,
till  casting  his  eyes  upon  Florian,  his  heart
"began  somewhat  to  conceivíí  a  marvellous
inward  joy,  lor  that  his  counîenance  bare  the
perfect  imac;c  of  his  noble  father.  Where-
upon sir  Pridos  fell  in  divers  demands  with
him,  which  Florian  very  courteously  an-
swered ;  so  that  sir  Pridos  fell  into  a  great
desire  that  he  would  bear  him  company  to
London,  where  in  the  king's  court  he  would
present  him,  among  the  number  of  those
whom  renowned  fq,nie  did  ever  accompany.
The  3'oung  prince  Florian,  more  desirous  ta
lead  his  life  among  the  gallants  than  to  pass
his  time  so  solitarily  among  the  unfrequented
places  in  the  wild  forest,  gave  his  consent,
andjourneyed  with  sir  Pridos  to  the  English
court,  where  he  presented  him  to  the  king,
clothed  in  the  .skin  of  a  hart,  a  thing  of  i\Q


71

small  admiration  to  the  king;  yet  did  he  re-
ceive him  very  graciously,  in  that  it  is  the
nature  of  the  heart  to  receive  pleasure  iVoiii
those  things  which  ought  to  give  it,  even
though  it  knov,-s  them  not.  And  taking  the
child  by  the  hand  he  led  him  to  the  chamher
of  Florida,  and  in  this  manner  began  to  sa-
lute her  :  Fair  daughter,  among  all  the  gnev-
ouá  vexations  that  afflict  your  weak  nature,
lo  !  here,  the  honour  sir  Pridos  doth  present
you  withal,  who  in  searching  your  noble  lord
and  my  sou,  hath  found  this  jewel,  which  he
oftereth  to  you  as  the  fruits  of  liis  labours.
And  trust  me,  the  oftener  I  behold  his  sweer
countenance,  the  more  I  conceive  opinion  ef
his  aUiance  to  my  son  Don  Duardos.  The
princess  Flcrida  v.-as  not  a  little  pleased  with
so  glad  a  present,  in  sign  whereof  she  em-
braced her  son,  albeit  unknown,  and  ^vent
straightway  to  sir  Pridos,  who  certiiied  her_,
that  he  found  him  sitting  in  the  same  place
where  the  savage  man  came  with  his  two
lions  and  took  her  tv.o  children  from  her.

This  moved  Flerida  to  suppose  him  for  lu  jr
son:  but  fortune   would  not  ai  vet  srJler  a


72

perfect  assurance,  that  either  he  should
know  her  for  his  mother,  or  she  him  for  her
child.  Nevertheless,  she  i^ave  him  the  name
of  the  Child  of  the  Desert,  training  him  up
in  the  company  of  a  young  gentleman,  son
to  sir  Piidos  and  Artada,  named  .Don  Rosi-
ran,  de  la  Brunda  ;  Avith  whom  I  will  leave
this  gentle  prince  Florian,  to  know  what  the
savage  man  and  Palmerin  did,  seeing  Floriair
returned  not  as  he  was  wont  to  do.


73


CHAPTER  8.


The  savage  man  long  expected  the  return  of
Florian,  and  seeing  it  wax  dark  and  his  liope
deceived,  he  was  out  of  measure  disquieted
for  his  absence.  But  in  the  morning  the
hons  returned  home,  all  washed  in  the  l^lood
of  the  hart  which  they  had  slain  ;  v/hcn  the
savage  man  perceived  their  guide  wanting,
and  they  thus  polluted,  what  with  anguish
of  heart  and  choleric  persuasions,  in  his
desperate  mood  he  slew  both  the  lions,  and
entered  into  such  a  disquietness,  that  nothing
could  assuage  his  extreme  passion.

The  young  prince  Palmerin,  sustaining  great
sorrow  for  the  absence  of  his  brother,  walked

VOL.    I,  H


74

to  the  sea  shore,  accompanied  with  Selviam,
the  savage  man's  son  ;\vhcre  sitting  comfort-
ing each  other  on  the  green  hank,  as  nature
moved  the  one  and  nurture  the  other,  they
espied  a  galley  to  strike  on  the  shore,  where
they  twain  disported.  Polendos,  king  of
Thessal^',  heing  chief  captain  in  this  gallev,
who  likewise  directed  his  journey  for  the
finding  of  Don  Duardos,  connnanded  to  cast
anchor  there  ;  because  for  recreation's  sake,
he  would  walk  up  into  the  forest,  as  also  to
fmd  sweet  water,  whereof  he  was  greatly
destitute.  And  seeing,  as  it  bcfel,  these
children,  and  beholding  the  beauty  of  Pal-
merin,  with  the  no  less  civil  than  comely  be-
haviour of  them  both,  he  desired  them  to  ffo
aboard  with  him,  and  he  would  prefer  them
in  such  place  as  they  should  be  raised  to  ho-
nour, and  find  all  things  equivalent  to  their
gentle  natures.  Palmerin,  whose  fancy  could
hardly  brook  that  savage  kind  of  life,  but
rather  desired  to  acquaint  himself  with
courtly  exercise,  gave  grant  to  that  which
the  king  had  rccpu;sted;  albeit  Selviam  used
rn treaty  to  persuade  him  to  the  contrary,
but  when  he  saw  all  means  that  he  devised


75

could  take  no  effect,  he  vowed  never  to  leave
his  company,  either  for  misery,  misfortune,
or  any  accident  whatsoever.     The  king,  no
less    delighted  in  mind,    than  greatly  con-
tented with  the  manners  of  Palmerin,  (his
servants  being  returned  with  such  necessaries
as  he  sent  them  for)  went  aboard  and  hoisted
sails   present!}',    committing   themselves    to
God  and  the  mercy  of  the  waves.     So  rid-
ing at  their  pleasure,  the  king  desired  Pal-
merin to  certify  him,  as  concerning  his  birth
and  parentage,  which  the  courteous  prince
right  willingly  gave  consent  unto,  declaring
his  life  with  the  savage  man,  whom  he   cer-
tainly supposed  to  be  his  father.

After  many  days  sailing  they  arrived  at  Con
stantinoplc,  which  at  that  present  was  en-
dued with  a  greaL  heaviness,  as  in  time  past
it  surpassed  in  princely  delights  ;  the  port  or
haven,  likewise  being  nakedly  provided  of
ships,  for  that  the  ocean  and  Aiediterranean
seas  had  scattered  the  whole  navy  in  search
of  the  prince  Don  Duardos,  as  also  to  know
what  was  become  of  the  noble  Primaleon;
yet  in  all  this  time  no  wished  tidings  heard,


76

Tae  emperor,  unclorstnnding  that  Polendos
uas  arrived  at  Constantinople,  walked  down
to  the  haven,  to  accompany  him  to  his  pa-
lace ;  where  being  comc,and  hearing  by  him
no  tidings  of  his  sons,  became  very  sorrow-
ful, as  he   had  continued  so    a  long  time.
Then  Polendos,  to  put  the  emperor  out  of
this  sad   conceit,    presented  unto  him    the
young  prince  Palmerin,  accompanied  with
îSclviam  :    who    casting    his    eyes    on    the
young  prince,  entered  presently  into  such  an
alteration  of  joy,  as  had  he  been  his  own  son
Primaleon  he  could  hardly  have  been  better
contented.      AVherefore  he   commanded    a
kniiïht  to  conduct  him  to  the  princess  Gri-
donia,  willing  her  to  give  him  as  servant  to
the  fair  Polinarda,  whose  beauty  was  so  ex-
cellent, her  feature  agreeable  in  every  line^
ament,  her  modesty  t-o  decent,  and  vntuc
thereto  apparent,  that  she  was  rightly  termed
the   phœnix  for  beauty,  and  most  famous
among  ladies  for  bounty.     The  empress  and
Gridonia  received  the  young  prince,  albeit
ignorant  of  his  estate,  yet  as  beseemed  their
honours,  respecting  who  sent  him,  and  went
straightway  to  present  him  to  the  fair  Poli,


77

narda  ;  who  in  time  caused  him  to  adven-
ture his  good  fortune  amoni^  the  pikes  of
mischances  and  hazards  of  most  danger,  only
for  her  love,  which  he  bought  as  dearly  as
she  gave  it  daintily:  for  proof  let  suffice  what
hereafter  ensueth.  But  attend  a  strange  and
rare  event  :  on  a  sudden  wa^  arrived  in  the
emperor's  palace^  a  comely  damsel  mounted
on  a  courser  as  white  as  a  swan_,  bearing
trappings  of  the  same  colour  of  fringed
velvet  powdered  with  little  roses  of  gold,
which  were  set  in  such  order  as  greatly  to
adorn  the  palfrey.  She  wore  a  French  robe
of  new  invention,  made  for  travelling,  bor-
dered with  rolls  of  gold,  interwoven  one  with
the  other;  her  hair  fastened  with  a  thread  of
the  same  colour,  and  thrown  back,  and  a
chaplet  of  bright  flowers  upon  her  head,
which  diffused  a  singular  perfume.  She
being  come  into  the  presence  of  the  emperor,
to  the  no  little  admiration  of  him,  v.ith  all
those  that  bare  him  company,  she  drew  forth
a  letter,  delivering  the  same  wiih  such  ma-
jesty of  behaviour,  as  was  meet  to  gratify
such  an  honourable  personage;  which  the
emperor  delivering  to  one  of  his  heralds,
H  3


7B

commanded  it  to  be  read  in  public  audience  j
who  unsealing  it  began  as  folio  we  th  :

To  the  invincible  and  most  renoicned  Pabnerin^
emperor  oj  Greece,  salutations.

Renowned  emperor,  at  whose  name  the
enemy  quakcth,  and  the  subjects  rejoiceth,
in  whose  court  fame  is  the  riches  of  the  va-
liant, and  friendship  the  reward  of  any  that
be  venturous  ;  I  wish  thy  state  as  perma-
nent as  thy  deeds  hath  been  puissant,  and
the  unanimity  of  thy  friends  to  prosper  in
longanimity  of  happy  fortune.  The  young
prince  that  thou  hast  received  into  thy  court
is  descended  of  two  the  most  puissant  kings
in  Christendom.  Wherefore  let  his  enter-
tainment be  such  as  his  honour  doth  de-
serve, and  his  estimation  according  as  his
valour  doth  declare  :  for  he  it  is  must  de-
fend the  diadem  of  thy  dominions  when  it
shall  remain  detrtitute  of  wished  defence;  and
he  it  is  that  shad  make  thee  lauded  of  for-
tune, and  loved  of  thy  enemies  as  of  thy
dearest  friend.  Likewise,  the  two  most  un-
fortunate princes  of  the  world  shall  enjoy


79

their  liberty  by  him  ;  in  which  many  have
and  shall  attempt,  but  he  alone  is  ordained
to  finish  this  exploit  :  for  that  he  is  above  all
in  the  favour  of  fortune,  and  he  shall  excel
all  in  the  nobility  of  knighthood.  Thus  leav-
ing the  sum  of  my  promise  to  your  gracious
trial,  I  wish  the  noble  emperor  of  Greece  may
Jive  in  eternal  honour  and  felicity.

By  her,  who  is  more  in  duty  than  by

pen  or  words    she  can  any  ways

disclose.

The  Lady  of  the  Lake.

The  emperor,  no  less  amazed  at  this  happy
adventure,  than  contentpd  at  the  glad  news,
pf  this  noble  young  prince,  desired  of  the
damsel,  who  might  be  the  Lady  of  the  Lake.
To  whom  the  damsel  replied:  Noble  sir,  she
is  altogether  unknown  of  me;  but  thus  much
I  dare  boldly  assure  your  majesty,  that  what
her  letter  presenteih  shall  be  performed  in
this  worthy  young  prince.  These  speeches
ended,  the  damsel  departed  :  which  the  em-
peror perceiving  sent  for  the  young  prince,
upon  whom  using  many  cheerful  counte-
jiances,  he    desired  his    noble    gentlemen^


80

standing  by,  that  he  might  be  termed  of  all,
Palmcrin,  after  his  own  name;  for  that  he
thought  he  sliould  be  the  better  esteemed
of  his  lady  Polinarda;  little  thinking  that
there  was  a  greater  reason  wliy  he  should  be
so  called,  to  wit,  that  it  was  his  own  true
name,  which  had  been  given  him  in  baptism.
Then  giving  him  garments  after  another
fashion  than  those  in  which  he  was  found,
he  ordered  the  old  ones  to  be  caretull}^  laid
aside,  that  they  might  be  produced  at  some
future  time,  if  what  the  letter  said  should
come  true.  But  the  empress  and  Gridonia
still  lamented  the  loss  of  Primaleon,  whose
absence  from  the  court  was  chieiest  cause  of
their  sorrow.


81


CHAPTER  9.


I  have  declared  unto  you  before,  how  Ver-,
nao  the  prince  of  Allemaigne,  and  son  to
the  emperor  Trineo  and  the  fair  Agriola,
left  the  court  of  Gonstantinqple,  when  Pri-
malcon  departed  to  seek  tl^e  prince  Don  Duar-
dos.  In  which  affairs  this  gentle  prince  hke-
wise  behaved  himself  so  worthily  in  many  rare
exploits,  that  his  fame  remaineth  as  a  per-
fect type  of  honour  in  the  Allemaigne
chronicles  :  for  which  cause  I  leave  to  re-
hearse them,  returning  to  that  which  hap-
pened this  prince,  and  is  in  my  charge  to
speak  of.  It  forti'ned,  that  he  having  spent
no  small  labour  in  travel,  arrived  at  last  u}
Great  Britain,  where  he  had  good  hope  tq
Uear  some  news  to  end  his  labour.


82

And  being  entered  into  the  unfortunate
forest,  riding  very  sadly,  for  tliat  his  mind
was  somewhat  distracted  with  remembrance
of  his  fair  Basilia,  at  length  there  met  him
a  comely  knight,  very  bravely  mounted  on
a  roan  horse,  attired  in  armour  of  gold  and
grey,  fashioned  like  columns;  the  helmet  of
the  same  fashion,  laced  with  strings  of  gold
and  grey  ;  he  bore  a  serpent  of  many
colours  in  a  white  shield,  which  carried  the
marks  of  many  rough  encounters  ;  for  which
cause  he  was  called  the  Knight  of  the  Ser-
pent. Passing  by  the  prince  \  ernao,  he
used  such  courtesy  unto  him  as  beseemed
knicrhthood,  and  was  meet  for  such  a  noble
person  ;  but  he  altogether  using  his  thoughts
on  his  fair  Basilia,  had  not  leisure  to  behold
the  knight's  courtesy.  The  knight  of  the
serpent  supposing  that  cither  he  willingly
would  not  perceive,  or  seeing,  scorned  the
gentle  salutations  he  used,  revived  the
prince  Vernao  with  these  speeches  :  Sir
knight,  methinks  it  might  stand  with  your
honour  and  profession,  and  no  blemish  to
you   any  way,   but  bounty   every   way,  to


83

have  thought  v»-ell  of  him  who  meant  no  ill
to  you,  and  to  have  gratified  him  like  a
courtier,  that  disdained  to  paás  by  you  and
not  use  courtesy.

The  prince  being  driven  forth  of  his  dumps,
M'hercto  he  had  more  pleasure  than  to  the
knight's  gentle  proffer,  between  jest  and
earnest  thus  answered  :  Sir,  Í  may  be  of-
fended without  blame,  and  judge  your  be-
haviour to  be  very  bold,  that  would  con-
strain me  to  speak,  not  hearing  your  speech,
when  I  had  more  matters  in  mind  then
would  suffer  me  to  see  you,  much  less  to
hear  you.

Sir,  (cjuoth  the  knight  of  the  serpent)  this
excuse  is  far  too  simple,  in  denying  both
your  hearing;  and  sio;ht;  for  thou g-h  state-
liness  would  not  suffer  you  to  see  me,  yet
the  loudness  of  my  speech  doih  justify  30U
might  hear  me.  Vernao  hearing  the  large
lano-uatreof  the  knÍ2;ht,  which  mÍ2;ht  quicklv
move  him  to  anger,  (being  before  subject
to  overmuch  melanchol}')  thus  shortly  re-
plied :    Sir  knight,  you  have  better  licence


84

to  depart  than  leave  to  stay  here  ;  for  that
my  mind  is  troubled  with  such  matters,  as
rather  requireth  your  absence  than  alloweth
your  presence  :  giving  you  further  to  un-
derstand, that  your  company  is  so  much  to
my  hurt,  that  the  strife  which  may  arise
between  us  will  be  to  your  great  harm.
When  the  knight  perceived  what  small
estimation  Vernao  had  of  him,  thus  roundly
replied  :  Sir,  either  your  bringing  up  hath
been  over  churlish,  or  your  present  be-
haviour scant  currant  :  greater  danger  is
in  concealing  what  I  desire,  than  damage  in
revealing  such  a  simple  demand.  I  desire
rather  (quoth  Vernao)  mine  own  ruin,  than  I
should  be  so  simple  to  grant  what  you  re-
quest :  wherefore,  esteeming  thy  manhood
as  small  to  command  as  thy  might  to  com-
pel, I  will  bury  my  thoughts  with  my  deaths
before  I  intend  to  satisfy  thy  desire.  So
leaving  their  words,  they  fell  to  weapons  ;
whei-e  shivering  their  spears  and  armour,
they  encountered  in  such  a  bravery  that
they  were  glad  to  take  breathing  ;  when  the
knight  of  the  serpent  began  thus  to  charge
him  :   I  believe,  sir,  you  Hud  this  skirmish


85

more  hot  than  your  concealed  thoughts  may
be  esteemed  wisdom,  and  that  your  estate
standeth  in  a  more  sharp  hazard  than  your
mute  conceits  are  of  force  to  yield  you  any
sure  help  ;  which  I  hope  shall  shew  you  the
difference  between  a  careless  groom  and  a
courtly  gentleman.

Sir,  (answered  the  prince  Vernao)  your
opinion  is  as  yet  far  beyond  my  purpose  ;
for  that  you  are  as  wide  from  your  hope  as
you  are  scant  wise  to  put  your  intent  to
hap.  Persuade  yourself  this,  that  the  cou-
rage I  have  to  your  foil,  and  secrecy  I  esteem
of  mine  own  faith,  shall  ere  long  give  an
absolute  answer,  whether  I  shall  perish  in
my  determination,  or  thyself  prevail  in  what
thou  demandest  ;  which  shall  crave  no  longer
forbearance,  than  my  sword  hath  taught
you  manners,  that  against  my  will  would
teach  me  your  kind  of  modesty.  Then  fell
they  to  a  fresh  combat,  which  was  more
dangerous  than  their  first  assault  ;  when
being  wearied  with  sword,  they  endeavoured
by  wrestling  to  suppress  the  strength  of  each  ;
but  the  equal  behaviour  of  their  force  was
I


8(5

suchj  as  the  loss  of  their  blood  was  great  :
yet  their  valiant  hearts  would  coneeive  no
tiiintness.  The  knight  of  the  serpent  had
such  a  desire  to  know  against  whom  he
fought,  that  once  more  he  began  to  use  fair
speeches  to  him.  I  perceive,  sir,  3'ou  more
esteem  your  earnest  opinion,  than  you  stand
in  fear  of  the  loss  of  your  life  ;  which  were'
more  honour  for  3'ou  to  deliver  unto  know-
ledge, than  such  a  severe  chance  should
happen  unto  either  of  us:  \^et  is  my  mind  so
alfected,  that  I  will  know  both  your  secret
and  yourself,  or  it  shall  value  my  life.  A^
for  my  life  (quoth  \  ernao)  I  am  so  much
the  more  willing  to  lose  it,  by  how  much  Í
perceive  you  jealous  to  know  what  yon  shall
not.  Whereupon  they  began  again  the
third  time,  albeit  more  faintly  than  before
passed  ;  which  caused  their  esquires  standing
by  to  enter  into  many  heavy  coniplaints,
especially  the  esquire  of  the  priiice  Vernao,
who  thus  framed  his  moan  :  Oh,  unfortunate
emperor,  v/ho  is  ignorant  that  fortune  will
at  this  time  deprive  hiiu  of  liisjoy!  The
knight  of  the  serpent  noting  these  words,
presently  conjectured  that  it  was  the  prince


87

Vernao^  son  to  the  emperor  of  Allemaigne,
against  ^\hom  he  entered  combat,  and  how
grievous  the  emperor  Pahnerin  would  take
the  matter,  if  he  heard  of  the  loss  of  either
of  them  both.  Beside,  himself  would  be
loth  an}'  way  to  displease  the  gentle  prince
Vernao  ;  wherefore,  for  more  assurance  of
him,  he  beheld  his  broken  shield,  wherein
he  perceived  a  half  burning  heart  in  a  green
field,  which  gave  him  persuasion  that  it  was
he,  to  whom  he  thus  used  his  speech  :  Sir
Vernao,  my  mind  constraineth  me  to  give
over  the  fight,  being  right  sorry  that  I  hjave
continued  it  so  long;  for  that  the  princess
Basilia  is  cause  of  3'our  sorrow,  which  you
feared  to  utter,  and  now  by  myself  declared.
Pardon  your  friend  Belcar,  who  is  so  heartily
sorry,  that  he  rather  desireth  the  death  than  to
see  you  in  any  distress.  The  prince  V  ernao,
perceiving  that  it  was  his  friend  Belcar,  ran
to  him,  embracing  him  in  his  arms,  giving
him  a  thousand  thanks  that  he  had  so  found
the  mean  to  cut  off  their  quarrel.  Then
giving  their  helmets  to  their  esquires,  w^ho
did  their  best  to  bind  up  their  woundsj  they
I  2


8S

roàe  to  the  city  of  Esbrique^  which  was  not
far  from  the  forest,  lecouutiug  to  each  other
what  had  happened  them  two  in  search  of
tlie  prince  Don  Duaxdos,


89


CHAPTER  10.


Bramuziando  still  detaining  the  prince  Don
Diiardos  captive,  was  suddenly  advertised  by
his  aunt  Eutropa,  that  there  should  arrive  a
liuight  at  his  castle,  whose  prowess  would
go  near  to  attaint  his  honour,  as  also  enforce
his  life  to  stand  in  some  hazard.  He  giving
credit  unto  her  persuasion,,  and  somewhat
careful  to  avoid  the  imminent  peril,  fortified
his  castle  with  such  sure  defence  as  he  thought
sufficient  to  award  the  enemy,  and  maintain
the  intent  he  had  vowed  to  prosecute.  Tor
fear  some  time  maketh  a  man  to  be  wise,
that  else  in  a  desperate  mood  would  set  the
world  on  wheels.

I  3


90

So  Dramuziando,  albeit  famous  in  his  deed?,
yet  fearful  to  be  surprised  by  any  danger,
vseth  the  industry  of  his  aunt  Eutropa,  with
the  help  of  his  friends,  whose  courage  he
knew  equal  to  their  wise  foresight,  to  be
yevenged  on  all  knights,  for  the  death  of  his
father  Franarque  :  whieh  the  better  to  ac-
complish, he  entertained  into  his  castle  two
hardy  and  fearful  giants,  the  one  named
Pandaro,  the  other,  Daliagam  of  the  Dark
Cave;  whose  stature  were  no  less  in  ugliness
than  their  strength  cruel  in  resistance.  And
because  he  would  have  every  thing  in  due
preparation,  he  determined  (when  need
should  be)  how  he  would  have  his  castle
defended,  as  thus  :  the  noble  prince  Don
Duardos,  against  all  knights  that  came,
should  have  the  first  honour  of  the  fight,
and  joust  with  whosoever  attempted  the  ad-
venture ;  next  to  him  the  giant  Pandaro
should  do  battle  with  the  adventurer  ;  if  he
failed,  stout  Daliagam  of  theDarkCave  should
give  them  their  welcome,  whose  countenance
was  fearful  to  all  that  saw  him,  and  whose
might  was  cruel  to  all  that  should  hap  to
feel  him  ;  and  if  so  happed  that  both  giants


91

should  be  worsted,  then  Dramuziando  him-
self should  give  him  battle.

In  this  way  the  time  past  on_,  and  many  en-
counters were  won  before  the  gate  of  the
castle,  never  one  escaping  from  the  joust
with  Don  Duardos,  so  as  to  call  out  Pandaro  ;
till  at  length  fortune  bending  her  brows  on
the  courageous  Primaleon,,  whom  she  had
earnestly  advanced  to  honour,  and  now
determined  to  unhappiness,  dirccteth  his
course  to  this  unfriendly  castle,  where  he
should  end  his  travels  w  ith  his  own  thral-
dom. He,  after  he  left  the  solitarv  Paudricia
in  the  realm  of  Lacedemonia,  he  travelled  on
in  great  sorrow,  because  he  could  hear  no
tidings  of  Don  Duardos.  And  now,  after
many  adventures,  he  drew  nigh  the  castle  of
Dramuziando,  riding  upon  a  mulberry  co-
loured horse,  and  in  armour  of  green  and
lion-colour,  gayer  in  his  colours  than  in  his
heart.  He  had  won  these  arms  at  a  tourna-
ment in  Burgundy.  In  his  shield  he  bore  a
sea  bravely  painted  on  a  ground  of  azure.
And  being  come  near  the  castle,  the  noble
prince  Don  Duardos  came  forth  upon  the


92

bridge,  very  gallantly  mounted,  his  armour

all  blacky   whereon    was   a   resemblance  of

hearts  burning  in  flames  of  fire.     His  shield

was  answerable  in  colour  to  his  armour  ;  in

the  midst  whereof  was  curiously  painted  the

image  of  a  sad  conceited  mind^  so  artificially

framed,  that  the  beholders  might  easily  judge

the  heaviness  of  the  knight  to  be  according

to  his  sad  device.    Primaleon,  no  less  abashed

at  the  bravery  of  the  castle,   than  to  see  a

knight  so  well  appointed  at  arms^  began  in

this  order  to   use  his   speeches  :  Sir  knight,

will  you  not  give  passage  to  one  who  wishes

to  see  this  castle,  without  making  him  prove

the  strength  of  your  hands  ?  If,  replied  Don

Duardos,  you  knew  how  little  necessary  that

wish  is,  I  well  believe  you  would  bend  your

way  elsewhere.    The  custom  is,  that  you  must

joust  with  me,  and  if  you  overthrow  me,  pass

throu2;h  other  full  doubtful  dangers,  which

will  show  themselves.     If  at  any  time  I  could

•fear  words,  said  Primaleon,  your  words  arc

such  as  might  make   me  fear;    but   being

accustomed  to  other  things,  I  must  tell  you

that  1  shall  prove  the  adventure  of  which

you  teach  me  to  conceit  so  highly.


Thus  concliidiVig  their  speeches,  they  couch-
ed their  spears,  and  began  a  sharp  encounter,
'.vherein  they  beliaved  themselves  so  bravely,
that  they  who  stood  in  the  castle  beholding
them,  did  no  less  commend  their  valour  than
the  c;ood.  iuient  earh  other  showed  in  hope  of
victory.     At  la?t,  so  fiercely  they  met  toge-
ther, that  they  Avcre  both  unhorsed;  v/hich
very  much  displeased  Primalcon,  being  never
in  all  his  life  cast  forth  of  his  saddle  before;
then  drawing  his  sword,  he  thus  approached
to  the  prince  Don  Duardos  :  Sir  knight,  I
will  try  if  your  strength  in  using  your  sword
be  equal  with  the  force  I  have  felt  at  your
spear.     But  Don  Duardos  began  to  suspect
that  the  knight,  against  whom  he  endeavour-
ed himself,  was  his  brother  and  friend  Pri-
maleon  ;  the  cause  that  moved  him  to  think
so  was  the  equal  state  of  their  strength,  which
in  time  past  he  had  often  proved  ;  of  which
doubt  to  resolve  himself  he  thus  beg;an  :  Sir
Primaleon,  it  would  be  error  in  any  one  to
think  that  in  aught  he  could  equal  himself
with  you,  and  most  of  all  in  me  who  have
learnt  this  truth  at  your  hands.     Primaleon
hearing  those  friendly   speeches,   presently


91

knew  that  it  was  his  brother  Don  Diianlos  ;
when  casting  his  sword  to  the  groiuu!^  he
■embraced  the  prince  with  these  loving  salu-
tations :  if"  my  heart  were  able  to  think,  my
tongue  to  speak,  or  myself  to  make  manifest
by  any  mean,  not  only  the  inward  joy  to  con-
ceive, but  the  high  good  fortune  1  do  esteem
of  my  travels  ;  then  should  my  dear  friend
and  brother  perceive  my  health  is  his  hap-
piness, and  Primaleou  liveth  no  longer  than
Don  Duardos  rejoiceth.  Long  have  I  de-
sired this  happy  day,  and  long  have  1  sought
this  good  luck  with  danger,  albeit  never  so
prosperous  as  to  hear  of  you  ;  yet  now  the
most  fortunate  of  all  men,  to  come  where  I
see  you.  Don  Duardos  would  have  answer-
ed again,  but  the  giant  Pandaro  brought
w  ord  from  Dramu/.iando,  to  break  off  their
talk  and  come  to  him  ;  whose  commandment
the  prince  obeying,  entered  the  castle,  Pri-
maleon  offering  to  go  in  with  him;  but  Pan-
daro being  armed  with  a  great  iron  mace  in
his  hand  and  a  very  strong  shield,  thrust  him
back  with  these  words  ;

Stay,  sir  knight,  I  mean  to  see  what  thou


95

canst  do  to  deliver  thee  out  of  my  Iiandsj  afi
also  how  thou  canst  warrant  thine  own  life.
Primaleon  beholding  the  great  pride  of  Pan-
daro^  with  the  dishonour- he  oflx^red  him  in
Avords,  gave  him  this  answer:  It  is  more
difficil  for  me  to  answer  tliee  as  thy  words
require,  than  dangerous  to  corrcet  the  bold-
ness of  such  a  proud  rival.  Pandaro,  vexed
with'  the  reply  of  Primaleon,  not  knowing
■whether  he  were  best  to  answer  him  with
words  or  deeds,  at  last  lent  him  such  a  blow
witli  his  iron  mace,  that  Primaleon's  shield
shivered  all  in  pieces;  which  grieved  him,
standing  in  some  need,  and  made  his  foe
triumph,  who  hoped  for  his  death.  But  he
espying  part  of  the  body  of  Pandaro  un-
armed, reacheth  him  such  a  blow  in  revenge
of  his  shield,  that  he  began  to  stagger,  hard-
ly withholding  himself  from  falling  to  the
earth.  Dramuziando  leaning  with  Don  Du-
ardos  forth  of  a  window  in  the  castle,  and
perceiving  the  courage  of  Primaleon  in  this
dangerous  combat,  desired  to  know  his  name
and  of  wlience  he  Avas;  which  Don  Duardos
answered  according  as  he  desired,  giving  him
farther  to  understand,  that  not  onlv  in  this


9t>  ^  .

but  in  many  other  adventures,  he  had  put  iih
life  in  hazard  only  for  his  sake.  Which
\vlien  r)ramuziando  knew,  he  was  well  coii-
tent  to  sec  how  all  things  succeeded  to  his
heart's  desire.

Pandaro  seehig  his  blows  bestowed  to  smali
purpose,  and  that  Priniak-on  returned  him
many  shrewd  greetings,  Hung  down  his
sword  and  target  in  a  great  fury,  pretending,
the  instruction  of  Primaleon  with  his  iron
mace.  And  after  many  sore  strokes  passed
on  either  part  ;  Primaleon  followed  his  de-
termination so  well,  that  he  had  struekcn
oft'  Pandaro's  four  fingers,  wherewith  his
mace  fell  to  the  ground  ;  which  he  stooping
to  recover,  Primaleon  had  gotten  such  good
advantag(?,  that  he  had  strueken  off'  his  head,
had  nottlie  ugly  giant  Daliagam  of  the  Dark
Cave  been  his  rescue;  who  stepping  bi?twecn
them  thus  saluted  Primaleon  :  Sir  knight,
thou  hast  a  fresh  labour  to  begin  ;  withdraw
thy  hands  from  him  that  is  conquered,  and
come  deal  with  me  ;  and  thcrewitlial  Pri-
maleon, being  not  fully  provided,  received
such  a  cruel  blow  on  the  head  that  it  put


97

him  in  some  danger.  Primaleon  seeing  such
a  fearful  enemy,  and  what  mighty  blows  he
still  charged  him  withal,  bethought  him  on
his  friend  Don  Duardos,  there  held  prisoner,
and  that  neither  Duardos  nor  he  himself
could  escape  from  thence  but  by  manful
courage.  Then  he  taking  up  the  shield  of
Pandaro,  between  Daliagam  and  himself  be-
gan a  hot  skirmish,  as  the  place  where  they
fought,  altered  in  colour  with  their  blood,
made  manifest.  In  this  way  the  battle  con-
tinued during  the  greater  part  of  the  day.
Vet  Daliagam,  for  all  his  rough  behaviour,
had  little  hope  of  any  good  success,  because
the  hardiness -of  Primaleon  had  both  mar-
tyred his  shield  and  at^mour  in  pieces,  so  that
he  had  no  defence  to  beat  off  the  blows  ;
and  at  last,  what  with  the  heat  and  fatigue
of  combat,  and  the  weight  of  Primaleon's
blows,  he  fell  like  oue  slain.  Primaleon,  who
surely  thought  him  so,  sat  himself  down  upon
a  stone  bench  to  rest  him,  for  that  faintness
with  loss  of  his  blood,  and  weariness  in  so
long  continuing  battle,  made  him  both  glad
and  desirous  of  a  little  ease.

K


98

Drainuziando  perceiving  the  liaid  event  of
this  combat,  armed  himself  presently,  and
came  forth  to  Primaleon,  assailing  him  first
with  these  words  :  Sir  knight,  my  friend  if
you  please,  my  foe  if  you  persist;  methinks
it  were  more  wisdom  for  you  to  yield  with
no  blemish  to  your  knighthood,  than  to  en-
dure a  fresh  assault,  which  will  be  to  your
great  hazard.  So  if  you  esteem  of  my  cour-
teous offer,  I  will  see  your  wounds  cured  at
mine  own  charge,  and  your  weak  estate  com-
forted as  beseemeth  a  ijood  knicrht.  Prima-
leon,welI  noting  the  honest  words  of  Dramu-
ziando,  and  fearing  his  fair  talk  might  bear
savour  of  a  shrewd  meaning,  made  him  this
answer  :  If  in  recompence  for  the  assaults
which  have  here  been  made  upon  me,  you
would  set  Don  Duardos  free,  then  indeed
should  I  believe  that  your  words  deserved
my  thanks  ;  but  because  I  ween  that  by
them  you  seek  to  win  what  by  arms  you  are
not  so  certain  of,  1  choose  rather  to  do
battle  and  die  in  it,  than  forbear  so  to  do  and
live  with  the  loss  of  honour.  For  two  rea-
sons, r<  plied  Dramuziando,  did  I  propound


99

what  thou  rejectest  ;  the  first  is,  because  it
is  my  condition  to  excuse  evil  when  it  may  be
dispensed  with  ;  the  second,  because  I  can-
not pride  myself  in  any  victory  to  be  gained
with  so  little  resistance.  But  since  your
judgment  is  so  wide  of  my  intent,  look  to
your  defence.  Upon  these  words  he  laid
fiercely  at  Primaleon  (whose  debility  rather
required  quietness,  than  such  extreme  stroke*
as  he  must  needs  suffer)  ;  nevertheless  hç,
employed  himself  to  such  nimble  defence, as
his  wear}'  travail  would  permit  him,  which
moved  a  great  compassion  in  the  mind  of
Dramuziando,  to  see  the  weakness  of  the
body  not  agree  with  the  invincible  courage
of  the  heart,  and  would  not  for  any  thing
have  slain  him,  as  very  easily  he  might  have
done  ;  but  that  he  once  more  would  use  per-,
suasion,  which  he  discharged  after  this  order:
Sir  knight,  thou  mayest  see  I  refuse  the  fight
more  for  the  grief  I  sustain  in  thy  hurt,  than
any  fear  I  have  of  thee  to  do  me  harm.  But
if  thou  once  more  refuse  my  courtesy,  and
dcperately  seek  thine  own  destruction,  my
sword  must  chastise  thy  folly;  for  life  ought
pot  to  be  given  to  him  Avho  despises  it.
K  2


100

Priinaleoii  casting  liis  eyes  upon  his  armour^
which  he  perceived  all  broken  and  battered
in  pieces,  as  also  bathed  in  the  blood  which
issued  from  his  wounds,  then  calling  in  re-
membrance his  lady  Gridonia,  whose  heart
might  hardly  brook  to  hear  any  mischance
of  her  best  beloved, used  withinhimself  these
silent  cogitations  :  Lady,  behold  the  last  day
of  our  heavy  departure,  and  my  last  farewell
sent  you  in  tears  with  a  bleeding  heart,  sub-
ject to  mine  enemy  whom  I  strive  to  con-
quer, and  yet  rather  desire  the  death  than
lose  the  honour  of  my  name.  I  know  our
next  assault  is  the  last  tragedy  of  time,wliich
I  must  not  refuse  if  I  love  my  friend,  and  yet
should  forsake,  remembering  your  loss.  O
famous  emperor,  and  my  renowned  father,
whose  thoughts  are  as  far  from  my  heavy
case  as  my  troubled  heart  is  void  ol  any
comfort;  yet  let  this  just  persuasion  cut  olf
the  grief  you  may  sustain,  that  I  lived  for
my  friend,  whose  freedom  was  my  felicity,
and  now  die  for  my  friend,  whose  thraldom
is  my  misery.  Albeit  the  loss  of  my  blood
overchargeth  me  with  faintness,  and  my  long
continuance  in   fight    oppresseth   me   wiil^


101

weariness;  yet  shall  it  never  be  reported^,  Prii
maleon  turned  back,  forgetting  bounty,  o^
left  the  field  for  one,  having  already  con-
quered twain  ;  for  the  joy  I  conceive  in  find-
ing my  chiefest  friend,  biddeth  me  die  ere  I
leave  him,  so  shall  he  try  if  1  love  him.  And
think  not,  dear  father,  nor  my  sweet  Grido-
nia,  that  I  forget  the  duty  which  law  of  nature
willeth  me  to  bear  you,  or  that  1  desperately
run  on  mine  own  death,  to  increase  your  sor-
row and  continual  moans.  But  think,  as  I
have  ventured  upon  the  honour  of  your  love,
so  the  estimation  of  my  friend  at  this  time
commands  me  to  hazard  my  lile.  ATherein
Í  swerve  net  from  you  in  obedience,  nor  from
my  friend  in  amity.

This  pause  had  so  heartened  the  noble  Pri-
maleon,  that  he  ran  courageously  upon  Dra-
muziando  with  these  words  :  Defend  thyself,
for  either  will  1  win  what  I  have  promised,
or  leave  my  life  as  a  gage  in  thy  presence.
Whereupon  they  fell  very  fiercely  to  com-
bat again,  which  made  Dramuziando  to  muse
to  see  the  noble  courage  of  Primaleon,  and
the  weak  defence  he  had  for  himself ,  who  al;
K  3


102

at  last  tliioLigh  extreme  faiiitness  fell  to  the
ground,  as  though  he  had  been  quite  be-
reaved of  life  ;  which  caused  Bramuziando
to  bear  him  into  the  chamber  of  Don  Duar-
dos,  commanding  his  chirurgeons  and  phy-
sicians to  use  great  care  and  diligence  in
saving  his  life  if  it  might  be  possible,  because
he  was  greatly  aficctcd  to  save  the  life  of  such
courageous  icnights.

Thus  leave  we  Dramuziando  using  all  means
he  might  for  the  health  of  Primaleon,  as  also
the  recovery  of  Pandaro  and  Daliagam,wliom
at  last  he  had  brought  to  good  constitution
of  body,  to  his  joy,  and  great  comfort  of  the
two  faithful  princes,  who  lived,  loved,  and
jejoiced  in  each  other's  friendly  company.


10^


CHAPTER  11.


Palmcriii  remaininu;  lono;  time  in  the  famous
court  of"  the  emperor  his  grandfather,  be-
loved of  every  one  for  his  princely  beha-
viour, and  esteemed  with  the  best  througli
his  gentle  nature,  gre«'  unto  such  ripeness
of  age,  that  he  greatly  desired  the  order  of
knighthood;  but  the  fear  to  lose  the  service
of  his  lady  and  mistress  Polinarda,  (to  whom
he  had  not  only  vowed  the  duty  of  his  heart,
but  the  whole  course  of  his  life,  in  knightly
adventures)  withdrew  his  mind  from  so  bold
an  enterprise.  And  she  likewise  was  joined
with  him  in  equal  affection  ;  but  ttiai  modesty
ci^used  her  to  cover  it,  and  maidenly  de?
ineanor  did  move  her  to  conceal.


104

The  emperor  remained  somewhat  pensive
for  his  two  sons,  seeing  never  a  knight  re-
turned that  departed  in  their  search,  which
caused  him  to  remember  the  Lady  of  the
Lake,  and  to  comfort  himself  somewhat  in
her  tidings,  as  concerning  the  young  prince
Palmerin,  by  v.  hose  means  he  had  good  hope
to  understand  their  estate;  albeit  affection
•would  hardly  permit  him  that  he  shovdd  tra-
vail. Wherefore  he  being  willing  to  content
his  subjects,  who  stood  in  doubt  of  their
government  after  the  emperor's  decease,  he
caused  a  triumph  to  be  proclaimed,  wherein
he  would  try,  if  the  towardly  beginning  of
Palmerin  would  encourage  his  mind  to  ex-
pect any  good  success.  Upon  this  determi-
nation, he  willed  all  the  vonnii  kniffhts  who
should  be  defcndiints  against  the  other
knights  of  his  court,  to  be  ready  prepared
against  the  Easter  holidays,  so  that  the  ru-
mours of  this  famous  triumph  caused  many
í-caífolds  and  galleries  (by  the  emperor's  con-
sent) to  be  built  round  about  the  tilt-yard;
which  rejoiced  the  citizens,  that  their  long
time  of  sorrow  should  now  obtain  a  general
consent  of  established  pleasure.  The  knights


105

marched  in  very  gallant  order  before  the
emperor  to  his  chapel,  \vhere  after  divine
service  was  accomplished  he  returned  to  his
palace,  to  make  the  young  prince  Palmerin
knight.  Where  first  the  emperor  embraced
the  noble  young  prince,  then  Frisol,  king  of
Hungaria,  fastened  the  spur  on  his  heel,  and
the  fair  Poiinaida,  by  commandment  of  the
emperor,  did  gird  his  sword  about  him  :
"which  gave  such  an  encouragement  to  the
valiant  Palmerin,  that  for  her  sake  he  at-
tempted such  rare  adventures,  as  increased
the  honour  of  his  fame  and  nobleness  of  her
beauty.  Then  were  the  other  young  noble
gentlemen  called  forth  to  receive  likewise
tlie  order  of  knighthood  :  as  first,  Graciano,
prince  of  France,  nephew  to  the  emperor,
and  son  to  the  king  Arnedbs  ;  Beroldo,
prince  of  Spain,  and  son  to  the  puissant  king
Recindos  ;  with  Onistaldo  and  Draniante,
his  two  brethren  ;  Estrclante,  son  to  king
Frisol  of  Hungaria  ;  Don  Rosuel  and  Beli-
sarte,  sons  of  Bclcar  ;  Basiliardo,  son  to  king
Tarnaes  ;  Luy manes  of  Burgundy,  the  son
of  duke  Triolo  ;  Francian,  who  was  so  ex-
pert  in  rausicj   son   to    Polendos,   king  of


106

Thessaly,  and  lhe  fair  Francelina;  Polinardo,
son  to  the  cinperor  Trinco,  and  brother
to  the  prince  \  crnao  ;  Dridem,  the  son  of
]VJ avortes,  Gcrmam  of  Orleans,  son  to  the
duke  of  Orleance  ;  Tenebrante,  son  to  the
duke  Tirendos  ;  Tremoran,  son  to  the  duke
Leccfiu  ;  Frisol,  son  to  the  duke  Drapos  of
Kormandy,  and  grandson  to  king  Frisol  ;
beside  many  other,  w  ho  were  brought  up  in
the  emperor's  court,  being  some  of  them
Avell  nurtured  in  virtuous  educations,  which
i'.re  chiefcst  required,  either  in  princes  or
noblemen's  children  :  by  Avhich  both  their
own  fame  is  increased,  and  a  continual  re-
nown left  to  all  their  posterity  ;  king  Frisol,
by  the  emperor's  coniraandment,  to  all  these
gave  orders  of  knighthood,  as  also  to  Floren-
dos  and  Platir,  both  sons  to  the  renowned
Primaleon.  These  matters  thus  dispatched,
they  went  up  into  the  hall,  which  was  very
sumptuously  adorned  with  cloths  of  gold,
■where  every  wight  was  placed  at  dinner,
according  to  their  estate  and  nobleness  of
birth.  The  dinner  ended,  and  the  tables
withdrawn,  the  emperor,  with  the  empress,
the  princess  Gridonia,  and  the  fair  Polinarda^


107

walked  to  the  place  where  they  should  be-
hold the  triumphs.  And  the  knights  having
every  one  appointed  himself  as  tile  exercise
required,  came  riding  very  bravely  into  the
tilt-yard,  of  whom  Palmcrin  was  chosen
chief  defendant  ;  which  somewhat  did
stomach  the  sons  of  I^-imaleon,  till  per-
ceiving the  whole  day  Avas  ordaaied  in  his
honour,  which  moved  them  to  quietness,
submitting  themselves  under  his  puiss-ince,
to  shew  their  prowess  and  magnanimity.


lOÔ


CHAPTER    l£î.


The  knights  being  all  entered  within  the  listi^^
and  the  tnunpets  sounded  to  begin  the
triumph,  Palmcrin,  who  was  appointed  to
begin  the  first  joust,  gave  courtesy  to  his
lady  Polinarda,  and  to  himself  thus  opened
his  present  thoughts  :

]\Ty  good  lady,  whose  beauty  is  the  prize  that
nllurcd  me  to  the  field,  and  whose  courtesy
is  the  honour  I  strive  to  attain  ;  let  but3-our
favour  remain  assured,  and  I  dare  awarrant
myself  the  victory  ;  for  as  you  are  above  all
in  beauty,  so  shall  Í  buy  your  bounty,  and
conquer  all  mischances.  Wherewith  he
ccv.ched    his    spear    against    Libusante    of


109

Greece,  enduring  a  brave  combat,  till  at
last  he  tanglii  Libusante  to  sit  his  horse
faster.  Palmerin  nothins;  dismayed,  but
joying  that  he^  had  conquered  one  of  the
chiefest  knights  of  Greece,  which  greatly
pleased  the  emperor,  and  his  lady  Polinarda  ;
as  also  the  whole  company  of  knights,  whose
eyes  were  partners  of  this  gallant  exploit.
The  prince  Florendos  encountered  with  Tro-
folante  the  Fearfid,  and  his  brother  Platir
with  Titubante  the  Black,  whose  valour  tlie
one  against  the  other,  was  no  less  cheerful
to  the  beholders  than  delÍ2;htful  to  them-
selves.  Graciano  and  Tragandor  brake  their
spears  with  such  violence,  that  horse  and
man  vrere  sent  to  the  ground.  Beroido,  Onis-
taldo>  and  Dramiante,  ran  against  Trusi-
ando,  Claribalte  of  Hungaria,  and  Esme-
raldo the  Fair:  but  fortune  was  so  averse
to  the  three  first,  that  thev  were  all  dis-
mounted^  and  the  steed  of  Onistaldo  had
one  of  his  fore  legs  broken.  Next  them,
Don  Rosuel,  Estiei  an  te,  and  Belisarte,  re-
ceived the  count  ^  alerian,  of  the  Archipe-
lago, and  his  brothers  ;  whose  strength  was
far  too  weak  in  resistance,  and  therefore
^OL.   I.  L


no

bare  dishonour  forth  of  the  field.  Francian,,
Dridem,  Tremoran,  Germain  of  Orleance,
and  Luymanes  of  Burgundy,  met  jointly
Tvith  Crispian  of  Macedon,  Tragonel  the
Active,  Forbolando  the  Strong,  Flaminiano,
and  Rocandor,  and  all  were  unhorsed  except
Tremoran,  uho  kept  his  saddle  valiantly.

Thus  was  the  first  encounter  very  gallantly
discharged,  to  the  no  small  pleasure  of  the
emperor  and  his  nobility,  as  also  the  re-
gardants, who  gave  great  commendation  to
the  haughtiness  of  the  first  exploit.  In  brief,
the  honor  of  Palmerin,  and  the  other  noble
young  knights,  was  commended  of  every
one,  especially  of  the  fair  Polinarda,  who
gave  her  servant  Palmerin  no  small  com-
mendations. The  empress  and  Gridonia,
somewhat  sad  for  Primaleon,  yet  rejoiced  to
see  the  tovvardly  behaviour  of  young  Pal-
merin, with  all  the  knights  of  his  train,  who
had  almost  forced  all  the  others  out  of  the
lists  ;  but,  on  the  sudden,  entered  among
them  two  knights,  bravely  mounted,  and  at-
tired all  in  green  armour,  who  running
against  two  of   the  young   knights,   brake


in

their  spears  very  valiantly:  then  la\Tng
hands  to  their  swords,  the}'  dealt  sucii
knightly  blows  amongst  them,  that  every  one
was  driven  into  great  admiration.  Palmerin
perceiving  the  hardiness  of  these  two  knights,
and  doubting  least  his  train  should  be  en-
dangered by  them,  bowed  himself  to  his
lady  Polinarda,  and  rode  forward,  using
these  speeches  to  himself:  it  is  not,  sweet
lady,  time  that  I  should  dismay  myself,  hav-
ing your  person  before  me,  w hose  sight  i^
surticicnt  to  conquer  any  proud  enemy;  but
it  is  that  time  wherein  your  name  siiall  be
eternally  honoured,  and  your  knighl  es-
teemed worthy  so  good  a  mistress.

So  advancing  him  to  one  of  these  strange
knights,  who  was  called  of  every  one  the
Knight  of  the  Savage  Man,  he  looked  on
the  device  in  his  shield,  which  was,  a  wild
man  leading  a  couple  of  lions  in  his  hand.
After  he  had  v,'ell  viewed  the  knight,  he
joined  combat  with  liim,  which  was  so
fiercely  handled  on  either  part,  that  all  which
had  passed  before  was  far  incomparable  tq
this  fearful  assault.

h  2


112

The  regardants  seeing  the  equality  of  their
strength,  could  not  jnflge  to  whom  victory
>vas  likeliest,  which  caused  the  emperor  to
marvel,  desiring  that  they  might  be  parted  ;
but  themselves  would  not  thereto  agree  in
anywise.  While  they  twain  thus  eagerly  dealt
with  one  another,  Platir  set  upon  the  com-
panion of  the  Knight  of  the  Savage  Man,
who  was  soon  brought  under,  by  the  puis-
sance of  Platir  ;  so  all  the  other  knights  were
forced  out  of  the  lists,  Tremoran,  Luymanes
of  Burgundie,  and  Belisarte  excepted,  who
were  fain  to  be  cairied  forth,  they  were  so
sore  wounded.

The  emperor,  perceiving  the  rough  assault
between  Palmerin  and  the  Knight  of  the
Savage  Man,  was  so  overcome  with  doubts,
that  he  scant  knew  what  to  say  ;  for  that  he
esteemed  this  combat  the  best  that  ever  he
eaw  in  all  his  life  time,  not  comparing  the
light  which  himself  had  with  the  giant
Parmaco*,  nor  his  encountering  with  Fra-


*  Palmerin  de  Oliva,  C  a*.


113

narque  *  in  England,  neither  the  combat  be-
tween him  and  Frisol  f  in  France,  for  the
contention  about  the  picture  of  the  empress
Pohnarda,  much  less  esteeming  the  hardy
adventure  between  Primakon  and  ihe  prince
Don  Duardos  ;  giving  the  only  praise  of  all,
and  above  all,  to  the  invincible  courage  of
these  twain.  The  emperor  perceiving  it  drew
towards  night,  and  fearing  the  endamage-
ment that  might  come  to  cither  of  tliem,
sent  commandment  to  leave  off  and  fight  no
more;  but  they,  desirous  still  of  victory,
would  hardly  agree  till  the  trumpet  sounded
the  retreat,  that  every  knight  must  hasten
unto  his  captain  :  then  the  two  green  knights
(because  they  would  not  be  known)  departed
secreth'^  that  way  they  came,  and  the  em-
peror, with  all  his  knights,  departed  to  his
palace,  to  a  sumptuous  banquet  that  was
prepared  for  them,  everyone  forgetting  lhe
anger  that  was  between  each  other  at  the
tournament.  The  banquet  ended,  the  knights
fell  to    dancing;   and   Palmerin,  somewhat


*  Palmcrin  de  Olira,  C,  57.        +  Palmeiin  de  Oiiva   C  4J.
fc  3


114

bashful  to  ?peak  to  his  lady  Poli narda,  danced
with  Drainaciana,  daughter  to  the  duke  Ti-
rendos,  and  chief  gentlewoman  attending  on
his  lady  and  mistress.  The  prince  Florendos,
because  he  would  not  strain  over  much
courtes}',  took  his  sister  Polinarda,  with
whom  he  thought  he  might  lawfully  be  so
bold.  Platir  cliose  Floriana,  the  daughter
of  Dilreo,  and  grandchild  to  king  Frisol.
Graciano,  prince  of  France,  desired  Clarisia,
the  daughter  to  king  Polendos  of  Thessaly.
Beroldo,  prince  of  Spain,  delighted  in  Oni-
stalda,  daughter  to  the  duke  of  Kormandy.
lielisarte  rttjuested  Dionisia,  daughter  to
the  king  of  Sparta;  and  Francian  was  amo-
rous of  Bernarda,  daughter  to  the  valiant
Bclcar.  Thus  every  one,  after  once  court-
ing his  lady,  fell  to  dancing,  and  so  ended
their  pastime  for  that  night.

The  emperor  departed  to  his  chamber,
accompanied  with  Palmerin,  and  the  two
noble  sons  of  Primaleon,  who  with  the  em-
press Gridonia  and  the  fair  Polinarda,  all
generally  gave  great  commendations  to  the
brave  behaviour  of  che  young  prince  Palme-


115

ria.  But  the  emperor  was  somewhat  of-
fended, that  the  two  green  knights  were  so
departed,  without  knowledge  from  whence
they  came,  or  \\hat  they  were  ;  hut  as  their
courage  made  manifest,  they  were  two  vaU-
ant  approved  knights  of  arms,  and  deserved
the  reward  of  honour,  wherever  they  came.
Thus  rejoiced  the  emperor,  for  that  in  his
court  remained  the  flower  of  all  chivalry,
both  in  the  young  knights  who  never  tried
themselves  before,  as  also  the  courageous
Palmerin,  whose  hardijiess  would  give  place
to  no  hazard  ;  which  made  the  emperor  fa-
mous, and  themselves  enrolled  in  the  book
of  eternal  mcmorv.


116


CHAPTER     13.


On  the  morrow  after  the  tournament,  the
emperor  accompanied  with  king  Frisol,  and
all  the  other  young  knights,  sat  in  hrS  great
hall,  giving  such  commendations  to  their
late  taken  travail,  that  they  esteemed  them-
selves highly  honoured  to  find  such  courtesy
at  the  emperor's  hands  ;  every  one  wishing
they  might  have  gained  knowledge  of  the
two  green  knights  that  hehaved  themselves
so  worthily.  To  break  off  their  talk  there
suddenly  entered  before  them  a  damsel,
attired  after  the  English  fashion,  in  a  robe
of  black  velvet,  over  which  she  wore  a
short  cloak  of  scarlet  cloth,  trimmed  with
rich  spangles  ;  her  face  was  endued  with  no


117

less  beautj  than  her  garments  were  adorned
with  sumptuous  bravery  ;  yet  with  the
countenance  of  one  who  was  offended.
When  she  had  well  beheld  all  the  knights,
and  failing  of  the  person  she  sought  to  find,
bending  her  knees  to  the  emperor,  thus  used
her  salutations  :

Most  renowned  emperor,  whose  name  is  no
less  honoured,  than  3'our  deeds  held  worthy
of  immortal  memoTy  ;  pardon  the  rude  en-
trance of  a  bold  maiden,  and  attend  the  dis-
course I  shall  dehver  to  your  majesty  :  The
great  magician,  named  the  Sage  Daliarte  of
the  Dark  Valley,  who  heartily  wisheth  your
continual  happiness,  in  faithful  oath  of  his
obedience,  kisseth  the  hands  of  your  imperial
majesty.  And  because  your  highness  hath
been  lately  conquered  by  much  sadness,  to
the  no  small  grief  of  your  courtly  assistants,
as  also  himself,  \Aho  is  your  unknown  ser-
vant ;  he  promiseth  your  loss  shall  be  re-
covered to  your  joy,  when  neither  fortune
shall  let  it,  nor  any  mishap  avouch  the  con-
trary. The  cause  of  my  coming  was  to  pre-
sent you  with  a  shield,  which  by  your  m?-


118

jcsty's  hand,  should  be  given  to  the  famous
young  knight  that  in  your  triumph  won  the
honour  of  the  day,  and  bears  the  title  of  per-
fect knighthood  as  his  just  desert  :  but  here,
in  your  dominions,hatli  this  been  taken  from
me  by  a  kniglit  in  green  armour,  who  bear-
eth  in  his  shield  a  savage  man  leading  two
lions.     And  thus  he  willed  me  to  certify  the
knight  whose  valour  and  worthiness  hath  de-
served this  shield,  that  he  Mill  meet  him
within  these  three  days  in  the  forest  of  the
Clear  Fountain,  where,  if  he  meet  him  not,
or  some  other  knight  for  him,  to  fetch  that
away  which  Ihave  unhappily  lost, undoubted-
ly he  will  bear  the  shield  away  with  him.
For  this  cause  did  I  so  circumspectly  be-
hold your  knights,  to  try  if  my  fortune  had
been    so    good,    to    know   that  courageous
mind,  for  whom  I  entered  my  travail.     And
thus  having  done  my  duty,  I  refer  the  rude-
ness of  my  discourse  to  your  gracious  par-
don.    The  emperor,  pondering  on  the  dam^
sel's  words,  with  the  friendly  message  of  the
sage  Daliarte,  whom  he  never  heard  of  be-
fore, sf  nt  her  to  the  empress  and  the  prin-
cess Gridonia  ;  who  received  her  so  honour-


J 19

ably,  as  the  hops  they  had  in  her  glad  tid-
ings increased  their  comfort.  Lpon  these
news  divers  of  the  knights  determined  with
themselves  to  go  fetch  the  lady's  shield,  re-
solving them  thus  :  that  if  it  were  their  for-
tune to  win  it,  the  honour  were  ineátimable
that  they  should  gain  by  so  brave  a  victory.
W  liereupon  Claribalte  of  Hungaria,  Esme-
raldo the  Fair,  Crespian  of  Macedon,  Fla-
miniano,  Rocandor,  Medrusam  the  Dreaded,
Trofolantc,  and  Forbolando  the  Strong,  who
were  no  friends  to  the  emperor,  but  came  to
the  tournament  to  seek  revengement  of
ancient  malice,  (being  of  the  cast  of  tlic
giants,)  that  the}'  bare  unto  his  majesty,  for
that  certain  of  their  predecessors  had  felt
the  force  of  his  fury.  And  a  fresh  spite
was  engendered,  because  the  young  knights
had  given  them  such  a  great  disgrace  before
their  ladies  ;  wherefore  they  would  pursue
the  knight  of  the  savage  man,  and  win  the
shield  from  all  the  knights  that  should  come
after  them.  When  they  were  come  to  the
forest  of  the  Clear  Fountain,  they  beheld  the
shield  haniîiniï  on  a  tree  hard  bv  the  foun-
taiii^  end  the  noble  knight  of  the  ravage  man,


120

there  ready  to  rlefend  it.  Forbolando  took
the  courage  to  give  liim  the  first  assault  ;
who  being  set  beside  his  saddle,  had  his
shield  and  helmet  hanged  on  the  tree  in  sign
he  was  conquered.  He  had  not  long  staidi
but  Crespian  of  Macedon,  Claribalte,  Esme-
raldo, Flaminiano,  and  Rocandor,  bare
him  company';  whose  shields  and  helmets
were  likewise  placed  as  vanquished.  Trol'o-
lante,  seeing  the  hard  hap,of'his  companions,
and  somewhat  angry  at  the  haughty  courage
of  the  knight  of  the  savage  man,  thought  to
have  done  more  than  his  strength  would  per-
mit, and  so  was  dismounted  with  his  horse
upon  him.  Having  recovered  himself  on
liii»  feet,  he  drew  his  sword,  and  began  a
fresh  encounter.  At  which  time  Palmerin,
accompanied  with  divers  noble  knights,  as
Graciano,  Dramiante,  Florendos,  Platir,  and
the  rest,  arrived  there,  and  saw  Trofolante
sent  to  his  conquered  companions  ;  where-
upon the  prince  Palmerin  began  in  this
manner:  Albeit,  sir  knight,  I  have  as  yef
received  no  other  works  than  those  of  an
enemy  at  your  hands,  worthy  of  the  like  re-
turn, the  feats  which  I  have  now  witnessed


121

are  such  as  to  make  me  change  the  will
wherewith  I  came  hither,  and  to  desire  to
serve  you  in  the  cure  of  these  your  wounds,
if  it  please  you  to  abide  in  my  lodgings  such
time  as  is  needful  for  this  purpose.  The
state  in  which  I  behold  you  induces  me  to
speak  after  this  manner;  there  will  be  time
enough  hereafter  to  satisfy  what  you  wish,
and  I  as  well.  The  shield  which  you  took
from  the  damsel  it  becomes  you  to  restore
unto  her,  because  with  it  you  have  v/on
others  not  less  fair,  and  to  you  more  honour-
able; and  also  because  wrongs  toward  women
are  not  to  be  expected  from  you,  whom
nature  hath  so  excellently  gifted  to  redress
them.  Now  know  I,  replied  he  of  the  sa-
vage, that  you  can  conquer  with  other  wea-
pons besides  arms.  So  soon  have  your  gen-
tle words  clean  changed  the  intent  which
was  in  me.  For  the  oiîer  which  you  have
made  I  hold  myself  thankful  ;  yet  am  I  not
in  such  disposition  that  it  is  needful  I  should
tarry  to  accept  it.  The  shield,  as  it  came
for  you,  I  beseech  you  take  it  :  for  the  in-
tention with  which  I  took  it  I  can  accom-
plish without  it,  if  we  should  meet  at  any
M


time  hereafter.  And  without  saying  more  he
mounted  his  horse,  and  went  his  way  with
his  companion.

Pahnerin  and  his  fiicncls  then  took  the
shield,  in  midst  whereof,  in  a  field  of  azure,
was  placed  a  very  fair  palm  tree,  so  lively
framed,  as  if  it  had  been  a  natural  tree,  sur-
rounded with  a  fire  so  pictured  to  the  life,
that  seeing  it  you  would  '  have  thought  the
tree  so  wrapt  in  flames  must  be  consumed  ;
and  that  which  was  most  wondered  at  of
them  all,  was  a  certain  posey  in  letters  of
gold,  engraven  round  about  the  sides,  so
darkly  placed,  that  none  in  the  company
could  judge  what  they  should  mean.  At
length  they  came  to  the  court,  when  the
emperor  was  newly  risen  from  supper,  who
being  certified  of  all  that  had  happened,  was
very  much  displeased  in  mind,  because  his
v.liole  desire  was,  to  have  had  knowledge
of  this  valiant  knight  of  the  savage  man.

Then  taking  the  shield,  and  looking  very
earnestly  upon  it,  he  sent  for  the  damsel  to
know  the  posey  that  was  engraven  about  it.


123


The  damsel  ansuered  :  I  would,  most  <.ra-
cious  emperor,  it  were  in  my  power  toftd-
^     your  request;    but   being    as    ignorant
thereof,  as  you  or  any  other,  I  must  desire
your  gracious  pardon.     When  she  saw  the
emperor  had   given    Palmerin    the    shield
who  vowed  to  use  it  as  became  a  knight  at
arms,  makmg  her  obeisance  to  his  majesty,
and  all  the  other  knights,  she  presently  took
ner  leave  and  departed.


M  2


124


CHAPTER   14.


Because  you  shall  be  resolved,  wlio  was  the
sage  Daliarte  of  the  Dark  Valley,  and  why
he°termed  hunself  by  such  an  unaccustomed
name,  mark  what  this  chapter  shall  give  in
relation,  and  then  consider  of  his  proceed-
ings afterward.

When  the  prince  Don  Duardos  left  the
realm  of  Lacedemonia,  after  he  had  deli-
vered the  king  Tamaes  forth  of  the  cruel
enchanted  castle,  he  entered  a  galley,  and
so  departed  on  his  voyage.  Not  long  had
they  been  on  the  seas,  but  that  a  damsel
suddenly  chanced  into  the  galley,  not  using
speech  to  any  Í  but  taking  the  principal  oar
in  her  hand,  turned  their  passage  quite  con-
trary to  another  island,  where  Don  Duardos
being  landed,  delivered  a  comely  knight  out


125


of  the   hands  of  divers  cruel  tyrants^  who

were  lei

death*.


were  leading  him  to  abide   an  unmerciful


The  damsel  conducted  the  prince  to  the  ha-
bitation of  Argonida,  where,  being  friendly
entertained,  and  staying  as  a  welcomed
guest,  such  conversation  was  between  them,
that  they  had  two  goodly  sons,  named  Pom-
pides,  and  this  sage  Daliarte  of  whom  we
mean  to  discourse  ;  whose  grandmother  be-
ing expert  in  the  science  of  magic,  nou-
ïished  this  Daharte  out  of  popular  conversa-
tion, that  through  her  means  he  became
marvellous  ingenious  of  wit,  and  very  skil-
ful in  her  devilish  exercise,  so  that  he  was
esteemed  the  notablest  magician  in  all  the
world  :  whose  memory  being  not  touched  in
the  book  of  Primaleon,  I  will  declare  in
what  order  he  passed  his  whole  life.

This  Daliarte,  reputed  of  no  less  fame  than


*  It  is  provoking  to  be  so  often  refencd  to  those  chapters  of
Primaleon  which  A.  Munday  has  unaccountably  omitted.
M  3


126

learning,  was  not  inferior  to  any,  but  bare
the  estimation  above  all,  so  that  none  durst
oiFer  him  injury,  albeit  he  deserved  it;  nor
none  would  contend  with  him,  they  stood
in  such  awe.  He  seeing  himself  honoured  of
the  mighty,  when  they  durst  do  no  other,
and  loved  of  the  most  part  for  his  excellent
cunning,  began  to  exercise  himself  in  mar-
tial exploits,  which  shewed  him  to  be  the
son  of  the  renowned  Don  Duardos  ;  and
having  received  his  knighthood  at  the  hands
of  the  giant  Gataru,  he  behaved  himself  as
famous  in  his  exploits,  as  he  was  esteemed
singular  in  his  practised  art  :  and  then  he
understood  his  father's  imprisonment,  with
the  noble  Primaleon,  in  the  castle  of  Dra-
muziando,  who,  by  the  skill  of  his  aunt  Eu-
tropa,  endeavoured  to  have  all  the  iiower  of
chivalry  in  like  captivity.  But  albeit  the
imprisonment  of  these  princes  was  unknown
to  all  the  knights  that  laboured  continually
in  their  search,  yet  this  Daliarte  was  so
well  acquainted  with  the  matter,  as  they  that
kept  it  most  secret  ;  for  that  his  art  gave  him
the  power  to  know  what  was  done  in  all
countries  in  the  world.  For  when  the  Grecian


127

knight?j  whose  affection  to  these  two  princes
caused  them  to  leave  their  native  country,
and  were  happened  unto  the  unfortunate  fo-
rest of  Great  Britain,  which  was  bravely  re-
plenished with  many  courageous  hearts,  as
also  sundry  gallant  ladies,  preparing  many
hard  adventures,  there  were  very  few  escaped,
but  for  the  most  part  were  all  lost  in  this  un-
fortunate search  :  among  which  noble  minds
was  Recindos  prince  of  Spain  ;  Arnedois
king  of  France  ;  Mayortes,  and  sir  Pridos,
whose  absence  was  greatly  bemoaned  in  the
English  court  ;  the  princes  Belcar  and  Vernao  ;
Ditreo,  and  the  Soldan  Belagriz,  with  the
renowned  Polendos.  All  these,  for  the  ho-
nourable affection  they  bare  to  the  straj'ed
princes,  left  their  kingdoms  and  signories,
and  unhappily  were  taken  prisoners  in  this
cruel  enchanted  castle  ;  which  was  great
grief  to  their  friends,  and  inestimable  sorrow
to  their  well  peopled  dominions.  Now  when
Daliarte  considered  the  danger  in  which  the
world  stood  by  this  unhappy  adventure,  he
would  willingly  have  taken  his  own  chance
like  the  others,  but  that  he  knew  the  end  was
reserved  for  anotlier,  and  not  for  him  ;  so  he


128

deemed  it  best  to  repair  to  the  Valley  of
Perdition,  which  was  named  so,  because  all
the  noble  knights  were  there  lost  ;  and  there
he   determined  to  make  his  habitation,  to
follow  his  stud}^,  and  provide  remedies  against
divers  mischances  that  were  hke  to  happen.
And  because  his  nature  desired  to  be  soli-
tary, in  that  his  bringing  up  was  forth  of  all
company,  he  builded  him  a  little   fortress
between  two  great  high  mountains,    which
kept  the  light  of  the  sun  away  by  day,  and
the  moon  in  the  night  season.   This  dwelling
he   called  the   Dark  Valley;    the  entrance
whereof,  however,  was  not  so  cheap,  but  that
he  was  fain  to  win  it  by  force  ;  slaying,  in
equal  battle,  the  giant  Trabolando,  and  one
of  his  sons,  who  were  lords  of  certain  castles
there.    Then,  in  the  most  solitary  part  of  the
valley,  he  made  as  singular  a  dwelling  place
as  the  wit  of  man  could  devise  ;  and  then  he
passed  his  time  in  study,  having  brought  thi-
ther all  the  books  which  he  had  inherited  from
his  grandmother,  and  whatever  others  he  could
acquire.     Sometimes  he  went  to  the  moun-
tains, for  his  inclination  led  him  that  way,
and  that  land  was  full  of  wild  boars  and  of


129

other  venison.  Sometimes  he  sallied  out  in
arms,  and  fought  battles,  from  which  al-
ways he  came  off  with  the  victory.  And
when  he  knew,  by  his  art,  that  any  knights
of  especial  prowess  had  arrived  before  the
castle  of  Dramuziando,  he  went  to  see
them  do  battle,  lamenting  the  misfortunes
which  he  could  not  remedy.  This  often  re-
pairing of  the  sage  Daliarte,  caused  both
Eutropa  to  doubt  something,  also  Dramu-
ziando  to  stand  in  great  fear,  seeing  that  he
entered  at  will  within  the  precincts  of  their
guarded  ground,  and  returned  from  it  at
will,  not  being  prevented  either  by  her  spells
or  by  his  power.  And  as  he  sat  one  day
very  pensive  in  his  study,  he  understood
by  his  art  of  the  triumphs  at  Constantinople,
when  the  emperor  would  try  the  young
knights  that  he  had  nourished  in  his  court  ;
against  which  time  he  framed  a  shield,  which
he  sent  by  a  damsel  to  Palmerin  of  England,
to  bear  it  with  him  in  all  adventures  that  he
should  undertake  ;  but  bj^  the  way  it  was  ta-
ken from  her  by  the  knight  of  the  savage  man
(whom  hereafter  I  will  disclose  unto  you),  yet
restored  again  by  the  gentleness  of  language


130

that  the  prince  Palmerin  used  with  him.
Thus  remained  the  sage  DaHarte,  expecting
the  time  for  the  dehvery  of  the  princes,
who  passed  their  tedious  captivity  in  such
sorrowful  thoughts  as  may  well  be  supposed,  '
yet  the  less  unhappily  in  as  much  as  they
enjoyed  the  friendship  of  each  other.


131


CHAPTER   15.


Vernao,  prince  of  Allemaigne,  and  Belcar,
duke  of  Ponto  and  Durazo,  remained  in
the  city  of  Esbrique,  till  they  feh  themselves
in  good  disposition  of  their  health;  and  then
they  depaited  to  London,  to  the  English
court,  disguised,  and  unwilling  to  be  known,
to  see  if  haply  they  might  attain  the  sight
of  the  princess  Flerida.

Tlie  princess  remained  still  pensive,  and
therefore  kept  her  chamber;  and  they  fail-
ing of  their  pretended  purpose,  travailed
thorow  Great  Britain,  where  they  valiantly-
revenged  the  quarrels  of  ladies,  and  enlarg-
ed their  report  of  their  redoubted  knight-


132

hood,  which  nehher  time  can  wear  out  of
memory,  nor  death  itself  hy  any  means  dis-
solve.

Proceeding  thus  in  iheir  adventurous  travail,
Eutropa  had  gotten  them  within  her  circuit,
that  she  was  as  sure  of  them  as  had  they
been  in  her  prison;  but  yet  let  them  alone
a  while,  to  try  the  hardness  of  their  fortune.
They  having  spent  the  day  in  travel,  and
the  dark  night  overcharging  them  with  her
uncomfortable  hours,  they  derermined  to
take  their  rest  at  the  foot  of  a  tree,  for  that
they  were  far  from  any  other  provision.
So  aliiihtinof,  çivinsr  their  horses  to  their
esquires.  Bolear  sat  him  down  and  fell
soundly  asleep;  but  Vernao,  whose  mind  wa^
on  his  fair  Basilia,  withdrew  himself  to  a
little  river,  a  pretty  way  from  his  friend
Belcar,  and  there,  what  with  the  sweet  har-
mony of  the  little  birds,  and  the  silent  pas-
sions he  used  to  himself,  the  gentle  prince
was  greatly  delighted.

Polendos,  king  of  Thessaly,. wandering  thaï
way,  by  f>rliino  took  his  plate  of  re-t  near  to


TOO
i  O^

tiie  prince  Vernao,  where  he  heard  all  the
lovely  ditties,  and  sweet  discourses,  that  he
used  in  commendation  of  his  fair  Basilia  ;
being  very  loth  to  disquiet  him,  or  to  be
known  that  he  was  so  near.  But  at  last
took  occasion  by  the  brave  inventions  that
he  had  heard  uttered  by  the  prince  Vcrnao,
to  enter  into  remembrances  of  his  own  lady,
fair  Fraacelina;  and  so  they  twain  in  this
manner  passed  away  the  weary  night.  In
the  morning,  w'hen  he  might  easily  espy  the
prince  V  ernao,  he  could  not  hide  his  pre-
sence any  longer,  but  went  to  him  with  this
salutation  :  I  know,  sir  Vernao,  that  your
amorous  passions  of  extreme  grief,  will  scant
suffer  your  oppressed  heart  to  enjoy  any
gladness,  because  the  remembrance  of  your
fair  Basilia,  hath  urged  you  this  night  to  be-
wray the  sundry  assaults  of  an  afflicted  mind,
whose  far  distance  from  your  presence,  hath
made  you  grievously  to  sigh,  when  you  would
gladly  have  slept  :  whereof  your  friend  is  a
witness,  who  is  not  a  little  sorry  to  under-
stand your  woes.

\  ernao  embracing  the  noble  Polendos,  de-


134

clared  the  great  joy  he  conceived  for  his.
company,  yet  somewhat  displeased  that  any
should  be  privy  to  his  amorous  complaints,
which  might  cause  him  to  be  judged  rather
effeminate,  than  any  way  famous.  While
they  were  earnest  in  talking,  Belcar  came
walking  unto  them;  who  rejoicing  at  the
sight  of  the  king  Polendos,  embraced  him,
using  these  pleasant  speeches  :  I  care  not
greatly  if  I  take  revengement  now,  for  the
sharp  assault  you  gave  nic  at  the  bridge  of
the  island  of  Cardcria,  where  you  bare  away
the  prize  and  I  the  repulse,  since  I  have  sir
Vernao  here  to  assist  me.  At  this  Polendos
embraced  him  and  answered,  I  know  not
how  that  may  be,  but  thii;  I  know,  that  he
who  takes  you  from  my  arms  must  be  a
stronger  than  I.

After  many  gratulations  passed  on  all  parts,
they  mounted  on  horseback,  and  rode  on,  re-
counting the  adventures  which  had  happened
each  other,  in  seeking  the  prince  Don  IHiar-
dos.  And  Polendos  rehearsed  unto  thémj
how  ho  brought  the  young  prin<ce  Palmerin
to  Constantinople,  not  forgetting  the  letter


135

sent  by  the  Lady  of  the  Lake.  In  con-
tinuance of  this  talk,  they  came  before  the
castle  of  Dramuziando,  every  one  giving  his
verdict  on  the  bravery  and  strength  of  this
fortress;  till  at  length,  to  put  them  forth  of
these  thoughts,  the  prince  Don  Duardos
came  upon  the  bridge  in  the  same  order  as
he  fought  with  the  noble  Primaleon  ;  which
urged  Polendos  to  this  pause.  Methinks
this  castle  should  be  invincible,  if  it  be  pro-
vided within  of  such  knisihts  as  this  which
we  see  without.  Upon  this  accident,  the
prince  Vernao  prevailed  by  entreat)'^,  to  have
the  first  joust  with  Don  Duardos  ;  when  pre-
sently they  encountered  one  another  with
such  large  appearance  of  knighthood,  that
Don  Duardos  lost  one  of  his  stirrups,  and
the  prince  Vernao  was  unhorsed.  Having
recovered  himself,  he  drew  his  sword,  and
came  courageously  to  him  again;  but  Don
Duardos  staid, delivering  him  these  speeches  :
Sir  knight,  it  may  be  that  your  skill  on  foot
is  more  agreeable  to  your  strength,  than  the
fore-fight  you  have  had  on  horseback  ;  but
against  every  knight  that  cometh,  I  am
allowed  only  the  first  exploit,  Let  me  joust
N  2


136

with  your  compamons  ;  you  will  have  other»
anon  on  whom  to  satisi'y  yourself,  and  God
send  that  you  may  speed  as  well  as  I  wish
you,  anrl  you  will  then  remain  with  more
honour  than  you  could  win  of  me,  even
though  you  should  overcome  me.

Then  Belcar,  very  desirous  to  enter  the  com-
bat, pacified  prince  Vernao  with  these  words:
Sir  Vernao,  since  the  knight  hath  fulfilled
his  first,  and  w-e  remain  to  begin  a  fresh
challenge,  you  may  not  refuse  to  forbear  the
fight,  considering  he  hath  observed  his  duty
in  the  field.  Don  Duardos  received  him
with  an  encounter  which  brought  him  to
the  ground.  Yet  grieved  he  at  these  jousts;
for  liaving  heard  Vernao's  name,  it  well
seemed  that  his  companions  must  needs  be
persons  unto  whom  he  was  bound  either  by
kin  or  friendship,  and  he  feared  for  the  dan-
ger in  which  they  stood.  Nevertheless,  see-
ing he  could  no  otherwise  than  obey  his
orders,  he  went  against  Polendos,  who  re-
ceived him  with  all  his  might,  full  of  anger
and  melancholy,  and  amazed  at  beholding
such  feats  in  a  man  who  was  unknown.    And


137

thus  they  encountered  so  unsparhigly,  that
Don  Duardos  fell  upon  his  horse's  neck,  and
had  well  nigh  fallen  ;  but  Polendos  went  to
the  ground,  with  the  saddle  between  his
legs.

Then  the  gate  of  the  tower  opened,  and  Pan-
daro  called  Don  Duardos  in,  to  whose  com-
mand he  obeyed,  very  sorry  that  he  might
not    speak  to    these    knights.     So  entering
into   the  castle,  Polendos,  who  greatly  re-
sented what  had  befallen  him,  would  have
followed  him,  but  Vernao  got  in  first  ;  Pan-
daro  let  him  enter,  and  then  shut  the  gate
so  quickly    that    Polendos    and    Belcar  re-
mained   without,  full    discontented    at  this
repulse,  and  to  see  Vernao  enclosed  there
alone,    he    being  little    accustomed    to    do
battle  with  such  men  as  these.     Don  Duar-
dos, seeing  him  within,  turned  to  him  and
said  :  Sir  Vernao,  this  is  the  danger  of  which
I  spake  to  you,  and  in  which  I  would  fain  not
have  seen  you,  the  issue  being  so  dreadful.
I  do  not  yet,  replied  Vernao,  hold  you  for
such  a  friend  to  my  honour  that  1  should
believe  your  words,  and  let  the  fear  of  them
N   3


138

make  me  do  what  I  ought  not.  At  which
words,  Pandaro  sakiled  liim  with  his  mace,
so  that  between  them  two  was  a  fierce  skir-
mish; and  Primaleon,  leaning  in  his  chamber
window,  took  great  pleasure  to  behold  the
haughty  courage  of  Vernao,  and  great  sor-
row, knowing  how  little  in  the  end  it  would
avail  him.  Don  Duardos  had  told  him  who
he  was  ;  whose  name  being  known  unto  Dra-
muziando,  he  was  not  a  little  glad  of  him,
for  that  his  father  Trinco  was  also  the  cause
of  the  death  of  his  father  Franarque.  Ver-
nao  so  long  assailed  Paiidaro,  that  he  brake
his  sword  close  to  the  hilt  upon  the  iron  rim
of  the  giant's  shield  :  whereat  Pandaro  being
no  little  satisfied,  let  fall  his  own,  and  took
his  mace  with  both  hands  ;  for  though  Pri-
maleon  had  cut  off  four  fingers  of  his  left
liand,  necessity  taught  him  after  he  had  re-
covered, to  supply  their  place  with  engines.
Vernao  seeino;  the  blow  comins:  down,  ran
in  so  close  to  him  that  it  fell  in  vain;  but  then
Pandaro  finding  him  so  near,  caught  him  in
his  arms,  and  squeezed  him  so  hard  that  it
seemed  as  if  he  had  crushed  him  to  pieces,
and  then  threw  him  down   senseless  at  his


139

feet,  from  \Yhencc  he  was  carried  into  the
castle.

Then  he  opened  the  gate  agam  ;  but  Bclcar
and  Polendos  were  so  quick  upon  him  that
he  could  not  shut  it  before  they  had  both  got
in.  Belcar  besought  Polendos  to  let  him
have  the  first  battle;  which  he  accorded
again:>t  his  will,  fearing  how  it  would  he;
and  though  it  was  as  welt  contested  as  was
expected  from  his  worth,  nevertheless  the
great  vantage  which  the  giant  possessed
brought  him  to  such  state  that  he  was  van-
quished, with  such  discontent  as  was  the
greatest  he  had  ever  received.  However,
Pandaro  did  not  come  off  so  sound  but  that
the  victory  cost  him  many  wounds,  Polen-
dos, with  whom  his  third  battle  was  to  be,
seeing  this,  said  to  him,  Methinks  it  is  good
counsel  to  you  not  to  lose  more  blood,  since
life  is  supported  by  it.  Yield  thyself;  if  there
be  more  to  do  I  will  do  it,  and  if  not,  show  me
the  knight  who  entered.  Methinks,  said
Pandaro,  in  reply,  if  I  do  not  cut  your  words
short,  you  will  let  out  as  many  as  your
foolishness  prompts.     AMtlithat  they  fell  to-


140

tlieir  fight,  wherein  Polcndos  prevailed,  so
happil}-,  tliat  Pandaro  was  soon  brought  to
the  ground.     Whereupon   the   cruel  Daha-
gam  came  forth  to   defend  him,  armed  as
usual;  and  though  Polendos  had  ah'cady  been
hardiy  handlid,  yet  in  that  battle  against  so
strong  an  enemy,  lie  well  showerl  wliat  he
was.      i)r;unuziando  made   great  account  of
him  for  what  lie  saw.     Primaleon  and  Don
Duardos  were  with  Vernao  and  Belcar,  see-
ing that  their  wounds  were  looked  to;  but
when  they  knew  tljat  he  who  remained  was
Polendos,  they  came  to  see  the  end  of  the
battle.     Then  did  they  behold  him  little  pro-
tected by  hisarms,which  were  all  black,  con-
formable to  the   sorrow  of  the  times,  and
upon  his  shield  a  thick  cloud  in  a  field  sable.
At  the  end,  both  he  and   his  enemy  finding
themselves   to  be    mated    every    way,   and
frustrate  in   hope  of  victory  any  way,  were
both  so  faint  and  wearied  that  they  fell  down,
neither  gaining  the  conquest  of  the   other.
Don  Duardos  and  Primaleon  looked  speedily
to  the  cure  of  his  person,  and  of  the  other
tv/ain;  who,  when  they  Avere  recovered,  re-
mained   contented    with    their  misfortune.


141

because  they  had  now  found  those  -wlionz
thev  sought.  But  it  was  otherwise  with  Don
Duardos  and  Primaleon  ;  for  they  knew  the
great  lack  of  knights  which  the  world  felt
because  of  their  prison,  and  feared  that  their
liberty  would  hardly  be  atchieved.  And
though  the  hope  thereof  was  not  wholly  lost,
yet  knew  they  that  the  possession  of  good
fortune  is  better  than  the  possibility  of  it;
though  with  respect  to  evil  fortune^  it  is  cleaa
contrary.


142


CHAPTER  16.


Hecindos,  king  of  Spain,  hearing  the  great
pursuit  oimany  noble  knights,  to  enquire  of
the  two  princes,  Don  Duardos  and  Prima-
leon,  determined  -with  himself  to  try  the  ha-
zard of  fortune,  if  that  his  employed  pains
iniglit  compass  any  good  luck.  And  leaving
the  governing  of  his  estate  to  the  duke  Or-
liando,  and  the  marquis  Ricardo,  men  of  no
less  valiancy  than  true  nohihty,  he  departed
with  no  body  but  his  esquire  attending  on
him,  and  travelled  through  many  countries,
till  he  came  to  the  court  of  France,  where
he  was  royally  and  graciously  received  by
his  cousin  king  Arnedos  ;   who,  imderstand-


143

ing  the  eiFect  of  his  noble  determination,  and
being  himseh-  affected  to  those  wJrthy
princes,  committed  his  kingdom  to  his
queen  Mehcia,  and  travelled  with  Recindos
in  this  heavy  enterprise.

Now  because  it  began  to  be  rumoured  that
all  knights  were  lost  in  Great  Britain,  no
man  knew  how,  they  took  their  course  thither
and  arrived  at  the  English  court,  not  making
themselves    known   because  of  the  general
sorrow;  wherefore  they  did  not  see  Flerida.
1-rom  thence   departing,  they  went  on  till
they  came  there,  whither  the  fortune  of  all
knights  led   them,  and  about  mid-day   en-
tered the  valley  and  rode  up  along  the  river
side  till  they  came  to  the  castle,  at  such  time
as    two   other  knights   had  just  reached  it
from  the  other  side.     The  one,  who  greatlv
surpassed  in  stature,  rode  a  large  bay  horse,
having    his    armour  spotted    with    red    and
crimson  colour,  and  in  his  shield  for  his  de-
vice,   he    bare   a   grey   doo-.       Tlie    other
i^night  was  all   in    black    armour,  and   his
shield  of  the  same  colour  :  these  four  met
lust  together,  at  the  entrance  of  the  brido-e


144

Don  Duardos,  \vho  was  ready  for  the  jousF,
said^SirSj  see  which  of  ye  is  to  joust  first,  and
let  him  come  on,  for  there  is  but  scant  time
for  so  many.

Upon  these  words  Recindos  couched  his
spear  ;  but  the  knight  of  the  dog  offered
him  this  stay  :  Sir,  it  seems  you  regard  not
knightly  courtesy,  to  offer  me  this  wrong,
who  both  came  before  you,  and  was  prepared
before  you,  and  tlierefore  of  right  ought  to
begin  before  you.  Recindos,  somewhat
moved  at  these  words,  shaped  him  this  reply:
Sir,  if  in  a  bravery  you  seek  to  go  beyond
me,  or  in  peremptory  words  to  bear  the  prize
away,  you  are  far  deceived  ;  for  that  words
cannot  out-face  me,  nor  your  weapons  fear
me.  Don  Duardos  perceiving  these  ques-
tions, said  to  them.  Sirs,  if  \'e  wish  to  excuse
this  difference,  neither  of  you  should  joust
first,  but  let  me  try  your  companions;  and
peradventure  they  may  give  you  such  a  re-
port of  themselves  as  will  set  you  quarrel-
ling which  shall  be  the  last.


Tlie   knight   of   the   dog,   not  chusing  to


145

answer  Don  Duardos,  cried  out  to  Recihdos,
the  joust  which  you  would  have  witii  that
knight  you  must  have  with  nie,  and  I  will
ihow  you  how  hurtful  is  pride  to  hiin  who
prizes  it.  ^^  herewith  they  ran  together  very
fiercely  ;  and  Arnedos  prepared  himself  to
the  black  knight,  so  that  between  them  be-
gan a  hot  skirmish,  wherein  horse  and  men
were  all  laid  on  the  ground.  Then  rising  up
again,  and  drawing  forth  their  swords,  they
charged  one  another  with  such  mighty
strokes,  that  their  singular  courage  made
manifest  the  valour  of  their  noble  minds.

Dramuziando,  accompanied  with  PrlmaleoHj
Polendos,  and  the  other  knights,  stood  upon
fhe  battlements  which  commanded  the
bridge,  beholding  the  battle,  which  was
one  of  the  notable  ones  of  the  world,  and
giving  no  less  commendation  to  it  than  the
behaviour  of  the  knights  did  justly  deserve.
Yet  none  of  them  could  judge  of  whence,  or
what  they  were,  saving  that  Don  Duardos
knew  the  knight  of  the  Dog  to  be  M  av-
ortes. They  the  while  continued  their  bat-
tle till  for  pure  weariness  they  were  fain  to
VOL.  I,  o


145

dr3^v  back  ;  but  the  desire  which  each  had  to
iinish  that  strife  not  sufiering  them  to  remain
long  at  rest,  they  turned  to  it  again,  and
soon  handled  each  other  so  hardly  that  all
^vere  brought  to  extreme  weakness.  ]May-
ortes  throwing  down  his  sword,  joined  with
his  enemy,  to  try  his  strength  in  wrestling;
and  Arnedos  likewise  received  the  black
knight,  so  that  the  blood  issued  forth  upon
their  armour,  and  they  all  through  great
weakness  fell  down  on  the  earth.  Then  came
forth  Dramuziando,  with  his  noble  prisoners^
in  M'hose  faith  he  had  full  confidence,  and
taking  off  their  helmets,  Primaleon  knew
the  black  knight  to  be  the  soldan  Belagriz^
and  certified  Dramuziando,  that  the  other
two  were  Recindos  king  of  Spain,  and  Ar-
nedos king  of  France  ;  who  were  all  pre.
gently  carried  into  the  castle,  that  their
wounds  might  be  cured,  and  themselves  re-
covered.

Dramuziando  used  all  the  knights  very  ho-
nourably, refusing  to  take  extreme  revenge
for  his  father's  death,  but  supposed  their
imprisonment   to    be   punishment  sufficient.


147

And  through  their  help  he  liad  good  hope
to  conquer  the  isle  of  the  Bottomless  Lake,
which  had  belonged  to  his  grandfather  the
giant  AlmadragOj  but  was  now  in  possession
of  certain  other  giants,  who  had  taken  it
from  him  by  force  ;  when  they  should  have
done  him  this  service  lie  thouglit  to  set  them
all  at  liberty,  and  remain  for  evermore  in
friendship  with  them.  In  time,  Mayortes,
the  Grand  Khan,  the  soldan  Beiagriz,  Ar-
nedos,  and  king  Recindos,  had  all  obtained
their  former  health,  rejoicing  that  they
were  imprisoned  with  their  dearest  friends,
whom  they  travelled  to  seek,  and  had  so
haupily  found.  And  they  laughed  among
themselves  at  their  eagerness  to  do  battle
with  Don  Duardos.  But  to  him  all  these
things  were  killing  griefs  ;  for  besides  that
he  saw  no  remedy  for  these  losses,  the
news  he"  heard  of  Flerida  from  each  new
Comer  continually  increased  hi»  own  sorrow.


o  2


H5


CHÃ  Pr  ER  17.


In  that  time  might  any  Pagan  lord  have  con-
quered the  whole  empire  of  Greece,  and
that  in  short  space,  so  little  defence  was  left
there  :  hut  the  emperor  Pahticrin  was  so
well  beloved  by  all,  that  they  who  could  have
made  war  upon  him  would  for  friendship's
sake  have  holpen  him  had  he  stood  in  need.
And  now  after  that  the  young  knights  had
made  manifest  their  great  expertness  in
many  triumphs,  for  the  honour  of  their
ladies,  and  estimation  they  held  of  them-
selves, the  emperor,  to  remove  the  sadness
of  his  people,  caused  every  night  dances
and  devices  to  be  performed,  for  the  delight
pi  the  empress,  and  the  princess  Gridonia  j


149       '

but  the  fair  Basilia  still  refused  theii  com-
pany, for  that  the  absence  of  prince  Vernao
caused  her  to  spend  the  time  in  pensive-
ness.  ;  .

Palmerin  of  England,  affecting  strange  ad-
ventures, and  desiring  with  other  knights
to  make  proof  of  "his  knighthood,  yet  dared
not  sally  forth  witliout  leave  of  his  mistress.
Courage  was  wanting  to  ask  this,  still  more
to  discover  his  heart  to  her  ;  so  that  he  knew
not  which  to  choose,  whether  to  keep  silence
and  live  with  this  grief,  or  to  discover  it  and
abide  the  hazard.  One  night  however  after
the  dance  was  ended,  drawing  near  Poli-
narda,  as  he  sometimes  used  to  do,  full  of
those  fears  to  which  enamoured  hearts  are
at  such  times  subject,  with  countenance
changed,  step  slow,  speech  faltering,  and
embarrassed,  he  began  to  sav  :  Ladv,  the
emperor  your  grandfather  gave  me  to  your
highness  the  day  whereon  I  entered  this
house,  that  I  should  ser\'e  you,  at  an  age
when  I  knew  not  the  favour  which  he  then
vouchsafed  me.  And  though  from  thence
the  danger  hath  arisen  in  which  I  now  stand,
o  3


I  am  yet  so  wcW  content  therewith  that  to
lose  it  I  should  feel  more  than  I  can  fear  all
those  dangers,  though  they  are  such  that  all
others  are  as  nothing  in  comparison.  And
because  my  intention  is  to  seek  adventures,
and  go  where  they  may  lead  me,  I  woutd
beseech  leave  of  you,  lady,  so  to  do,  and
also  your  consent  that  I  may  call  myself,  at
least  in  my  own  heart,  your  knight  ;  for  from
that  I  shall  find  strength  for  atchicvcment
wherein  it  will  be  needed.

Polinarda,  who  well  understood  the  end  of
these  speeches,  and  meant  to  give  him  occa-
sion to  speak  more  plainly,  answered  thus  :
Certes,  Palmerin,  I  owe  you  so  much  for  the
cervices  which  you  have  alreadydone  me  that  I
should  rejoice  in  the  power  of  requiting  you
to  your  honour.  I  consent  that  you  call
yourself  my  knight  ;  your  appearance  and
breeding  in  this  court  suffice  for  that,  and
J  adventure  nothing.  The  danger  in  which
you  say  you  now  stand  I  would  willingly  un-
derstand, for  I  should  be  little  content  with
any  which  affected  you.  Lady,  replied  Pal-
merin, how  can  I  believe  that  you  grieve  to


IJl

áee  me  in  it,  since  it  proceeds  from  you  ?  Yel
though  it  should  destroy  me,  I  would  rather
it  were  so  than  that  I  were  without  it.  1  am
glad,  quoth  Polinarda,  that  my  suspicion
was  right  ;  and  since  the  iault  of  tliis  pre-
sumption is  mine,  will  give  you  no  other
punishment  in  guerdon  than  to  advise  you
not  to  appear  again  before  me  ;  if  you  do  I
shall  find  means  to  punish  that  transgression,
and  this  also,  at  once.  As  soon  as  she  had
finished  these  words,  she  turned  her  back
and  left  him  ready  to  fall,  and  in  such  a  mor-
tal condition,  that  if  any  one  had  looked  at
him,  it  might  have  been  known  what  had
passed  in  that  conversation.  But  as  all  were
employed  in  following  their  ladies,  who  were
now  retiring  with  the  empress,  there  was  none
to  notice  him.  And  having  past  the  force
of  that  accident,  he  somewhat  recovered  him-
self, and  went  as  well  as  be  could  to  his  lodg-
ing.

Before  morning,  because  he  could  find  no
repose,  and  also  that  he  might  obey  his  lady's
Command,  he  armed  himself  in  armour  of
spotted  grey,  powdered  wi:.ii  little  tlu)riiS  of


152

black  and  gold,  tokens  of  the  troubles
through  which  he  was  to  pass.  His  shield
bore  the  wheel  of  fortune  in  a  field  azure,
for  that  which  Daliartc  had  sent  him  he  car-
ried in  a  case  that  he  might  not  be  known
by  it  ;  and  taking  with  him  Selviam,  his  fos-
ter brother,  the  son  of  the  savage  man,  who
bore  ic  together  with  his  other  arms,  he  de-
parted sccreily.  He  had  no  other  thought
tha.i  to  pass  the  time  in  sorrowful  words
mingled  with  many  tears  and  sighs,  which
rent  hiS  soul,  true  signs  of  his  grief,  to  which
all  tae  consolations  of  Selviam  could  give
no  remedy  ;  instead  thereof  he  redoubled
them  with  so  much  the  more  violence,  so
that  he  dared  say  nothing  more  to  him.  In
this  manner  he  rode  on  all  night  and  all  the
next  day,  without  taking  food  ;  for  always  in
great  sorrows  the  thoughts  which  spring  from
them  sustain  him  who  endures  them.


153


CHAPTER    18.


Thus  travelled  Palmerln,  neither  resting
himself  in  any  place,  nor  abiding  in  any
company,  hut  only  his  brother  Selviam's.
On  the  second  day  towards  evening,  being
now  far  distant  from  Constantinople,  he
found  himself  in  a  valley  full  oi"  thick  trees,
among  which  were  certain  old  buildings  in
many  parts  fallen  to  ruin,  yet  in  the  little
which  appeared  they  gave  sample  of  how
noble  a  thing  they  had  once  been  ;  within
"Were  galleries  and  apartments  worthy  to  be
inhabited,  and  without  the  walls  were  covered
with  ivy,  so  green  and  inwoven  with  the  very
stones,  as  not  only  to  give  adornment  to  the
antiquity  of  the  edifice,  but  also  to  preserve
it  from  its  total  fall.     About  a  stone's  thro»v


l5-%

distant  wa:<  a  fountain  of  clear  water,  in  so
pleasant  a  place,  that  he  could  not  choose
but  alight.  Selviam  took  his  horse,  and
Avould  fain  have  given  his  master  food,  but
Palmerin  would  not,  for  in  those  days  sor-
rowful thoughts  were  his  sustenance  ;  so
sending  him  away,  he  remained,  leaning
upon  one  hand  with  his  eyes  fixed  upon  the
fountain  Ixîlow  iiim  ;  and  calling  to  mind  the
words  of  his  lady,  fell  from  thence  to  blam-
ing his  own  boldness.  O  Palmerin,  said  he,
son  to  a  poor  savage  man,  and  born  in  the
woods  of  Great  Britain,  what  estimation
hadst  thou  of  modesty,  to  move  so  great
olfence  with  thy  gracious  mistress  ?  And  yet,
lady,  if  you  respect  my  trusty  service,  with
the  constant  loyalty  I  have  always  borne  to
your  sovereignty,  my  fault  committed  rashly
deserveth  no  such  repulse;  for  if  you  regard
your  own  beauty,  you  shall  perceive  my
words  to  be  for  your  honour,  and  not  worthy
any  hate,  in  that  I  will  prefer  y  oui  name
above  all  ladies  in  nobleness.  And  yet  am
I  contented  to  abide  your  hard  doom,  and
according  to  your  pleasure,  waste  my  days  in
distress.


I^J^


With  this  he  paused  awhile,  xvcakness  do-.
priving  him  both  of  strength  and  breath  to
express  the  words  which  sorrow  and  love
suggested.  It  was  not  long  before  he  heard
within  the  huilding  the  touch  of  a  stringed
instrument,  which  because  it  was  somewhat
distant  he  knew  not  presently  what  it  might
be  ;  hut  anon  the  sound  thereof  comino;  un-
der the  trees,  roused  him^and  going  towards
it  he  had  not  proceeded  far  witliin  the  build-
ing, before  in  one  of  the  vaulted  chambers
he  espied  one  sitting  all  in  black,  with  a
long  beard,  and  a  countenance  shewing,  bv
its  sad  complexion,  that  he  had  more  mind
to  mourn  than  to  any  mirtli  ;  he  was  plaving
upon  virginals  of  so  loud  a  tone,  that  thev
could  be  heard  in  the  field  without  ;  the  har-
mony of  which  lingering  in  the  hollows  of
the  vaulted  cieling,  made  so  rare  a  soHiid
jhat  he  who  heard  it  was  perforce  led  to  lis-
ten, and  to  the  forgetfulness  of  all  other
things.  Tlie  knight  of  Fortune,  transport-
ed at  hearing  him,  leant  against  tlK-  door,  and
would  not  enter  farther  least  be  s!io\dd  dis-
turb him;  seeing  that  the  other  was  so  car-
ried av.av  with  his  own  thoughts  that  some-


156

times  he  fell  upon  the  instrument,  and  then
broke  out  into  words  conformable  to  his  way
of  life,  and  in  praise  of  her  \vho  oecasioned
it.  Palmerin  having  heard  what  singular  re-
ports he  gave  his  lady,  as  that  none  might
compare  with  her  for  beauty  and  bravery  ;
he  was  very  much  oilended,  in  tliat  he
esteemed  all  ladies  as  counterfeit  to  his  fuir
Polinarda  ;  wherefore  he  entered  in,  saying.
It  would  be  well,  sir  knight,  if  you  would
praise  your  own  lady  without  disparaging
others,  since  there  may  be  some  one  who  is
in  nothing  her  inferior.

He  of  the  Vaulted'  Chamber  seeing  one  en
tered  upon  him  so  suddenly,  advanced  him-
self towards  him  with  this  answer  :  Is  there
any  to  be  equal  with  my  lady  ?  Stay  till  1
am  armed,  and  I  will  show  thee  the  truth  of
what  I  say,  and  the  lie  which  thou  believe^t.
I  would  thou  wert  armed,  replied  he  of  I'or-
tunc,  for  so  manifest  an  error  ought  to  have
no  delay  in  receiving  its  punishment.

The  knight  withdrew  himself  into  a  cham-
ber, and   Palmcria  went  forth^  where    he


157

mounted  on  iiorseback^  and  attended  his
coming.  Presently  he  of  the  Vaulted  Cham-
ber came  forth,  attired  in  black  armour  ;  the
device  on  his  shield  could  not  be  seen  be-
cause it  was  now  dark,  but  what  he  bore
there  was  a  sepulchre  in  a  sable  field,  death
above  guarding  it.  Using  no  words  they
fell  to  combat  valiantly  ;  but  the  knight  of
the  Chamber  breaking  his  lance  upon  his
antagonist's  shield,  was  driven  himself  to  the
earth.  Then  dealing  awhile  together  with
their  swords,  Palmcrin,  after  no  long  battle,
because  he  fought  for  truth,  and  was  the
stronger,  albeit  the  other  was  excellent  in
arms,  overcame  him  ;  and  taking  off  his  hel-
met, bade  him  unsay  the  lie  which  he  had
uttered,  or  he  would  slay  him.  The  knight
replied,  the  lie  wherewith  you  charge  me,  Í
shall  not  unsay,  for  to  unsay  it  would  be  a
greater  ;  kill  me  you  may  at  your  pleasure,
it  is  the  best  boon  my  evil  hap  can  grant  me;
and  if  I  regret  any  thing,  it  is  that  ought
besides  my  own  sorrow  should  destroy  roe.
Palmerin  seeing  him  thus  desperate,  left
him,  saying,  suftlce  it  for  the  test  of  3'our
truth,  that  you  have  so  ill  been  able  to  main-
p


tain  it;  and  inoiuuiiio  his  horse  he  ucrit  his
vvay^tlie  more-  coutcntctlly  fu' v-iiat  had  lieio
bcl'ah'cri  hiii..  'Ji„.  oihc-r  ivtunicd  into  hi*
vaiiltecl  charnhc  r,  v.  lu;if  he  v.  as  h^-akcl  In-  l^s
Si\mve,  bcin-  so  (h-sinnjs  ol'  death,  t!i:â  hr
v.ould  have  given  ii  l„  };iín.;,.!í;  if  he  ha^i
liol  tiu,.i;rht  tlK.r  in  .J  duin-lieslionl.i  have-
Mimed  :,:.:dnst  th:,i  >o;,uuiul  leineiaSraaco
Irom  'A-hieti  lie  a!,vay  ev|K-eîed  it.


í^'.9


CHAPTER   ]g.


ît  is  registered  in  ancient  histories,  that  ii,
Sardinia  sometime  reigned  a  king,  named
Avandro,  ^^ho  spoused  queen  ámeralda,
daughter  to  the  duke  Ar.nian  of  Xonnandv,
and  sister  unro  the  duke  Drapos,  the  son-in-
law  of  king  f  risol.  This  king  had  one  only
son  who  was  named  i'loraman,  of  no  less
cxpertness  of  capacity,  than  knightly  beha-
viour in  courage  ;  which  made  him  liked  of
all  that  saw  him,  and  loved  of  all  that  knew
him.  It  so  chanced  that  this  Floraman
growing  to  ripeness  of  years,  became  ena-
moured of  Altea,  daughter  to  the  duke  Carlo,
■^vho  was  brought  up  by  the  queen,  her  father
p  i>


160

being  the  king's  vassal.    Between  these  two
was  joined  a  league  of  perfeet  good  liking,
and  a  mutual  consent  of  faithful  love.     This
love  could  not  please  the  king  his  iather,
who  by  all  means  he  could  sought  still  to
prevent  it.     And  perceiving  he  could  hardlj
reclaim  his  son,  but  that  his  affection  still  in-
creased to  fair  Altca,  he  sent  her  home  to
the  duke  her  father,  meaning  to  match  his
son  to  Adriana,  the  queen  of  SiciUa,  whom
Floraman  denied  to  love,  or  in  this  to  grant
to  his  father's  mind  ;  but  rather  endeavoured
to  follow  his  lady,  whose  absence  procm-ed
the  languishing  of  his  life.    The  king  well
noting  the  intent  of  I'loranian,  that  he  could
not  fancy  his  father's  choice,  by  secret  trea-
son in  the  duke  of  Sicilia's  court,  he  found
the   means  to  poison  the   fair  Aliea,    The
duke  misdoubting  that  the  untimely  death  of
his  daughter  was  procured  by  some  unna-
tural mean,  because  she  was  so  soon  sick,
and  so  suddenly  gone,  sent  for  Larisa,  her
chamber-woman,  and  by  force  of  tormenta
made  her  confess  the  whole  manner  of  her
dcadi.     Then  having  learnt  the  truth,  order-
ed the  body  of  his  daughter  to  be  embalmed.


Í6l

and  placed  it  in  a  tomb  of  black  marble,
M  hereon  the  whole  history  of  her  life  was  in-
scribed, and  upon  the  tomb  Death  was  sculp^
tured,  as  hideous  as  he  is  always  pourtraycd.
This  rare  piece  of  workmanship  he  laid  in  a
chariot  and  led  into  the  field  ;  and  collecting
all  his  vassals,  began  to  make  war  upon  the
king  ;  but  it  availed  him  little,  for  the  king's
power  was  so  much  greater  than  his  own,
that  he  was  routed  in  the  first  battle.  Prince
Fioraman,  in  the  day  of  battle,  with  a  com-
pany of  well  appointed  knights,  brake
through  the  ranks  and  entered  the  camp,
from  whence  he  took  the  chariot  with  the
tomb.  So  riding  presently  to  a  port  of  the
sea,  he  took  shipping,  and  coasted  towards
the  Turk's  dominion  ;  and  finding  his  solitary
castle,  he  lived  there  bemoaning  the  act  of
his  father,  and  the  unfortunate  death  of  his
fair  Altea.

In  this  place  remained  Floraman,  till  such
time  as  Palmerin  visited  him,  as  you  have
heard  ;  and  although  it  was  the  good  for-
tune of  Pabierin  to  conquer  him  (who  was
r  3


162

bolh  wasted  with  mourning,  and  gro\\-n
into  great  debility  by  his  exceeding  sorrow,)
vet  was  Floraman  a  knight  of  singular
prowess.  Long  he  staid  in  that  comfortless
place  ;  till  at  last  the  king  his  father  undcr-
stunding  where  he  was,  found  means  to  carry
vft"  from  him  the  tomb,  without  his  knowmg
the  loss  till  it  was  too  late  to  recover  it.
And  in  his  discontent  that  he  should  have
been  defeated  in  such  a  quarrel,  he  besought
forgiveness  of  his  lady,  in  such  words  as
these  :  Alas,  my  Altea,  impute  not  this  con-
quest to  any  right  in  mine  enemy,  but  rather
to  the  feeble  and  weak  assaults  of  your  ser-
vant, which  extreme  sorrow  hath  caused.
Wherefore,  to  make  amends  for  this  great
mischance,  and  that  you  may  know  your
knight  csteemeth  none  but  you,  I  will  in
my  adventures  so  blaze  your  memory,  that
all  ladies  shall  report  you  are  the  only  Altea;
and  cause  them  to  know,  she  is  as  yet  unbora
that  must  be  your  equal.  Then  he  departed
thence,  still  using  his  black  armour,  and
the  shield  wherein  death  was  painted  ;  using
no  other  name  for  himsellj  but  the  knight  of


163

Death.  And  "what  rare  adventures  were  by
him  atchievcdj  in  the  honour  of  his  lady,
and  great  reputation  of  himself,  you  shall
he  at  large  certified  in  the  sequel  of  thiu
historv-


154


CHAPTER  20.


"When  the  knight  of  Fortune  had  conquered
Floraman,  he  proceeded  on  his  journey,  be-
ing somewhat  the  less  sorrowful  for  this  little
service  which  he  had  rendered  to  his  lady  ;
which  Selviam  perceiving,  made  him  take
food,  a  thing  which  till  then  he  had  not
done  ;  and  venturing  to  speak  anon  freely,
reminded  him  how  great  an  error  it  was  to
be  forgetful  of  himself,  since  that  could
profit  nothing,  and  would  destroy  the  life
with  which  he  might  serve  his  lady.  Pal-
merin  replied,  Selviam,  if  thou  couldest
judge  the  world  of  woes  I  abide  in  my
silent  thoughts,  as  thou  dost  perceive  some
motion,     by     outward    appearance,     thou


165

vouldst  rather  wish  me  in  iny  grave  than
to  see  me  remain  in  tliis  remediless  grief^
\khich  no  way  can  be  remedied^  but  only
by  the  last  extremity,  which  is  death.  That
sorrow  which  is  without  hope  hath  no  cure  ;
and  if  you  would  know  whether  mine  be
such,  remember  the  worth  of  her  who  de-
stroys me  ;  her  high  parentage,  the  great-
ness of  her  state,  and  above  all  that  beauty
6o  different  from  all  others  which  are  lauded
in  the  world  ;  then  call  to  mind  that  I  am
such  an  outcast  of  fortune  that  I  know  not
from  what  blood  I  am  descended,  nor  whe-
ther I  have  any  other  father  than  thy  own,
whom,  what  he  is,  thou  knowcst  ;  what  then
but  death  can  I  look  for,  righteous-  guerdon
of  so  great  presumption  ?

Then  relapsing  mto  his  lamentations,  he  rode
on,  not  knowing  neither  caring  whither  he
went,  till  they  arrived  at  a'  bridge,  where
thev  saw  three  koÍ2;hts  before  them,  who
would  have  passed  over,  but  were  resisted
by  a  knight  who  kept  the  passage  ;  he  was
ready  for  the  joust,  being  armed  in  arms  of
red  and  white  with  silver  waves,  and  hearing


]GG

in  his  shield  a  white  Lull  in  a  grev  field.
One  of  these  three  knights  courageously
gave  eomhat  to  him,  but  was  quickly  set
beside  his  saddle.

The  second  w  ishing  to  revenge  him,  ran  at
him  of  the  Bull,  who  was  ready;  but  this  one
went  to  the  ground  without  an  encounter  ;
for  the  horse  not  bein^  accustomed  to  such
passes,  was  frightened  at  the  bridge,  which
was  a  wooden  one  and  very  high,  so  that  he
started  and  threw  his  rider.  The  third  gave
his  the  spur,  and  met  the  knight  of  trie  Bull
with  such  force  that  both  were  left  on  foot
in  the  middle  of  the  bridge  ;  he  who  kept
the  pass  held  the  reins  fast,  and  sprang  up
again  as  lightly  as  though  he  had  never  lost
his  seat.  The  other,  drawing  his  sword,  de-
manded battle;  that,  replied  he,  I  may  not
do,  for  she,  by  whose  command  I  keep  the
pass,  orders  me  to  do  battle  with  none  but
w  ho  shall  manifestly  bear  the  better  in  the
joust  ;  since  you  have  not  done  this,  no  fault
can  be  laid  to  my  charge.  At  this  the  other
drew  back  in  animer.


167

The  knight  of  Fortune  knowing  these  tliree
knights  that  had  been  foiled   to  be  of  the
emperor's  courr_,  as  Luymanes  of  Burgundy,
Germain  of  Orleans,   and  Tenebrantc,  >vas
not  willing  that  they  should  go  without  their
revenge  :  so  making  at  hira  of  the  Bridge,
who  was  ready  to  receive  him,  he  bore  him
out  of  the  saddle  more  easily  than  the  others
had  beeii  by  him  unhorsed.     Tlien  leapin*!-
from  his  horse,   which   he  could  not    turn
because  of  the   straitness  of  the   brid«:e,  he
found  hini  with  his  sword  drawn   and  his
shield  upon  his  arm.     The  three  beholders
were  dismayed  to  sec   so  brave  a  battle   as
ensued.     But   though  the  blows   which  he
of  the  Bridge  dealt  were  such  as  beseemed
the  dealer,  who  was  a  right  good  knight;
ihose  of  the  knight  of  Fortune  showed  him
the  difference  in  his  flesh,Yor  they  cut  away
the   shield  from  his   ann,  and   strewed  the
bridge  with  the  splinters;  and  so  much  blood
ran  through  the  gaps  in  his   armour,    that
there  was  scarcely  another  knight  who  could
so  long   have  endured  ;  till  at  length  he  of
Fortune  laid  him  at  his  feet,  and  putting  the
point  of  his  sword  at  his  face,  bade  him  vield


168

if  he  -.voiiîd  not  be  slain,  and  tell  whiit  lie
\vos_,  and  wherefore  he    kept  that  passage.
The    kniîïht    of    the  Ball    secin'j;    himself
broufçht   under,  and    hearing   his  demand,
vshich  he  was  very  loth  to  grant,    at    last
diseovercd  himself  as   thus  :  Sir  knight,   it
hath  been  always  my  desire  to  keep  myself
unknown  to  any  ;  not  that  I  hide  my  name
for  fear,  but  till  my  noble   exploits  might
deserve  to  make  me  known  :  understand  that
I  am  son  to  Bon  Buardos  the  famous  prime
of  England,  and  Argonida,  the  lady  of  the
Enehanted  Isle,  having  to  name  Pompides*.
As  concerning  why  I  keep  this  passage,  thus
it  is  :  a  certain  lady,  who  cured  the  wounds
I    received    at   my  last  eneouuter,  against
two  knights  whom  I  slew,  commanded  me
to  keep  this  passage  until  I  should  win  a
knight  whom    she    greatly  desireth.      And


*  Pompides  has  some  reason  to  compUiin  of  Francisco  ds
Moraes,  nr  of  whoever  wrote  Palmerin  of  lùiglaiid.  The  ,
author  of  Primaleon  designing  him  to  be  the  h.  ro  ot  i^e  next
Romance  in  the  series.  P.  3.  C.  45.  he  s;iys  thiit  ncn?  of
ihe  other  children  of  Duardcs  nearly equJi-d  hin:j  bc^iu  f
Flerida  educated  them  too  delicatelv.


1 69

îiere  have  I  remained  for  the  space  of
twenty  days,  having  been  ]ittle  longer
knighted,  and  now  suH'erin":  from  vour
handá  what  I  did  not  think  to  have  sufiVrcd
from  any.

Tlie  knight  of  Fortune  hearing  his  word?,,
fufferi'd  him  to  ari?e,  and  gave  him  this
aivswor  :  Sir  Ponipides,  of  such  a  person  as
you  it  may  well  be  beheved  that  only  be-
<a;:sc  he  i>  himself  forced  so  to  c.Oj  does
he  ofi'cr  this  force  to  otherá  :  henceforth  seek
other  adventures,  for  there  are  many  in  the
world,  and  leave  thi.-,  in  v\  hicli  you  impede
the  road  which  should  be  open  to  all.  Tb.c
other  vanquished  kniiiiits,  vlio  greatly  de-
sired to  have  knowledge  of  the  knight  of
l'ortune,  approached  him  with  that  intent  ;
but  lie  choosing  to  remain  unknown,  took  his
leave  courteously  and  departed.  They  also
then  went  their  way  in  search  of  Palmerin,
V  horn  they  had  set  out  from  the  emperor's
court  to  seek,  being  greatly  his  friends.
I'ompides  remained  in  such  plight  that  he
was  carried  upon  a  litter  to  a  neighbouring
ca5tle_,  where  he  was  healed,  it  was  not
2


170

many  days  since  he  had  received  the  order
of  knighthood  Ironi  the  hands  of  king  Frisol
of  Hungary  ;  and  going  about  the  uorld  to
seek  news  of  his  father,  he  came  to  these
parts,  where  what  you  have  now  heard  be-
fell him.


171


CHAPTER  21.


The  knight  of  the  Savage  Man,  ^vho  behaved
himself  so  bravely  at  Constantinople,  endea-
vouring himself  in  travel,  fortune  directed
his  course  to  the  Sorrowful  Valley,  where
Paudricia  abode  in  her  House  of  Sadness.
To  this  name  all  things  were  conformable  ;
the  trees  dark  and  gloomy,  the  air  damp  and
overshadowed,  the  waters  of  the  river
, mournful  both  in  colour  and  in  sound  ;  in  one
part  where  the  river  formed  a  dark,  smooth,
silent  pool,  there  was  a  knight  under  some
thick  willow  tree,  of  great  stature,  armed  in
plated  mail  of  black  and  yellow,  without
other  mixture  ;  in  his  shield  a  white  swan  iu
a  field  sable  ;  he  rode  upon  a  grey  horse,  and
q2


172

âome  lances  were  placed  again'^t  the  tree<.
The  knight  of  the  \  alley  seeing  hhn  of  the
Savage  ap})roaeh,  blew  a  horn  whieh  hung
from  one  of  the  trees,  which  was  heard  afar,
and  it  seemed  as  if  the  sorrowfulness  of  the
place  exteinlcd  even  to  thing-»  itianimatc;  for
ilie  sound  was  more  dolorous  th;in  delightful.
Tortluvith  upon  the  battlements  of  tluit  habi-
tation.there  was  laid  a  fair  cloth  of  black  velvet,
and  cushions  of  the  same,  when  there  came
a  fair  lady,  with  her  damsels,  and  placed
herself  thereon  to  sec  the  combat.  This  sight
moved  the  knight  of  the  Savage  Man  to  stand
in  a  great  maze,  as  well  to  behold  the  fair
ladies,  as  also  such  a  seemly  knight  in  a
place  of  so  small  fréquentation.  But  of  which
study  to  revive  him,  the  knight  of  the  Swan
sent  his  page,  who  summoned  him  in  this
sort  :  My  lord  and  master  (sir  knight)  whom
you  here  behold,  and  can  no  way  e:<cape«
hath  kept  this  passage  for  this  six  months,  to
the  advancement  of  his  honour,  and  disgrace
of  no  small  company  of  good  and  hardy
knights,  as  their  shields  may  suffice  for  wit-
ness, that  hang  on  yonder  tree;  lie  thercforb-
bath  sent  me,  and  I  in  his  name  soJici;  yór..


173

that  if  cowardly  fear  docs  enforce  you  to
faint,  as  not  daring  to  venture  where  so  many
hath  been  vanquished,  you  are  permitted  the
choice  of  two  extremes  ;  you  must  pass  no
further,  but  return  from  whence  you  came,
or  you  must  vow  to  this  sorrowful  lady,  (who
with  all  her  company  spendeth  the  time  in
wailing,)  never  to  rejoice,  in  remembrance  of
her  grief,  but  to  be  partner  of  her  sadness
while  your  life  endureth.  In  a  remembrance
of  either,  you  must  leave  your  shield  and
your  name  Avritten  on  the  rim  thereof,  for
such  is  the  pleasure  of  the  lady  whom  he
serves.

TlT.e  knight  of  the  Savage  INIan  smiling  at  this
discourse,  sent  his  answer  in  these  words  ;
Thy  conditions  are  both  so  bad,  that  I  choose
to  try  the  force  of  his  arms,  rather  than  sub-
mit to  either.  Upon  this  answer  they  met
together  valiantly,  each  charging  the  other
with  such  knightly  blows,  as  the  ladies  gave
great  commendation  to  the  fight,  hardly
judging  who  was  the  Fikest  of  victory.  They
breathed,  and  fell  to  it  again,  the  knight  of
the  Swan  accounting  himself  well  mated,  and
Q  3


174

the  knight  of  the  Savage  Man  inditTorently
matclicd.  At  length  he  of  the  Valley  waxed
faint,  and  would  fain  have  taken  breath;  but
he  of  the  Savage  Man  pereciving  this,  pressed
on  the  harder,  and  laid  on  so  heavy  a  load  o'
blows,  that  he  brought  him  to  the  ground*
Incontinently  all  the  ladies  who  had  been  be-
holding the  battle  withdrew  from  the  battle-
ments, and  a  lamentation  of  sorrowful  voiees
began  within,  which  moved  the  knight  of  the
Savage  Man  to  resentment  of  their  grief,  and  to
compassion  upon  his  enemy.  Then  unclasping
the  knight  of  the  Swan's  beaver  (who  was  quite
overcome  with  a  grievous  trance)  he  wrought
the  means  to  get  life  in  him  again  ;  whenas
he  charged  him  to  tell  what  be  was,  as  also
wherefore  these  ladies  lived  there,  and  why
he  undertook  to  keep  that  passage  ?  Unto
which  request  the  knight  thus  answered  :  Sir
knight,  I  am  called  Blandidon,  son  to  this
sorrowful  princess  Paudricia,  the  lady  of
this  House  of  Sadness.  Her  manner  of  Hfe^
and  the  reason  why  she  hath  chosen  it,  is  so
well  known  in  the  world,  that  I  need  not  ex-
plain it  :  and  because  I  cannot  find  the
means  to  persuade  my  mother  from  this  sor"


Í7S

i-owfiil  kind  of  life,  but  that  she  will  still  re-
main in  her  vowed  heaviness,  I  have  deter-
mined to  guard  this  passage,  making  all  that
come  here  partakors  of  her  grief;  thinking
that  the  best  thing  in  misery  is  to  have  many
who  partake  it.

The  knight  of  the  Savage  Man,  hearing  the
tale  of  Bkuulidon,  (who  was  esteemed  for  a
knight  of  no  less  valour  than  good  fortune)
advised  him  to  leave  keeping  this  pass,  and
seek  adventures  abroad  ;  the  which  he  pro-
mised; asking  to  know  the  name  of  his  con-
queror, and  beseeching  him  to  be  received  as
his  friend  and  servant.  Sir  knight,  replied  the
other,  I  account  myself  happy  to  meet  with
so  good  a  knight,  whose  company  I  would
gladly  have.  To  resolve  you  what,  and  who
I  am,  you  shall  know  that  I  am  called  the
knight  of  the  Savage  Man.  No  farther  can  I
disclose  my  name,  till  I  am  better  acquaint-
ed with  myself,  then  as  3'et  I  am.  And  now
I  intend  to  hazard  myself  in  the  adventure  of
Great  Britain,  whereas  many  noble  knights
do  enter,  not  heard  of  afterward,  vhom
I  mean  to  bear  company^  or  else  to  end  the


176

great  danger.  Blandidon  would  gladly  have
assayed  this  adventure  also,  hut  the  faint
estate  of  himself  would  not  suffer  him  to  de-
part. Wherefore,  using  such  friendly  greet-
ing at  their  departure,  as  heseenicd  their
profession  and  loyal  intent  of  courtesy,  the
knight  of  the  Savage  Man  took  his  way  on  his
journey,  and  Blandidon  to  the  castle,  to  have
his  wounds  recured.


177


CHAPTER  22.


Croat  was  the  sorrow  that  the  knight  of
Death  sustained  for  the  foil  which  Pahneriu»
the  noble  knight  of  Fortune,  had  given  him  ;
whereof  to  be  revenged,  he  arrived  at  Con-
stantinople, where  before  the  emperor's  pa-
lace he  erected  two  fair  tents,  very  artiticialjy
made  in  workmanship,  all  of  bkick  silk  and
u;oki,  whereon  was  given  to  view  in  brave
jiictures,  the  rare  beauty  of  his  lady  Altea,  as
also  the  whole  course  of  his  mournful  life  ;  a
spectacle  of  great  delight  to  all  that  took
occasion  to  sec  it.  In  tlie  one  of  ihese  tents
V,  as  prepared  furniture  for  his  lodging,  and  in
the  other  stood  four  lusty  coursers,  with
spears  and  weapons  to  maiutain  Xúi^  tourn.v


ITS

ment,  and  on  the  top,  in  an  arch  which  the
portal  of  the  tent  formed,  was  placed  the  per-
fect image  of  his  fair  Altea,  so  fair,  that  set-
ting aside  Polinarda,  there  was  not  a  lady  in
the  court  so  confident  that  it  did  not  excite
envy  in  her.  On  the  hem  of  her  garment  were
letters  that  expressed  her  name.     The  knight
of  Death  having  every  thing  in  readiness,  with
his  two  esquires  attending  on  him,  he  enter-
ed the  emperor's  palace,  attired  in  his  accus^
tomed  armoar,    having  only  his  head  and
hands  unarmed:  then  kneeling  down  to  kiss
his  majesty's  hand,  he  was  not  suffered  as  he
would,"  but  was  kept  back  ;  which  he  abiding
very  patiently,  began  to  stir  his  eyes  upon
the  empress  and  her  courtly  ladies,  to  see  if
he  could  find  the  lady  that  might  for  beauty
compare  with  his  Altea  ;  and  after   a  good
whiU''s  pause,  ir.  this  order  he  began  to  ren-
der his  speeches.    Most  puissant  emperor,
let  not  my  boldness  be  admitted  to  any  ill
intent,  or  my  rude  behaviour  to  merit  your
gracio'us  disliking,  to  whom  I  not  only  vow
my  heart  and  hand,   but  my  unfeigned  ser-
vice t,5  the  hour  of  my  death.     I  am  thai
knight  whose  misfortunes  cannot  be  recount-


179

ed,  for  that  all  my   life   hitlierto  hath  beea
nothing  but  misery:  for  fortune,  not  satisfied
with  having  taken   the  fair  Altcafrom  my
sight,  rubbeth  a  fresh  grief  upon  the  green
wound,    in   sending  a   knight    to  break    off
my    silent    devotions  ;  who    repining  that  I
should  extol  my  lady  above  his  saint,  entered
the  fight,  which  returned  to  my  foil  ;  he  bare
away  the  victory,   and    1   was    vanquished.
Thus  have  I  been  ever  indamaged,  every  way
distressed  (and  may  say  what  no  knight  can
i»ay),  I   am  the    only  man  for  mishap.     Anl
because  I  will  hot  be  reputed  so  ingrateful
to  my  lady,  that  one  repulse  shall  make  me
forsake  her  sweet  shrine,  I  have  vowed  in  all
princes'  courts  to  extol  her  beauty,  to  whom
I  can  esteem  none  equal.    And  those  knights
who  honour  their  ladies,  and  dare  contend
with  my  Altea  in  their  quarrel,  either  for
beauty  or  bounty,  I  am  ready  to  give  combat
to.  The  order  appointed  in  this  fight,  under
your  gracious  leave  requested,  is,  that  those
knights  who  esteem  their  quarrel  so  good  as
to  enter  the  field  for   the  beauty  of  their
ladies,  shall  bring  with  them  her  portrait  for
whose  sake  they  adventure,  or  some  pledge


ISO

instead  tliereof,  to  remain  with  tKc  conqueror»
beside,  if  my  hap  be  so  good  as  to  gain  the
victory,  they  must  enter  my  tent,  to  render
their  armour,  and  their  names  to  be  then  re-
gistered ;  if  my  enemy  prevail,  he  shall  be
master  of  all  :  but  none  shall  enter  com-
bat \^ith  the  sword,  unless  he  shall  have
equalled  me  in  the  joust.  Your  highness  may
be  judge,  that  every  thing  may  be  decided
justly.  I  now  return  to  my  tent,  to  expect
the  comino;  of  him  that  shall  first  adventure-
Thus  takinp;  leave,  be  departed  to  his  tent,
the  emperor  remaining  desirous  to  know  ot
«whence  he  was  ;  which  was  declared  to  him
bv  some  of  his  court,  that  he  was  FloraivuiU;
son  to  the  kinir  of  Sardinia.

His  coming  caused  so  great  ii  stir,  that
presently  more  than  ten  knights  were  at  the
place  appointed.  The  first  who  enterpri/ed
-was  prince  Graciano,  of  France,  for  the  love
of  Claricia,  diJ-ughter  to  king  Poleudos.  Be-
ibre  he  began  the  joust,  he  drew  from  his  fin-
ger a  ring  with  a  ruby  of  great  price,  Avhich
she  had  giveo  him  on  the  day  of  the  tourna-
i»cnt,in  token  that  hc  was  Ijcr  knight  ;  tl>jb  bc


181

gave  to  the  judges.  He  rode  upon  a  bright
chesnut  horse,  full  ot"  black  spots;  his  arms
were  azure  and  gold,  and  in  his  shield  he  bore
a  damsel  in  a  green  field,  with  her  face  co"
vered.  Before  he  lowered  his  lance,  direct-
ing his  eyes  towards  the  windows  of  the  em-
press, he  fixed  them  upon  his  lady  and  said.
For  a  thing  so  clear  as  that  you  are  fairer  than
Altea,  it  is  needless  to  ask  your  aid;  then
laying  heels  to  his  horse,  he  ran  at  Flora-
man,  and  though  the  encounter  was  a  lull
one  and  a  strong,  yet  neither  went  to  tlic
ground.  A  second  course  they  ran  with  the
like  knightly  behaviour;  then  the  knight  of
Death  drew  towards  the  image  which  was  over
the  tent,  saying.  Lady,  albeit  in  those  things
for  which  I  have  besought  succour  from  you,
you  have  alway  refused  it,  nevertheless,  deny
it  not  now  in  this  which  is  for  your  own  ser-
vice ;  with  that,  holding:  the  lance  firm  under
his  arm,  they  met  a  third  time  with  such
force  and  furv,  that  Floraman  tottered  in  lii
saddle,  but  Graciano  went  to  the  ground  ;
whereat  he  remained  so  discontented,  that  i-
he  could  have  compounded  for  that  disple
sure  with  all  his  father's  kingdom^  he  v.oulu

VOL.  I.  R


18í2

have  thought  it  cheaply  bargained.    The  em-
peror, though  he  felt  for  the   overthrow  of
his  grandson,  yet  held  for  much  the  bravery
of  the  strange  knight,  and  began  to  fear  that
his  court  would  be  found  in  fault.     Floraman
then  required  Graciano  to  give  him  his  arms,
according   to  the    condition  of   the  joust:
Whoever   adventures  in   them,  replied    the
prince,  must  some  time  or    other  feel    the
trouble  which  they  bring  with  them.    Then
was  he  led  into  the  tent,  where  he  resigned
his  armour,  and  his  name  was  written  on  the
place  appointed.     Then  approached  Goarira,
brother  to  the  prince  Graciano.    Hejousted
Avithout  a  pledge,  for  Clariana  whom  he  serv-
ed  would  give  him  none,  having  delivered
her  heart  elsewhere.  In  the  first  encounter  he
was  overthrown,  and  left  his  arms  and  liis
name  with  hi?  brother's.     After  these,  came
Fr agonal  the  Agile,  Flaminiano,  Rocandor,
Esmeraldo  the  Fair,  and  others,  in  all  ten  in
number,  whom  the  emperor  greatly  esteem-
ed ;  and  all  left  their  arms,  and  pledges,  and
names  written  in  that  apartment  of  the  tent
■which   Floraman  called    the    Sepulchre    of
liovers.


183

The  emperor  commanded    the  tournament
should  end  for  that  day,  that  the  victor  might
rest.  Other  good  knights  prepared    for   the
morrow,  each  so  confident  in  his  Lady's  beau-
ty, that  he  thought  the  time  long.  That  even-
ing there  was  a  ball,  at  the  which  the  ladies
and  gentlewomen  made  such  estimation  of
Ploraman  as  his  singular  prowess  and  haugh-
ty  courage   deserved;  which  made  him   in
sighs   to  think  upon  his  Altea,  whose  com-
mendation was  ever  best  welcome   to  him;
yet  he  dissembled  his  grief,  giving  it    vent
only  in  secret  sighs  ;  for  sighs  and  tears  are
the  only  iiidulgencie»  of  sorrow.


R  2


184


CHAPTER  23,


The  knight  of  Death  on  the  next  morning
came  forth  hefore  his  tent,  attired  in  black
armour,  v.hereon  Nvas  painttid  in  divers
places,  the  resemblance  of  a  woman's  face
fcen  through  shrubs,  and  in  his  shield  was.
figured  a  knight  of  sorrowful  aspect,  sur-
rounded by  many  deaths,  who  all  fled  from
him;  the  whole  so  naturally  pourtrayed^  as
moved  the  beholders  to  fear  of  those  ugly
anatomies,  and  compassion  of  the  man.  He
sat  upon  a  dark  flame-coloured  horse,  leaning
upon  his  lance,  the  hilt  of  which  rested  upon
the  ground,  and  his  eyes  upon  the  image  of
Altea,  as  full  of  love  as  though  she  were  still
living.     Lady,   said  ho,   this  is  the  day  re-


185

sers'ed  for  the  remedy  of  my  evil  fortune  ;  for
to-day  shall  women  see  the  diifereuce  be-
tween themselves  and  vou,  and  their  knio-hts
and  me,  who  am  yoiuá.

To  break  oif  these  imaginations,  Polinardo,
the  brother  of  prince  Vernao,  presented  him-
self. He  came  to  the  gate  of  the  lists  in
arms  of  red  and  grey,  with  silver  doves  so
cunningly  rivetted  on,  that  the  whole  appear-
ed one  piece.  He  bore  a  damsel  upon  his
shield  in  a  field  or,  with  her  face  turned  so
that  it  could  not  be  seen  ;  this  he  did  for  Po-
linarda,  Primaleon's  daughter,  whom  in  his
heart  he  loved,  though  neither  to  her  nor  to
other  had  he  ever  disclosed  it.  The  judges
of  the  joust  willed  him  to  deliver  his  favour,
because  it  was  the  order  of  the  fight  ;  to
whom  he  answered.  This  is  the  day  on  which
I  hope  to  win  one.  The  knight  of  Death  re-
plied. Many  a  good  knight  hath  thought  so,
and  yet  hath  been  deceived.

So   without  more   words  they  encountered

fiercely;  their  lances    broke  in  pieces;  the

horses  niet,  and  with  such  force  that  PolL-

R  3


186

nardo's,  having  his  shoulder  broken,  fell,  and
his  master  with  him  :  Floraman  staggered  two
paces  back,  but  recovered.     Polinardo  called
for  another  to  renew  the  joust  ;   out  to  this
rioraman  would  not  consent,  saying,  That
whoso  enterprises  such  things  as  this  should
come  so  provided  as  to  stand  in  need  of  no-
thing.    Upon  this  there  ensued  a  hot  debate,
till  the  emperor  ocdered  Polinardo  to  retire,
AS  ho  obeyed  in  anger,and  would  neither  yield
his  arms,  nor  confess   himself  vanquished.
The  knight  of  "Death,  in  bis  wrath  that  full
justice  was  not  done  him,  in  denying  that
vvhich  was  his  right  and  title  to  have,  smote
down   five    other   knights    before    he    took
food.

By  this  time  it  drew  toward  dinner,  and  the
emperor  with  the  ladies  withdrew,  all  extoll-
ing the  valour  of  the  strange  knight  to  the
stars.  When  dinner  was  ended,  they  went
forth  again,  continuing  that  afternoon  in
their  sport,  to  the  foil  of  many  a  good
knight;  for  though  many  adventured,  and
among  them  Onistaldo,  Dramiante,  and
Belisarte,  yet  Floraman  so  did  his  eiidea-


187

vour  that  he  bore  away  the  victory  from  alî,
and  his  chamber,  the  Sepulchre  of  Lovers,
was  full  of  spoils.

AVhen  they  were  ready  to  leave  oif  their
pastime,  the  sun  being  about  to  set,  there
came  riding  up,  as  if  from  a  distance,  a
knight,  whose  armour  was  beset  all  with
green  spheres,  bearing  in  his  shield  likewise
a  sphere  of  the  same  colour  ;  he  rode  upon  a
roan  horse  stained  with  blood,  which  made
hira  look  the  fairer,  and  in  passing  made
obeisance  to  the  emperor  and  empress  ;  then
advancifig  towards  Floraman,  before  the
judges  spake  to  him,  as  a  man  who  knew
what  was  to  be  done,  he  drew  from  his  bosom
a  tablet  with  a  circle  of  gold  and  precious
stones  round  about  it,  wherein  was  lively  pic-
tured the  fair  face  of  Onistalda,  daughter  to
the  duke  Drajws  of  Normandy  ;  and  looking
stedfastly  upon  it  before  he  delivered  it  up,
said.  Lady,  I  am  without  you,  but  not  without
hope  of  obtaining  what  others  who  have
sought  the  same  have  failed  to  win,  because
I  fight  for  the  truth.  Remember  that  this
battle  is  concerning  your  beauty,  and  my


188

loss  tlien  is  yours;  favour  me  therefore  in
this,  though  in  nothing  else.  Then  gave  tie
the  tablet  to  the  judges  with  much  courtesyj
and  lowei'ing  his  lance^  advanced  to  meet
Floraman,  who  angrily  beheld  the  extremity
of  passion  in  which  he  indulged.  They  put
spurs  to  their  horses,  and  met  with  such
puissance  together,  that  they  were  both
thrown  to  the  earth  ;  when  drawing  their
swords  they  charged  one  another  so  bravely,
that  tliis  combat  bare  the  commentlatiou
above  all  that  had  yet  been  seen  there.

Great  desire  had  the  emperor  to  know  the
knight  of  the  Sphere,  They,  as  men  who
remembered  that  their  battle  was  concern-
ing the  beauty  of  their  ladies,  wrought  such
marvels  as  love  can  display  in  those  who
combat  for  him.  Thus  they  continued  till
the  sun  was  well  nigh  set,  and  they  in  such
plight  as  might  be  expected  from  the  cruel
blows  they  had  received  ;  then  they  sepa-
rated for  a  while  to  take  breath.  The  knight
of  Death  beheld  his  armour  all  slashed  and
broken,  so  that  the  countenance  of  his  lady
was  defaced  ;  at  which  he  exclaimed.  Ah,


189

lady  !  How  can  I  desire  your  favour,
suffering  your  blameless  face  to  be  thus
offended  ?  but  now  I  ask  nothing  more  to-
wards victory  than  the  strength  which  this
sight  hath  given  me.  On  the  other  hand,
he  of  the  Sphere  was  saying,  O  my  lady,
Onistalda  !  how  is  it  that  you  do  not  remem-
ber my  strength  is  only  according  to  your
remembrance  of  me?  look  at  my  present
state,  and  desert  me  not  in  it  ;  the  battle  is
upon  the  difference  which  there  is  between
you  and  other  women  ;  let  not  the  lie  of  an-
other be  mighty  enough  to  overpower  this
truth.  With  that  they  fell  to  again,  hand-
ling each  other  so  cruelly,  that  both  were
hardly  able  to  stand  for  weakness.  By  this
time  it  waxed  very  dark  ;  and  because  they
would  not  give  over,  and  delay  their  com-
bat till  the  next  day,  the  emperor  caused
torches  to  be  lighted,  which  made  the  lists
as  light  as  day.  And  now  each  being
ashamed  to  see  that  the  battle  had  con-
tinued so  long,  they  loose  their  swords,  now
so  blunted  that  they  could  not  cut  with
them,  and  grappled  body  to  body  ;  in  which
struggle  their  wounds  opened,  with  iuch  losa


190

of  bióod  that  there  was  but  enough  left  to
support  their  limbs.  The  strange  knight  had
received  a  deep  cut  in  his  left  leg,  in  conse-
quence of  which  lie  fellj  and  Fioraman  fell
upon  him,  being  himself  so  hurt  that  he
scarce  knew  the  victory  to  be  his.  Howbeit,
having  more  recollection  than  the  other,  he
imlaced  his  helmet,  and  prepared  to  cut  off  his
head.  But  the  judges  prevented  hira,  accord-
ing him  the  victory,  and  delivering  him  the
tablet  with  the  picture,  and  the  arms  of  the
vanquished  ;  so  he  was  carried  into  his  tent.

When  it  was  known  that  the  vanquished
knight  was  Beroldo  prince  of  Spain,  then
was  the  valour  of  Floraman  the  more  ac-
counted of.  But  the  emperor  could  not  con-
ceal his  sorrow,  it  was  so  great,  and  he  sent
him  to  his  palace,  where  he  was  carefully
tended  until  his  health  was  perfectly  restored;
yet  he  v.'as  marvellously  otfended  with  him-
self, that  his  lady  past  without  the  honour  of
the  day.

The  knight  of  Death  could  bear  no  armour
a  great  while  after,  for  that  he  had  fouud


191

the  puissance  of  prince  Beroldo  of  no  less
force  than  worthy  commendation.  But  when
he  had  gained  his  good  estate  of  health,  he
still  maintained  his  quarrel  against  many
strange  knights,  of  whom  by  his  good  for-
tune he  had  always  the  victory,  replenishing
his  Sepulchre  of  Lovers  to  liis  own  heart's
content.  And  the  emperor  Palmerin  gave
him  such  honour,  in  the  time  he  en-
dured his  adventure,  that  he  was  doubly  en-
couraged to  maintain  the  beauty  of  his  lady
Ahea.


1.9Í2


CHAPTER    24.


Enduring  the  tournament  of  the  knight  of
Death^many  noble  princes  and  valiant  knights
left  oft'  search  of  the  strayed  princes,  and
came  to  Constantinople  to  defend  the  beauty
of  their  ladies  ;  which  caused  the  knight  of
Deathj  having  ahvay  prosperous  fortune,  to
leave  his  black  armour,  the  image  of  his  hea-
viness, and  bear  new  arms  of  green  and
white,  all  beset  with  pelicans  of  gold,  every
one  holding  in  their  bills  a  heart  as  haughty
as  his  own  courage.  His  shield  was  also  an"
swerable  thereto,  bearing  in  the  midst  a  gold-
en pelican,  upon  a  ground  of  sinople.  But
now  to  his  brave  victories  we  will  leave  the
kiiight  of  Death,  and  declare  what  happened


193

tlie  knight   of  Fortune,   when  he  had  left
Pompides.

After  that  to  his  own  renown,  and  honour  of
many  princes'  courts,  he  had  succoured  the
distress  of  many  defamed  ladies,  and  borne
away  the  prize  from  many  famous  knights.
Coming  forth  of  a  forest  in  Hungary,  which
was  upon  the  conhnes  of  Greece,  he  met  a
knight  mounted  on  a  mulberry  courser,  and
attired  in  green  armour,  which  was  all  hack-
ed and  hewed;  and  though  his  shield  also  was
defaced  with  dents  of  many  a  fight,  he  remem-
tered  him  to  be  the  knight  that  came  with
the  knight  of  the  Savage  Man  to  Constanti-
nople, which  caused  him  in  gentle  manner
to  oiicr  him  salutations  ;  whereupon  the
Green  knight  put  forth  this  demand  :  Perad-
venture,  sir  knight,  I  may  by  you  hear  news
of  which  I  am  greatly  desirous.  He  of  For-
tune answered,  I  am  so  luckless  a  one  that  I
kttow  not  whether  I  can  give  you  good  tid-
ings of  any  thing.  Quoth  the  Green  one,
I  would  gladly  know  if  in  your  travel  you
chanced  to  meet  with  a  knight  in  such  ar-
mour as  you  see  pic  wear,  carrying  for  his


Ií)4

device  in  his  shield  a  savnge  man  leading
two  lions,  in  a  leash,  in  a  field  of  silver.  I
would  myself  (answered  the  knight  of  For-
tune) gladly  know  where  he  is,  for  that  my
travel  is  partly  to  seek  him  ;  hut  I  know  not
whether  you  and  I  seek  him  with  the  same
will.

Certes,  quoth  the  Green  knight,  I  will  know
what  yours  is,  and  if  he  hath  done  any
thing  that  doth  displease  you,  behold  me
here  who  will  answer  in  his  cause.  Displea-
sure as  yet,  replied  he  of  Fortune,  I  have  re-
ceived from  none,  but  only  a  lady  from  which
I  deserve  it  not.  As  for  the  knig;ht  of  whoin
you  enquire,  suffice  it  to  knov.'  that  I  should
gîadly  meet  him,  and  go  your  v/ay  ;  for
though  I  remember  him  well,  I  remember
other  things  better.  I  am  not  so  accustom-
ed to  live  in  doubt,  cried  he  of  the  Green
arms,  that  I  should  choose  to  continue  in  this
with  which  you  would  leave  me;  tell  me  why
you  wish  to  meet  him,  or  look  to  yourself.
With  that  he  lowered  his  lance  and  ran  at
him  ;  he  of  Fortune  had  no  time  to  do  more
ihan  avoid  the  encounter^  and  not  waiting  to


1P5

take  his  lance  from  Sehiam,   he  drew  his
sword.   The  other  turned  and  rode   at  him
again;  and  though  he  did  not  miss  his  blow
this  time,  but  broke  his  spear  into  splinters,
did  not  move  him  in  his  seat  ;  he  himself  in
passing  took  with  him  such  a  blow  from  the
knight  of  Fortune's  sword  as  cut  away  a  third
part  of  his  shield,  and  left  him  with  less  pride
and  more  fear  than  he  began  with.  Howbeit,
drawing  his  sword,  then  began  a  brave  battle
between  them,  till  the  horse  of  the  Green
knight,  being  weary  with  the  toil  of  that  day
and  with  long  travelling,  fell  with  his  master-
the  knight  lightly  voided  his  saddle  with  that
promptness  which  in  such  cases  is  needful  ;
^vhich  the  knight  of  Fortune  seeing,  alighted
also.    And  then,   as  they  could  reacireach
other  now,  they  dealt   with  each   other  at
pleasure,  smiting  and  slashing  without  mer-
cy.  Atlength  the  Green  knight  waxed  very
feeble  ;  and  the  knight  of  Fortune  perceiving
n,  and  unwilling  that  the  fight  should  be  con''-
nued  to  his  death,  would  have  drawn  off:  but
he,  who  understood  wherefore  he  did  this,  at-
tacked him  anew,    saying.  Finish  what  you
have  begun  ;  I  am  not  so  desirous  of  hfe  that
s  2


\9G

î  would  possess  it  without  honour.  I  am
glad,  quoth  he  of  Fortune,  that  you  perœiv-
ed  my  intent  ;  but  since  it  meets  with  so  un-
gracious a  return,  t^ke  your  requital.  And  he
had  hardly  finished  these  words,  when  he
gave  him  a  blow  upon  the  helmet  with  all  his
force,  which  brought  him  upon  his  knees;
then  laying  hands  on  him,  he  threw  him
down,  and  made  semblance  as  if  he  would
cut  off  his  head.  The  Green  one  seeing  him-
self in  such  plight,  said.  Sir  knight,  though
1  rejected  your  courtesy  in  regard  to  my  own
honour,  it  is  not  well  that  you  should  slay
me.  You  have  gained  upon  my  person  that
which  is  of  most  price  ;  all  beyond  this  is
work  of  cruelty,  with  which  oftentime  vic-
tory is  disgraced.  You  have  so  well  defend-
ed yourself,  replied  he  of  Fortune,  that  I
should  repent  to  do  what  I  threaten,  and  yet
do  it  I  will  unless  you  tell  me  who  you  are,
and  who  the  knight  of  the  Savage  is.  Trust
me,  sir,  (answered  the  Green  knight)  as  con-
cerning the  knight  of  the  Savage  Man,  hi*
name,  nor  of  whence  he  cometh  is  known  un-
to me  ;  nevertheless,  if  I  did  know  it,  and  he
bad  desired  me  to  keep  in  secret,  you  should


19?

have  my  life  before  I  would  discover  him.  As
for  myself,  I  am  called  Don  Rosiram  De  l.i
Brunda,  son  to  sir  Pridos,  duke  of  ^^  ale?
and  Cornwall.  This  is  all  ihat  I  can  declare;
which  if  it  will  not  suffice  you,  finish  what
you  have  begun,  and  be  content.

The  knight  of  Fortune,  satisfied  with  this
answer,  mounted  on  horseback,  giving  him
this  farewel:  it  had  been  better  sir  Rosi-
ram that  this  quarrel  had  not  proceeded  so
far  ;  for  though  the  fault  was  yours,  the  hurt
could  not  but  fall  to  both,  as  my  armour
çiarked  by  your  hands  bears  token.  And  so
Selviam  and  he  departed,  and  took  up  their
lodging  that  night  in  a  castle,  where  by  a
lady  he  was  cured  of  such  wounds  as  he  had
4'eceived.

But  concerning  why  sir  Rosiram  departed
from  the  knight  of  the  Savage  Man,  the  his-
tory declareth,  that  it  chanced  in  this  order  :
After  they  were  come  two  days'  journey
from  Constantinople,  it  fortuned  they  met  a
child,  riding  a  great  pace,  and  using  a  heavy
clamour  all  the  way  as  he  rode  :  to  whom
S3


\9^

they  advanced  themselves,  desirous  to  know
the  cause  of"  his  complaints  :  to  whom  the
child  declared,  that  three  knights  had  taken
a  damsel  from  him,  to  abuse  her  honour  j
wherefore  he  requested  them,  as  they  tender-
ed the  estate  of  ladies,  so  they  would  help  to
defend  her  from  injury.

This  heavy  tale  urged  them  to  ride  withliim
till  by  fortune  tiiey  met  with  the  damsel,  in
tlie  forest  of  the  Clear  Fountain,  who
brought  the  shield  from  the  sage  Daliarte  to
deliver  to  Palmerin,  whom  the  knight  of  the
Savage  Man  was  desirous  to  know.  When
Don  Rosiram  saw  how  he  had  taken  the
shield  from  her,  and  sent  her  with  the  mes-
sage you  have  heard  before,  he  desired  that
he  might  accompany  the  child,  to  relieve  the
distressed  cst.'ite  of  the  lady,  promising  to  re-
turn to  what  place  he  would  appoint.  After
leave  obtained,  he  departed  with  him,  and
had  such  good  fortune,  that  he  slew  two  of
the  knights  in  combat,  and  compelled  the
third  to  flight,  himself  being  sore  hurt;
wherefore  being  long  delayed  by  the  cure  of
his  wounds,  whca  at  last  he  came  to  ihc


159

place  of  meeting,  his  friend  was  far  away  ;
so  he  went  through  the  world  seeking  him,
lill  he  met  with  the  knight  of  Fortune.

But  because  yon  shall  be  certified  why  he
was  called  De  la  Brunda,  you  shall  hear
what  in  the  English  Chronicles  is  affirmed
for  this  matter.  King  Mark  had  by  his  queen
Ysolt,  a  daughter  named  Ysolt  also,  who
was  thought  by  some  to  be  the  daughter  of
Tristram,  She  being  joined  in  marriage  with
Urgel  Blasonante,  the  duke  of  Wales,  had
a  son  by  him,  named  Blasonan  De  la  Brun-
da, duke  of  A\'ales,  and  Cornwall,  who
espoused  Morlota,  daughter  to  the  king
Charlian,  of  Ireland  ;  who  having  a  son
by  her,  at  her  request  named  him  Mor-
lot  de  la  Brunda  ;  and  in  this  manner
did  the  name  continue  to  the  dukes  of
Wales^  till  it  came  to  the  father  of  Pridos,
who  gave  it  to  his  grandson,  that  so  old  and
honourable  a  name  might  not  be  lost.  To
return  to  Sir  Roseram,  Ilobrante  his  squire
bound  up  his  wounds,  and  carried  him  to  a
convent  of  friars  which  was  hard  by,  where
he  was  carefully  attended,  the  brethren  of


200
that  house  being  holy  men,  and  of  good
hves,  who  had  all  things  needful  in  such
cases  at  liand,  remembering  that  it  be-
came them  to  be  charitable  for  the  loVe  of
Coil.


SOI


CHAPTER  25.


The  knight  of  Fortune  remained  in  the  cas-
tle of  the  lady,  who  was  called  Rianda^  till
he  felt  himself  able  to  travel.  One  night
as  he  was  talking  with  her  after  supper
concerning  his  departure,  a  damsel,  her
niece,  knocked  at  the  door,  who  lived
with  the  empress  of  Constantinople,  and
had  left  the  court  the  day  after  the  bat-
tle between  Floraman  and  Beroldo,  to  vi-
sit this  her  aunt,  who  was  very  rich,  and  had
no  other  heir.  The  knight,  little  thinking
that  she  who  approached  was  Lucenda,  with
■whom  he  had  been  brought  up,  thought  not
of  conceaUng  himself  till  it  was  too  late;
whereupon  he  went  up  to  her,  saying,  Liady


Í202

Lucenda,\vUat  brings  you  here  so  far  from  the
land  where  I  left  you  ?  She  perceiving  that  it
was  Palmerin,  embraced  him  saying,  I  would
not  advise  you  to  return  there  Unless  you  take
with  you  some  excuse  for  the  fault  you  com-
mitted in  leaving  it  so  secretly.  The  empe-
ror and  his  knights  thiuk  more  than  I  will
speak,  and  the  ladies  judge  worse  of  yon
than  I  can  say  ;  in  that,  the  one  imputeth  it
to  your  small  friendship,  and  the  other  sup-
pose you  owe  them  small  favour.  It  is  plain
that  you  are  no  lover,  since  now  the  ladies
stand  in  need  of  you  you  do  not  appear,  to
revenge  them  upon  prince  Floraman,  who
hath  done  them  such  wrong.  The  knight  of
Fortune,  upon  this,  enquired  who  prince  Flo-
raman  was,  and  how  he  had  wronged  them  ;
and  the  damsel  told  him  all  that  had  passed  :
a  recital  which  left  him  with  less  satisfaction
than  what  his  late  victories  had  occasioned.
Presently  he  called  to  mind  that  this  might
be  he  whom  he  had  found  among  the  ruins
and  had  already  conquered;  then  remem-
bering that  all  this  past  in  the  sight  of  the  fair
Polinarda,  his  lady,  he  could  ill  dissemble  his
anger.    It  was  now  late  ;  so  bidding  them  the


203

good  niglít,  he  retired  to  his  hed,  where  he
lay  with  less  sleep  than  usual,  little  as  that
usual  had  been,  blaming  himself  that  Flora-
man  should  so  long  have  been  triumphant.
On  the  other  hand,  remembering  the  com-
mand of  his  lady  that  he  should  not  appear
"before  her,  he  knew  not  what  to  do.  To  dis-
obey her  was  a  thought  not  to  be  entertained,
and  to  let  the  falshood  of  Floraman  pass  so
victoriously,  not  to  be  endured.  In  this  trou-
ble of  spirit  he  past  the  ni^ht,  nor  was  he  de-
cided when  day  appeared.  Howbeit,  he  de-
termined at  last  rather  to  err  in  proving  him-
self against  Floraman,  than  to  keep  away  and
remain  doubtful  whether  he  did  right.  On
the  morrow  therefore  he  donned  his  arms,
and  taking  leave  of  Riandaand  Luv-enda,  put
himself  in  the  road  to  Constantinople.  Ne-
vertheless, many  times  his  mind  misgave  him,
and  he  turned  the  reins  back,  remembering
the  command  of  his  lady  ;  but  Selviam  at
such  times  reasoned  with  him,  saying,  Consi-
der with  yourself;  if  you  forsake  your  lady  in
such  great  extremity,  how  can  you  think
yourself  worthy  at  any  time  to  have  her  fa-
vour? Go  forward!  it  will  be  a  greater  error


204

to  let  his  insolence  pass  unpunished,  than  to
go  where  she  hath  fbibidden  you,  since yout
going  is  for  her  service;  the  more  so,  as  what
she  said,   doubtless  she   presently  repented.
Inasmuch  as  anger  always  brings  on  repent-
ance.    With  such  reasons  as  these   Selviam
cheered  him   on,  till   after   travelling   some
days  without  adventure  to  delay  them,  they
came  in  sight  of  the  great  city  of  Constant!^
nople,  on  a  Sunday,   at  the  hour  of  vespers.
There  Palmerin  beholding  the  palace,   and
the  chamber  of  his  lady  Polinarda,  he  fell
into  a  multitude  of  amorous  complaints,  ut-
tering a  thousand  passionate  vanities,  such  iis
men  in  like  case  are  wont  to  find  ready  for
utterance.  But  Selviam  left  him  not,  till  with
his  wonted  persuasion  he  had  recalled  him  to
remember  where  he  was.     At  this  time  Titu-
bante of  Greece  had  just  finished  his  combat
with  Floraman.  He  served  in  secret  Cardina,
daughter  of  the  giant   Floram,  thinking  to
marry  her  because  she  was  rich  ;  but  as  her
beauty  was  not  equal  to  Altea's,  he  was  sooa
conquered.     Floraman  was  so  well  pleased
with  his  victory,  that  he  stood  talking  to  the
image  of  Altea,  and  extolling  his  own  at-


206

chieveinents,  as  if  their  guerdon  was  to  come
Irom  lier.     The  emperor  could  not  conceal
his  displeasure;  and  at  this  time  that  goodly
knight  of  Fortune  came  riding  into  the  open
space  hefore  the  palace,  armed  in  his   grey
arms  with  thorns  of  gold,  upon  a  goodly  bay
horse,  well  marked  with  patches  of  other  co-
lours, which  Ilianda  had  given  him.  Repass-
ing below  where  the  emperor  was,  abased  his
head  in  courtesy.     The  emperor  and  all  the
ladies  judged  him  to  be  the  seemliest  knight
that  entered  there  since  the  tournament  be-
gan; and  there  was  a  general   buz  of  expec-
tation, all  thinking   him  to    be  that  knight
of  Fortune    who    was   now  so    greatly   re-
nowned.

The  knight  of  Death,  somewhat  offended  to
see  every  one  make  such  estimation  of  this
knight,  prepared  himself  to  lower  the  pride
with  which  he  came  on.  He  of  Fortune,  when
he  came  to  the  gate  of  the  lists,  turned  round
toward  the  palace  and  the  apartments  of  the
empress,  and  seeing  the  windows  full  of  la-
dies, and  among  them  his  fair  Polinarda,  her
presence  made  him  (as  it  were)  clean  beside

T


206

himself  ;  but  Selviam,  who  never  left  his  side,
rounded  him  in  the  car,  saying.  Sir,  do  not
discover  this  weakness  in  a  phice  where  it  is
so  little  wanted.  At  these  words  recoveriníç
from  his  maze,  he  said  inwardly.  Lady,  for  the
remcd}'  of  my  sorrow,  I  would  that  you  aided
and  remembered  me;  but  as  for  this  encoun-
ter, I  stand  in  need  of  nothing  better  than  the
cause  for  which  I  undertake  it.  With  this  he
entered  the  lists.

The  judges  demanded  of  him  his  pledge,  as  it
was  the  custom;  to  wliich  he  answered,  Í
have  no  other  than  what  my  heart  feels;  ii  he
conquers  me  let  him  take  that, — it  is  the  best
prize  he  can  win  of  me.  Floraman  waved
the  custom  willingly,  because  of  the  stli
which  his  coming  had  excited.  They  lower-
ed their  lances,  and  at  the  sound  of  a  trum-
pet both  began  their  career  at  once,  and  met
full-but.  The  knight  of  Death  broke  his  lance
short  upon  his  antagonist's  shield,  who  re-
mained as  firm  in  his  saddle  as  though  he  had
fck  nothing;  but  the  return  was  widely  dif-
ferent, for  having  on  his  side  the  cause  of
PuUaarda's  beauty,  he  sent  Floraman  over


5207

tlie  crupper  of  his  horse  with  such  violence
that  he  lay  stunned  ; — evident  proof  of  her  su-
periority to  Altea.  So  signal  an  encounter
dismayed  all  the  beholders,  and  put  all  the
former  combats  clean  out  of  remembrance.
Yet  had  it  been  known  in  whose  quarrel  the
victory  was  won,  there  was  no  cause  for
wonder.  He  of  Fortune  alighted^  and  taking
off  Floraraan's  helmet,  who  lay  motionless,
prepared  to  cut  off  his  head  ;  but  this  the
judges  would  not  permit,  awarding  him  the
victory.  Floraman  was  taken  up  by  his
squires  and  carried  away,  and  the  tent  and
the  arms  delivered  to  the  conqueror.

The  emperor,  not  able  to  bear  the  suspence  of
the  suspicion  which  his  heart  felt,  came
down  ;  but  he,  fearing  to  be  discovered,  de-
parted by  another  way  so  privily,  that  when
tlie  emperor  came  he  was  not  to  be  found  ;
which  made  him  the  less  contented  with  so
honourable  a  victory.  And  perceiving  that  it
would  little  please  one  who  sought  so  greatly
to  conceal  himself  to  be  sou  «ht  after,  he  for-
bore  to  send  in  pursuit  of  him.  Then  the
court  triumphed,  the  ladies  rejoiced,  al-
t3


208

though  ignorant  of  the  lady  for  whom  the
knight  of  Fortune  adventured  ;  and  so  they
accompanied  the  emperor  joyfully  to  his  pa-
lace.


209


CHAPTER  26.


After  that  the  emperor  had  seen  this  brave
conquest,  he  desired  the  ladies  that  night  to
end  the  jousts  with  all  courtly  pastime  of
dancing;  which  request  all  gave  consent  un-
to, except  the  princess  Basilia,  who  still
mourned  for  her  lord  Vernao.  When  the
knights  that  had  been  vanquished  by  the
knight  of  Death,  heard  of  this  general  joy,
they,  to  make  their  ladies  amends  for  the  re-
pidsc  they  had  sustained,  came  into  the  great
hall,  where  courting  their  ladies,  they  dan-
ced and  passed  the  most  part  of  the  night
■with  honest  and  decent  talk,  in  their  de-
lightful exercise.  The  princess  Polinarda,
as  she  appeared  like  one  who  bare  the  supe-
riority of  beauty  from  Altea,  so  had  she
T  3


£10

commendation  for  her  stately  behaviour  in
the  dance,  Mhich  graced  her  person  mar-
vellously, and  made  the  more  lively  appear-
ance of  her  beauty.

On  the  morrow,  after  hearing  mass,,  with  all
the  ceremonies  accustomed  on  days  of  festi-
val, the  emperor  gave  commandment  that
dinner  should  be  laid  in  the  tent,  for  himself,
the  empress,  and  their  daughter-in-law  Gri-
donia.  King  Frisol  dined  with  them,  and
led  the  empress  there  ;  the  emperor  led  Gri-
donia,  and  prince  Florcndos  his  sister  Poli-
narda,  all  the  otlier  princes  taking  their
places  as  pleased  them,  ^vhere  they  were
bravely  and  royally  feasted.  When  dinner
was  ended,  they  went  to  behold  the  whole
tent,  where  over  the  first  entrance  was  placed
the  statue  of  the  fair  Altea,  whose  beauty
made  excuse  for  all  the  knights,  in  that
they  were  conquered.  Thou  went  they  to
see  the  Sepulchre  of  Lovers,  where  the  la-
dies beheld  the  arms  of  their  knights,  with
their  favours,  and  the  name  of  the  owner
written  over  each  in  such  large  letters  that  it
could  be  read  afar  off.     The  ladies  at  thi»


211

sight  began  to  jest  with  their  servants^. many
of  whom  felt  their  jests  as  a  worse  evil  than
the  defeature.  But  Onistalda  cried  out,
laughing,  Methinks  we  who  are  so  many
should  not  let  one  knight  carry  off  all  our  fa-
vours ;  let  us  win  them  by  force  as  he  did  ;  I
will  be  first.  A\'ith  that  she  laid  hands  on  her
own  picture,  which  prince  Beroldo  had  left
there,  and  put  it  in  the  sleeve  of  a  Greek  robe
which  she  wore.  The  rest,,  seeing  their  fa-
vours before  them,  followed  her  example
with  such  good  will,  'that  the  tent  looked
like  a  field  of  battle  when  the  plunder  was.
begun.  The  emperor^  seeing  how  they  were
sacking  it,  asked  his  grandson  Florendos  if
he  would  venture  to  defend  it.  I  do  not  set
so  little  store  by  my  own  life,  replied  he,  as
to  adventure  it  in  so  great  a  peril.  Much
do  I  wish  to  know,  said  the  empress,  wha
the  damsel  is  for  whom  the  knight  of  For-
tune fought,  that  the  others  midit  hold
themselves  obliged  to  her.  I,  said  the  empe-
ror, know  nothing  which  I  would  not  give
to  know  if  the  conqueror  be  whom  I  sus-
pect him  to  be.  There  must  come  a  time
when  he  will  be  known.     It  wus  now  even-


O] '2

ins;,  and  they  returned  to  the  palace  in  the
order  wherein  they  left  it.  The  empress  or-
dered the  image  of  Altea  to  be  carried  before
her,  that  it  might  be  preserveil  according  to
its  worth;  at  which  the  ladies  of  the  court
were  little  contented,  aware  that  none
among  them  equalled  it  in  beauty,  except
only  Polinarda.

Meantime  the  knight  of  Fortune  made
great  haste,  doubting  lest  he  should  be
s,ent  for  back,  and  so  discovered  what  he
was  :  for  if  that  the  emperor  sent,  he  must
not  disobey  his  will  ;  which  to  prevent,  he
rode  till  he  resolved  himself  he  was  far
enough  from  recalling.  But  as  he  was
greatly  contented  with  his  honourable  con-
quest, so  was  he  heavily  oppressed  in  think-
ing on  his  lady;  and  in  these  thoughts,  sad
one  hour,  and  sadder  another,  he  trmelled
en,  letting  his  horse  carry  him  whither  he
v/ould.


213


CHAPTER   27.


The  knight  of  the  Savage  Man,  leaving  Blan-
didon  in  the  Sorrowful  Valley,  came  to  tlie
city  of  Lambrc,  where  he  embarked  himself
for  Great  Britain,  minding  to  visit  king  Fa-
drique,  and  tlie  princess  Florida,  and  then  to
seek  the  castle  of  Drauiuziando,  which  was
now  greatly  talked  of:  for  certain  of  the
squires  belonging  to  knights  there  captured,
had  been  sent  away  by  Dramuziando,  be-
cause there  was  no  room  for  them  in  the  cas-
tle, and  they  had  spread  abroad  the  fame
thereof,  though  they  knew  not  who  the  per^
sons  were  who  were  held  prisoners  there,

Tlie  knight  of  the  Savage  jSIan  had  such
a  prosperous  wind,  that  in  a  few  days  he
came  in  sight  of  the  cape  of  the  Long  Ships,
which  is  on  the  coast  of  England  ;  but  on  a


214

sudden  arose  such  a  tempest,  as  carried  them
"by  force  upon  the  coast  of  Ireland,  taking
haven  at  the  mount  of  St.  Brandam,  because
they  could  not  reach  the  port  of  Maroique.
The  knight  had  a  great  desire  to  land,  but
the  master  persuaded  him  to  the  contrary,
saying,  Sir  knight,  you  had  better  wait  here
for  fair  weather,  than  land  in  so  perilous  a
place.  For  on  yonder  mountain  dwelleth  the
tyrant  Calfurnio,  the  bloodiest  and  most  ter«
rible  man  this  day  alive  ;  whose  cruelty  is
£u<;h,  that  if  any  chance  into  his  hands,  it  is
their  present  death.  Sir,  (quoth  the  knight
of  the  Savage  Man)  if  he  be  so  cruel  as  you
speak  of,  it  were  good  to  teach  him  some
courtesy,  if  he  can  conceive  none  of  him-
self. The  bloodier  he  is,  tlie  more  hope
may  man  have  of  God's  help  against
him;  and  by  God's  help  go  I  will  and
try  my  fortune.  7hen  ordering  the  boat
to  be  hoisted  out,  he  and  Artifal  his  squire
got  into  it,  and  went  to  land  ;  he  being  armed
in  his  green  arms,  which  he  so  greatly  prized.
They  travelled  along  the  foot  of  the  moun-
tain, thinking  it  a  goodly  land  :  for  it  was
all  full  of  lofty  trees,  such  as  Ireland  is  still


£15

wooded  '.vitli.  Ere  long  thej  came  to  a  beck,
which  ran  iVom  the  top  of  ihe  mountain,  so
overshadowed  with  thick  trees,  that  in  many
places  there  was  no  other  sign  of  the  water
than  the  sound  of  its  descent.  Presently,  in
an  open  glade,  hard  by  a  fountain,  they  saw
a  paviUon  pitched,  a  little  one,  but  a  right
fair,  and  there  was  no  person  in  it.  They
drew  nigh,  and  saw  that  before  it  lay  many
truncheons  of  spears  and  broken  armour.
Walking  on  farther  in  a  little  path,  which  he
saw  traced  with  liesli  blood,  he  followed  the
trace  up,  and  was  led  by  the  drops  thereof
10  the  sight  of  the  castle,  which  was  well
built  and  strong,  surrounded  with  towers,  and
placed  upon  a  rock,  towards  which  he  con-
tinued to  ascend.  AViien  he  liad  attained  the
top  ofthelii!l,lie  saw  the  giant  standingabove
liim  by  his  castle  gate,  being  such  a  man  as  the
master  of  the  ship  reported.  Before  him
stood  seven  well  appointed  men  at  arms  with
brigundiues  on,  and  haiberts  in  their  liands,
liokiing  four  knights  prisoners;  and  by  this
giant  were  three  damsels,  holding  their  heads
down  and  weeping.  The  gate  was  opened  and
the  giant  thrust  them  in.    He  of  tlie  Savagj;


£1G

put  spurs  to  his  horse,  hoping  to  come  up
before  they  were  shut  in  ;  but  coining  to  the
ioot  of  the  rock,  he  saw  this  was  impossible.
So  he  alighted,  and  leaving  Artifal  with  the
horses,   began   to  ascend  by  a  narrow  path
hewn  in  the  rock,  with  so  many  turnings  and
windinçrs,  that    thou<rh  the  heierhi  was  not
very  great,  it   was  an  hour's  good   work  to
mount.     AVhat  with  the  weight  of  his  arms,
and  the  haste  he  had  made,  he  was  so  weary
when   he  reached   the   top,  that   he  could
scarcely  stand  ;  and  seating  himself  to  take
breath,  C.ilfurnio,  not  chusing  to  give  him
leisure  for  this,   sent  three  of  his  knights  to
take  him,   and  bring  him  to  his  presence.
They  opened  a  little  door  whi<.h  was  in  the
gate  of  the  tower;  but   he  of  the  Savage,
l<no\ving  that  he  was  not  yet  in  breath  to  de-
fend  himself,  put  himself  against  the  door,
and  would  suffer  none  to  come  out  till  he  had
recovered  strength.     Then  he  drew  back,  and
they  came  to  him  commanding  him  to  yield,
or  else  they  would  slay  him.     The  knight  of
the  Savage  Man  made  this  answer:  This  is  a
less  danger  for  one  of  my  complexion,  than
it  would  be  to  6CC  myself  a  prisoner  in  such


217

hands.  With  these  words  he  saluted  one  of
tbeni  so  friendly  upon  the  head,  that  he  fell
down  dead  at  his  feet  ;  as  for  the  other
twain,  he  dealt  with  them  so  reasonably,  that
he  paid  them  their  debt  in  the  same  coin;
the  one  he  cut  down  to  the  ground,  the  other
iled  ;  but  as  the  door  had  been  closed  by  the
giant's  orders  as  soon  as  they  went  out,  he
,     could  not  escape  into  the  tower.

Presently,  Calfurnio  himself  came  down,
very  strongly  armed,  with  a  mighty  shield,
set  round  with  hoops  of  iron,  and  a  great
mace  of  iron,  having  the  head  thickly  beset
with  strong  spikes,  that  no  shield  nor  ar-
mour but  it  would  enter  into.  The  porter
opened  the  whole  gate  for  him,  for  the  door
was  not  large  enough  ;  so  out  he  came,  say-
ing :  Sir  cavalier,  you  have  more  wilfulness
than  wit  ;  yield  yourself  into  my  hands,  or
I  will  take  cruel  vengeance  for  the  death  of
my  knisihts.  He  of  the  Savag^e,  had  never
seen  a  giant  till  now,  and  this  was  one  of  the
fiercest  and  most  terrible  in  the  world  ;  so
that  he  did  not  think  his  life  secure.  How-
beit,  since  his  heart  was  such  that  no  sense

VOL.  I.  u


of  danger,  liowevev  great,  could  make  hiin
,  shrink  from  doing  his  devoir,  he  made  an-
swer :  It  would  be  better  if  you  would  lay
aside  this  haughtiness,  and  employ  your
strength  in  good  works,  in  gratitude  to  God,
seeing  he  hath  made  you  more  mighty  than
other  men.  Calfurnio  was  in  sueh  rage  at
these  words,  that  he  smoked  through  the
aventail  of  his  helmet,  and  began  with  a
raging  voice  to  blaspheme,  saying  :  I  would
.there  were  before  me  ten  of  the  strongest
knights  upon  the  earth,  that  I  might  avenge
these  words  on  them,  because  thy  death  can-
not satisfy  my  fury.  Good  sir,  (quoth  the
knight  of  the  Savage  Man,)  since  you  are
conlident,  let  us  do  our  battle  within  your
fortress,  and  I  may  hap  to  shew  you  that  nine
.of  tlie  ten  may  be  spared.  Thou  shalt  not  say,
.replied  Calfurnio,  that  I  refuse  to  do  any  thing
for  fear.  So  ordering  all  his  people  to  come
out  from  the  tower,  both  men  at  arms,  and
.serving  men,  in  they  went.  He  fastened  the
gate  on  the  inside  with  its  huge  bolts,  and
,went  on  till  they  came  to  a  paved  court,  in
the  midst  of  which  was  a  fountain,  support-
ed upon  jaspur  pillars  ;    the  water  issuintj


219

fortlifrom  tlie  mouths  of  infants,  that  were
artificially  made  m  chrjstal,  all  about  it
Round  the  court  were  goodiy  iodgmçs  and
chambers,  royally  edihcd;  a  place  •vvorth^  to
be  seen,  and  to  have  been  iniiabite(r  by  .
other  dwellers.  This  goodly  castle  was  built
by  the  kings  of  Ireland,  wherein  thev  would
often  recreate  themselves  when  they  rode  on
luuiting  ;  but  the  father  of  this  tyrant,  named
Tromazor,  took  it  by  force,  and  added  to  it
these  towers,  by  which  he  defended  it.

Calfurnio  being  now  alone  with  the  knight
of  the  Savage  Man,  said  to  him.  Now  do  thy
best  ;  for  though  thou  maycst  repent  thee,
thou  canst  not  escape  now.     So  saving,  he
let  fly  at  him  with  his  mace.     The  kni-ht  re-
ceived the  blow  upon  his  shield;  but  ,t  camo
with  such  force,  that  the  spikes  of  the  mace
broke  the  shield  into  as  many  pieces,  and  the
arm  on  which   he  bore  it  was    so   deadened
with  the    mighty  blow,    that  he   could   not
înove  It.     He  of  the  Savage   then  held  his
own  death  for  certain;  yet  bestirrino- him-
self the  more  for   the   danger  in  whïch  he
^topd,  and  having  nottiingwhereuiih  to  d,e.


220

fend  himself,  be  shifted  before  the   giant's
blo^vs  so  nimbly,  that  they  all  fell  in  vain  ;
and,  indeed,  any  one  which  had  taken  ei-
feet,  would  have  done  the  giant's  will.     And
at  times  he  struck  at  him  with  his  sword,  so
that   he  wounded  him  in  many  places,  and
made  him  lose  much  blood.     At  length,  Cal-
ftirnio,   feeling  himself  grow  weaker,   threw
down  his  shield,  and  took  his  mace  in  both
hands,  intending  the  present  death  of  the
knight,  and  saying.  Here  is  the  last  punish-
ment for  thy  boldness.     The  blow  came  so
near  him,  that  the  knight  had  no  other  re-
medy than  to  interpose  his  sword  ;  which
unable  to  withstand  so  heavy  a  weight,  and
of  such  force,  broke  in  twain.     Howbeit,  it
cut  the  half  of  the  mace,  into  which  the  iron
xvas  fixed,  clean  through.    The  ^"J  «^  ^he
mace  still  held  on,  and  fell  upon  his  head
with  a  force  that  dinted  the  hebaet  in  many
places,  and  had  well  nigh  brought  him  to  the
-round.     But  the  present  necessity  making
him  recollect  himself,  he  caught  up  Calfur-
nio's  shield,  and  sought  to  cover  himself  with
that.     It  was   so   heavy  that  he  could  not
wield  it  but  with  both  hands.     By  this  the


221

giant  had  drawn  a  huge  and  sharp  cutlass,
which  he  wore  at  his  side,  and  making  at  him,
smote  it  into  the  edgeotthc  shield,  into  whicli
it  bit  so  deeply,  that  when   he    would  have
drawn   it    back,  the  shield  came   too  ;  and
wbile  it   was   thus    fastened,  he  of  the  Sa-
vage, drove  at  him  with  the  broken  piece  of'
his  sword,    and   gave   him    many    wounds.'
Thp  giant  at  last  set  his  feet  upon  the  shield,
and  palling  at  the  cutlass  with  all  his  force,
plucked  it  out;  but  while  he  was   doing  it,
tlie  knight  gave  liim  such  a  cut  in  the  left
l<?g,  where  the  armour  was  weakest,  as  made
him  limp  all  the  rest  of  the  battle.     Never-
thelcss,  though  the  giant   was  thus  cruelly
handled,  he  gave  his  enemy  another  blow,
which  came   upon  the  right  shoulder,  and
cutting  througVi  the  armour,  entered  into  the
flesh     so    deej)ly,    that   the    knight     surely
thought  the  whole  quarter  was  sliced  through.
But  Calfurnio  could  no  longer  >.tand  for  loss
of  blood.  He  fell,  and  as  he  v.as  tailing,  with
the  last  fury  of  death,   threw  the  cutlass  at
him.  It  struck  him  lengthways  on  the  body,
and  brought  him  down  ;  he,  however,  pre-
sently recovering,  went  to  the  giant,  mcau-
u  3


228

ing  to  cut  off  his  head  ;  but  when  be  came  to
him,  he  found  that  he  had  already  rendered
up  his  soul  to  all  the  devils.  Then  he  sate
himself  down  upon  a  stone,  being  in  such
plight  that  he  could  not  move.  He  thought
that  the  wounds  which  he  had  received  were
certes  his  last  ;  but  consoled  himself  wi  th
remembering  from  what  misery  he  had  saved
the  damsels,  though  at  the  cost  of  his  life.


i:í^o


CHAPTER  í28.


It  was  not  long  before  the  damsels  came  into
the  court,  for  the  giant  had  not  had  time  be-
fore the  battle  to  put  them  in  his  dungeons.
Seeing  their  enemy  to  be  slain,  and  the  noble
knight  of  the  Savage  Man  to  lie  in  such
danger  of  his  life,  they  came  speedily  unto
him,  and  taking  off  his  armour,  were  care-
ful to  stanch  the   bleeding  of  his  wounds.
Orianda,  the  eldest  of  the  sisters,  who  had
greater  experience   in    medicine    than    the
other  twain,  attended  to  him  with  such  care
as  he  deserved  at  her  hands  ;  supplying  her-
self with  things  needful  from  a  dispensary
which  the  giant  had  at  hand.     At  length  Ar-
tifal  his  esquire  came   up,    and  seeing  the
great  danger  he  was  in,  while  the  ladies  car-


224

ried  his  lord  into  a  fair  chamber,  he  barred
fast  the  gates,  so  that  none  might  enter  in.
Howbeit  this  fear  was  needless,  for  they  who
had  served  the  giant  had  done  it  less  for  lik-
ing than  for  fear.     There  was  the  knight  of
the  Savage  Man  kept,  until  such  time  as  he
had  attained  to  more  strength  ;  who,  when  he
had  gotten  a  little  health,  would  fain  have
gone,  but  the  ladies  restrained  him  to  the
contrary,  declaring  to  him  the  danger  that
might  happen  unto  him,  if  so  soon  he  would
load    his   body  with  his   armour,  that   was
brought  very  low,  and  rather  required  more
strength.     Their  great  courtesy  hked  him  so
well,  that  he  was  loth  to  do  any  thing  they
should  mislike  of:  wherefore  sitting  talking
with  them,  he  desired  them  that  without  of-
fence  he  might  demand    their  names    and
country,  and  by  what  mishap  they  chanced
into  the  giant's  government .''  Artinalda,  the
second  sister,  whose  beauty  was  equal   with
her  maidenly  behavioar,  resolved  him  of  their
names,  and  said,  we  are  all  three  sisters,  and
daughters  to  the  marquis  Bcltamor,  vassal  to
king  Fadriquc  of  England;  who,  upon  the  en-
vious report  of  sliiudcrous  tongues^  bani;>hed


ft


!iO


him  from  his  dominions.  Our  father  being
endued  with  great  riches,  came  to  inhabit  this
place  ;    where,  upon    three  mountams,    he
caused  to  be  built  three  fair  castles,  deter-
mining one  to  each  of  us  after  his  decease  ;
which  place  is  called  the  Mountain»  of  the
Three  Sisters.     After  our  father's  death,  we
resorted  each  of  us  to  our  appointed  castle,
keeping  them  a  good  space  from  this  giant,
whom  you  have  slain,  that  daily  laboured  to
defeat  us  of  them.     But  when  we  were  in
good  hope  he  had  changed  his  mind,   be-
cause he  had  well  left  his  continual  watching,
then  were  we  soonest  of  all  deceived:  for  one
da  V,  not  having  of  longtime  seen  each  other,
we'  met  by  appointment  all  together,  not  far
from  our  castles,  where  a  little  pavilion  was
erected  to  make  merry  for  the  time,  having
in  our   company  six    knights.    This  giant,
who  by  his  spies  was  admonished  of  our  be-
ing there,  came  suddenly  upon  us,  slew  some
of^our  knights,  and  took  the  others;  and  he
brought  us  with  him  into  this  place.  To  which
place",  if  good  fortune    had  not  conducted
you,  we  had  been  deprived  not  only  of  our
smaU  wealth,  but  that  which  is  most  of  all
the  chief  ornament,  of  our  honour.


^26

The  knight  of  the  Savage  Man,  who  had

been  well  acquainted  with  their  father's  name,

promised  them  to  use  such  means  on  their

behalf  to   king  Fadriquc,  that  they  should

again  possess  their  inheritance.     When   he

had  abode  there  till  he  was  well  able  to  bear

armour,  he  desired  Orianda  to  accept  that

castle,  in  rccompencc  for  the  pains  she  had

bestowed  on  him  in  his  weakness;  promising

both  to  her  and  her  sisters  his  sword,  when

any  need  should  require.     The  ladies  used

large  thanks  unto  him  for  his  great  courtesy,

desiring  him  to  make  known  his  name  untj

them,  that   they   might  commend   him  to

their  memory,   who   had   been   so   good  a

friend  unto  them.

To  which  request  ho  thus  answered  :  Ladies,
my  name  is  as  yet  so  little  known,  that  I  am'
unwilling  to  shew  it  :  desiring  you  to  accept
of  this  answer  as  now,  and  think  not  that  my
deeds  shall  reprove  my  word  ;  but  that  at
any  time  I  will  employ  myself  in  your  ser^
vice.  But  first  I  must  hazard  myself  in  an
adventure  wherein  many  noble  and  famous
knights  have  disappeared  ;  which,  if  I-may


^27

finish,  or  in  trial  Safely  escape,  I  promise
you  that  my  first  business  shall  be  to  serve
you.  Sir,  quoth  Artinalda,  if  prayers  may
prevail,  doubt  not  but  we  will  be  earnest
therein  for  your  prosperous  success  in  Great
Britain  :  for  doubtless  there  is  the  adventure
w  hereof  you  speak,  which  in  truth  hath  hi-
therto proved  so  desperate  that  small  hope  is
left  of  seeing  it  atchieved.  Meantime  esteem
your  poor  handmaids,  not  stretching  beyond
tlie  bounds  of  modesty,  yours  so  far  as  cour-
tesy may  and  ahall  cojnmand.  After  many
gentle  salutations,  the  knight  of  the  $avage
Man  departed,  accompanied  with  Artifal  his
esquire,  leaving  the  ladies  with  more  security
than  he  found  them,  in  their  castles  ;  and  at
this  day  the  heights  whereon  they  were  edi-
fied are  called  the  Mountains  of  the  Three
Sisters  ;  eternal  commendation.  So  he  took
his  way  with  all  speed  toward  the  realm  of
England.


228


CHAPTER  Q9.


It  hath  been  already'. declared  unto  you  the
great  displeasure  which  the  emperor  took  for
the  departure  of  the  knight  who  conquered
Floraman,  suspecting  still  that  it  was  Pal-
merin  :  seeing  however  that  for  that  there
was  no  remedy  but  patience,  he  went,  accom-
panied with  his  princes  and  lords,  to  visit
prince  Floraman,  and  console  him  in  his  sor-
row.


The  knight  of  Death  being  advertised  how
the  emperor  was  coming,  came  to  the  gate,
attired  in  a  long  fleecy  robe  of  black,  agree-
able to  his  sad  and  joyless  kind  of  life,  where
he  received  the  emperor  according  to  his
obedient  duty.  Then  assayed  the  emperor  to


229

give  him  such  pleasant  speeches  as  might
constrain  him  to  think  of  cheerful  things  ;
hut  he  giving  small  attendance  thereto^  re-
plied little  to  the  purpose,  and  with  less
courtesy  than  the  emperor  deserved.  Ne-
vertheless, the  emperor,  calling  to  mind  his
V.  orth  in  arms,  and  his  other  excellent  quali-
ties, could  not  conceal  the  grief  he  felt  at
seeing  so  good  a  knight  lost  in  so  hopeless  a
sorrow;  and  striving  yet  to  bring  him  to  more
reason,  he  reminded  him  of  olliers  who  had
sufiered  a  like  loss,  and  remonstrated  upon
the  folly  of  grieving  so  out  of  measure  for
what  no  grief  could  remedy.  I  would,  said
he,  sir  Floram  an,  not  only  commend  your
constancy,  but  likewise  attribute  high  honour
to  it,  if  tears  could  call  the  dead  to  life.  Do
but  remember,  impatience  brings  sorrow,  sor-
row sickness,  sickness  consumption,  consump-
tion the  miserable  anatomy  of  himself,  which
is  a  terror  to  his  kindred,  an  eye-sore  to  his
friends,  and  the  continual  heart-breaking  of
all  that  love  him  :  on  the  other  side,  if  a  man
apply  himself  to  any  exercise,  as  either  travel
for  the  honour  of  himself  and  fame  of  his
country,  or  spending  his  time  in  martial  ex-

X


230

ploitSj  or  according  as  his  estate  is;  the  poor
to  take  painSj  the  rich  pain  with  pleasure,
the  artificer  and  sucli  to  their  handy  crai'ts,
tlie  nohle  mind  and  courtly  gentleman,  ei-
ther to  the  exploits  of  the  field,  or  such  ex-
ercise as  may  avoid  idleness  ; — then  is  the
€ye  directed,  the  sense  quickened,  the  mind
preserved,  the  heart  quieted,  the  conscience
unpolluted,  affection  governed,  lovehridled^
and  lust  banished;  the  good  name  perfected^
virtue  established,  honour  well  exercised,  and
fame  eternized.  Think  thus  with  thyself:
AVhile  Altea  lived  I  loved  her,  being  dead  I
remember  her,  and  in  her  love  I  live  for  her,
as  the  honour  I  will  entcrprize  shall  witness,
and  the  adventures  I  will  hazard  shall  mani-
fest. So  drown  this  dulled  desire,  in  remem-
brance of  your  knighthood,  which  j^ou  enjoy
for  manhood,  not  for  mourning;  to  display
your  worthy  deeds,  and  not  to  play  inamo-
rous  ditties;  but  one  month's  using  this  medi-
cine, trust  me,  will  extinguish  this  malady*.


♦  Old  Antony  is  here  so  much  more  eloquent  than  usual,
that  1  have  let  him  speak  both  for  the  crnperor  and  IIoia.-
man.


Í231

"V^licn  Floraman  perceived  the  earnest  words
of  the  emperor  to  be  both  for  the  honour  of
his  name,  and  nobleness  of  his  hfe,  he  rephed
thus:  Most  gracious  emperor,  I  see  that
goat's  blood  will  mollify  the  adamant,  and
the  little  drops  of  rain  pierce  into  hard  mar-
ble ;  so  wisdom  reproving  wilfulness,  shew-
eth  him  his  folly,  and  persuasion  piercing
into  the  obstinate,  doth  more  by  friendship
than  others  can  do  with  force.  I  confess,  the
affection  to  Altea  hath  both  overcharged  my
mind,  and  clean  dulled  my  wit,  so  that  I
neither  seem  as  I  should  be,  nor  do  that  I
ought,  but  sit  musing  on  her  love  who  hath
no  lite,  and  endamage  mine  own  life  by  such
over-fond  love.  And  since  your  majesty  hath
quickened  mine  idle  nature,  and  revived  the
duty  w^hich  I  owe  unto  knighthood,  I  v.ill
remember  myself  in  forgetting  her;  and
though  I  cannot  exclude  her  love  on  a  sud-
den, yet  toleration  and  persuasion  in  time
may  do  something.  And  because  the  ho-
nour of  the  field  can  assuage  this  fondnc'^s,
and  my  duty  commandeth  me  to  employ  ni}'-
{service,  I  will  do  even  as  you  counsel  me>
tl^ough  to  command  myself  is  at  present  dii-

V    '^


G32

ficult,  and  I  know  not  how  it  may  be  hereaf-
ter. But  since  you  have  shown  so  much  bounty
to  me  in  this  advice,  deign  to  complete  it  by
ranking  me  among  your  servants;  an  honour
which  will  in  some  degree  make  amends  for
the  shame  which  I  have  received  here  in
your  court.  I,  replied  the  emperor,  am  he
who  gains  in  this,  which  indeed  1  should
long  since  have  solicited,  could  I  have  ven-
tured so  to  do  ;  and  now  that  you  of  your
own  will  offer  to  me  what  I  have  so  greatly
desired,  judge  whether  I  can  refuse  it.  Then
Floraman  would  have  kneeled  to  kiss  the
emperor's  hand  ;  but  he  graciously  sustained
him  in  his  arms,  with  great  thanks  on  either
side  liberally  bestowed.

This  done,  the  emperor  went  to  the  empress,
who  had  sent  to  call  him,  and  was  waiting
for  him  with  news  to  his  heart's  desire.  She
came  forward  to  meet  him,  with  Lucenda  in
her  hand,  saying.  Pay  me  for  my  tidings,
my  lord,  and  I  will  tell  you  who  overthrew
Floraman.  The  emperor,  who  greatly  desir-
ed to  know  this,  could  scarcely  contain  him-
self for  the  agitation  these  words  occasioned;


233

and  seating  himself  upon  the  estrado  \vith
the  empress,  he  bade  the  damsel  relate  what
she  had  to  say  in  a  loud  voice,  that  all
might  hear  her;  that  if  the  news  was  such
as  to  deserve  rejoicing,  all  might  have  their
part  of  the  joy.  Then  Lucenda  stood  up  and
said.  The  knight  of  Fortune,  who  came  to
3"our  court  in  arms  of  grey  covered  with
thorns  of  gold,  and  who  so  soon  overthrew
the  famous  and  puissant  prince  Floraman,
is  the  fair  child  Palmerin,  Avhora  Polen-
dos  hrought  to  your  court,  and  whom  you
ordered  to  be  brought  up  here,  and  of
Avhom  at  that  time  tVie  sage  Lady  of 'the
Lake  of  the  Three  Fates,  sent  to  announce
such  great  things.  Then  she  related  how
she  had  found  him  in  the  house  of  her
aunt  Rianda,  from  whence  he  set  out  to
Constantinople  upon  hearing  her  tidings;
and  that  the  yesterday  she  met  him  on  her
way  back,  when  he  had  charged  her  to  beg
pardon  in  his  name,  that  he  had  not  dis-
closed himself,  saying,  that  his  determina-
tion was  not  to  appear  before  the  emperor
till  he  liad  tried  the  adventure  of  Great  Bri-
tain, whereof  so  much  was  now  said  ;  for
X  3


234

there  he  believed^  and  no  where  else,  were  all
those  knights  to  be  found  who  were  missing.
He  bade  her  also  request  the  emperor  to  give
the  tent  to  Floraraan,  and  all  its  garniture  to
that  person  of  his  household  whom  he  deem-
ed worthiest  of  it  for  her  beauty,  since  he
had  waged  the  battle  in  the  name  of  all  ;
though  by  what  he  had  seen  of  Altea,  he
knew  that  no  one  could  surpass  her,  except
only  the  lady  Polinarda.

The  emperor,  not  able  to  conceal  the  pleasure
which  he  felt,  replied.  Certes,  Luceada,  Í  will
show  you  how  greatly  I  thank  you  for  this
joy  which  you  have  given  me.  My  mind  did
persuade  me  that  it  .iiould  be  he  ;  let  him  go
where  he  will,  and  as  secretly  as  he  W'ii:,,
good  fortune  will  follow  him.  As  for  his
tent,  it  shall  be  bestowed  according  to  his
desire  :  he  who  knew  how  to  gain  it  so
well,  cannot  choose  ill  in  disposing  of  it.
It  was  now  late,  and  he  retired  to  his
apartment,  the  empress  also  retiring  to  herSj^
and  all  the  knights  going  each  to  his  lodg-
ing, desirous  to  depart  without  delay  in
quest  of  adventures,  because  of  the  envy
which  the  feats  of  Palmcrin  occasioned.


235


CHAPTER    2Ù,


Not  long  after  Lucenda  had  declared  these
tidings,  when  the  emperor  sate  with  his
knights  rejoicing  in  the  towardly  behaviour
of  young  Palmerin,  there  entered  a  knight
in  his  presencCj  a  young  man,  armed  at  all
points  except  his  face  ;  his  arms  were  of
dark  green  full  of  hinges  of  gold  and  azure;
his  shieldj  which  his  squire  carried,  bore  a
green  tree  in  a  green  field,  as  if  seen  in
the  distance;  and  he  himself  was  so  come-
ly and  well  limbed  a  man,  that  his  ap-
pearance gave  fair  hope  of  great  deeds.
He,  after  his  obeisance  made,  began  Avith
a  loud  voice,  as  thus  :  I,  sir,  am  a  strange
knight,  whose  name  is  not  known  here,
because  it  is  so  short  a  time  since  I  have
carried    arms.      Travelling    towards    Great


256

Britain,  with  design  of  trying  myself  in  that
adventure  wherein  so  many  have  disappear-
ed, I  heard  that  a  joust  was  proclaimed  in
your  eourt  for  the  beauty  of  a  lady  named
Altca;  in  which  to  adventure  myself  I  have
travelled  hither,  to  lUiiintain  that  my  lady  and
mistress  dcscrveth  the  perfect  praise  above
all  for  beauty;  but  since  I  arrived  here  it
hath  been  told  me,  that  a  knight  is  departed
from  your  court,  bearing  the  renown  of  this
triumph  away;  which  news  doth  not  a  little
displease  mc,  in  that  it  was  my  desire  to  con-»
tend  with  him,  or  any,  on  my  lady's  behalf,
Wherefore,  if  I  may  desire  so  much  courtesy
as  to  know  where  he  is,  or  whither  he  de-
parted, 1  shall  think  myself  continually
bound  to  you  in  duty,  and  will  search  that
knight,  though  it  be  to  the  loss  of  my  life.
Your  pursuit  (quoth  the  emperor)  isso  bold,
ihat  I  should  not  advise  you  to  continue  it.
I  know  not  where  the  knight  is,  of  whom
you  speak  ;  but  this  I  know,  that  wherc:io-
ç'ver  he  is,  liis  works  w^ill  discover  him.

The  good  opinion  you  hold  of  him  (answcrcdl''
t^e  knight)  makcth  me  the  more  aflection-


237

ate  to  seek  him  ;  and  the  more  famous  his
deeds  are,  the  greater  estimation  shall  I  con-
ceive to  deal  with  such  a  one.  For  if  he  con-
quer me,  it  will  he  told  abroad  that  I  proved
mvself  against  him  ;  but  should  Fortune
stand  my  friend,  and  I  conquer  him,  then
the  reputation  I  shall  gain  will  constrain  you
to  think  as  well  of  me,  as  now  you  repose  a
good  affiance  in  him.  Tremoran  the  son  to
the  duke  Lecefin,  and  grandson  to  the  em-
peror Trineo,  hearing  the  proud  words  of
the  knight,  advanced  himself  towards  him
with  this  greeting:  Fortune  hath  been  your
friend  to  send  you  hither  when  he  is  gone,
who  would  else  so  settle  your  armour  on
your  shoulders,  that  you  would  curse  your
lady,  to  abide  his  canvazado*.  Neverthe-
less, albeit  he  is  not  here,  he  hath  such
friends  here  as  would  be  sorry  you  should
depart  without  some  recompence  for  your


*  Less  courtly  language  than  that  of  the  original,  but  I
have  let  it  stand  for  its  singularity.  The  language  of  Mo-
raes is  always  courtly,  and  strictly  deserves  the  praise  which
Cervantes  bestowed  upon  it.


travel:  and  if  you  are  willing  to  do  battle
with  me  in  his  name,  I  shall  joyfully  under-
take it,  that  the  knight  of  Fortune  may
know  I  have  served  him  in  something.  The
other  answered,  I  think  sir,  the  good  will
you  bear  to  him  maketh  you  hardy  in  that
which  appertaineth  not  unto  you;  yet  be-
cause you  welcome  knights  in  such  a  bra-
very, that  this  may  not  seem  an  excuse,  if  it
please  the  emperor  to  secure  the  lists  to  us,
arm  yourself  presently,  because  I  would  be
loth  a  cold  calm  should  come  over  this  hot
matter.  The  emperor,  though  loth  that
Tremoran,  without  cause,  should  thus  seek  to
do  battle  with  one  who  came  to  his  court
with  no  ill  will,  accepted  their  glaves  as
gages,  because  he  could  do  no  otherwise.
Upon  this  Tremoran  went  to  arm  himself,
and  the  strange  knight  entered  the  lists,
which  were  always  ready  for  such  occasions-
He  had  not  waited  long  when  Tremoran
came  into  the  field,  gallantly  mounted,
wearing  black  armour,  as  the  sign  of  his  hea-
viness for  the  departure  of  prince  Primaleon,
bearing  in  his  shield  a  leopard  in  a  field
isablc;    he   rode  a   bustard-coloured   horse,


(139

úhich  was  a  fair  steed  and  a  large,  and  his
semblance  was  such  as  promised  what  he
could  do  :  for  as  3'ouhavc  heard  heretofore,
he  was  one  o-f  the  new  knights  who  on  the
day  of  the  tourney  had  done  best  in  arms.
As  soon  as  they  w  ere  both  in  the  field,  at  the
sound  of  the  trumpets  they  couched   their
spears,  set  spurs  to  their  horses,  and  made  a
very  brave  encounter,  that  the  truncheon»
of  their  spears  flew  up  into  the   air,  horses
and  men  came  to  the  ground  together,  and
they  were  fain  to   end    their  combat  witii
their  swords.     In  fine,  what  with  cxpence
of  blood,  grief  of  their  wounds,  and  great
weariness  in   fight,  catching  each  other  in
their  arms  they  fell  both  to  the  ground  ;  Tre-
moran  with  somewhat  more  recollection  than
his  antagonist,   yet  not  50  much   that  lhe
victory  could  be  clearly  adjudged  to  him.

The  emperor,  seeing  they  were  so  sorehurt^
ordered  them  to  be  taken  out  of  the  field  ;
and  the  squire  of  the  strange  knight  carried
his  master  to  the  lodging  appointed  for
strangers,  where  all  things  necessary  were
provided  iu  abundance  ;  where  he  used  such


240

diligence  in  his  attendance,  that  he  recover^
ed  to  a  httle  stronger  estate.     Then  sent  the
emperor  to  require    of  whence    and    what
the  knight  was  ;  word  being   returned  that
he  was  son  to  the  king  of  Bohemia,   and
named  Roramontc  ;  upon  which  tidings  he
presently  sent  for  him  into  his  palace,  where
he  was  honourably  used  till  such  time  he
had  gained  his  health  ;  and  then  he  departed
from  thence  toward  Great  Britain,  less  con-
fident of  accomplishing  that  adventure  than
he  had  been  when  he  arrived  at  Constanti-
nople.    Nevertheless  he  went,  that  it  might
not  be  said  he  was  one  of  those  who  kept
back.     This  Roramontc  being  only  of  twen-
ty years  of  age,  was  of  so  haughty  courage
that  he  thought  it  little  to  adventure  in  any
enterprize,  how  hard  soever;  and  it  was  for
the  love  of  Lusiana,  daughter  to  the  king  of
Denmark,  that  he  had  thought  to  win  the
image  of  Altea.

After  the  battle,  all  the  young  knights  of  the
court  departed,  some  one  way,  some  ano-
ther, all  with  purpose  of  repairing  to  Great
Britain.    Among  others  went  Florendos  and


241

his  brother  Platir,  sons  of  Priinaleon  ;  at
whose  departure  Gridonia's  sorrow  was  re-
newed, she  fearing  that  the  ill  fortune  of  the
father  might  follow  the  sons  also,  and  that
their  meetingr  would  be  late  or  never.  The
city  of  Constantinople  was  deserted,  as  it
were,  and  the  emperor  so  left  alone  that  he
had  none  but  women  for  its  defence.  How-
beit,  though  he  felt  sorely  this  second  deser-
tion of  his  court,  he  concealed  his  soitow,
that  he  mia;ht  not  communicate  it  to  others.


242


CHAPTER  3]


Long  travelled  the  kiiiglit  of  Fortune,  (hav-
ing left  the  danibcl  Lueenda,)  till  at  last  he
came  to  the  Cape  of  Tangis,  which  is  a  sea
port  :  here  he  waited  some  days  expecting
a  fair  wind,  and  at  length,  when  the  weather
served,  embarked  on  board  a  ship  freighted
by  the  countess  of  Sorlinga,  who  was  re-
turning to  England  from  a  visit  to  her
daughter,  who  had  lately  beeii  left  a  widow.
Tlieir  voyage  w  as  quick  and  prosperous,  and
they  lauded  in  the  port  of  St.  Micheo,  two
leagues  from  Sorlinga,  where  the  countess
dwelt.  And  because  the  knight  of  Fortune
had  received  great  honours  from  her  on  the
way,  he  accompanied  her  to  her  dwelling,
and  remained   there  that  night.     The  next


245

morning  he  rode  forward,  rejoicing  that  he
was  arrived  in  that  country  Avhtrc  he  had  de-
termined to  put  his  fortune  in  trial.      So  tra-
vellinti:  on  toward  London,  accompanied  by
remembrances   of  his  lady    Polinarda,   one
day  the  heat  being  very  great,  crossing    a
mountain  in  the  desert  wherein  he  was  born,
he  came  to  a  glade  in  the  forest,  and  alighted
to  refresh  himself  bv  drinkins;  from  the  wa-
ter  of  the  very  fountain    in  which  he  had
been  baptized  the  day  of  his  birth,  little  now
jccoilecting  what   had  there  befallen   him.
Selviam  unbridled  the  horses  and  let  them
feed,  and  then  gave  his  master  provisions,
with  ihe  which   he  always  went  provided.
"While  they  were  talking  of  the  land,  how-
goodly  a  one  it  seemed,  a  hart  burst  through
the  thicket,  breaking  down  boughs  and  bush-
es before  him,  and  close  after  him  a  huge
lion.     The    knight   hearing   the   bruit  they
D^ade,  started  up  before  he  saw  them  ;  and
the  halt,  whom  fear  taught  to  seek  for  pro-
tection, took  for  remedy  a  tning  contrary  to
nature,  and  from  which  at  another  time  he
would  have  fied  ;    which    was    to  go  up  to
him,  as  if  having  certain  hope  of  life  from  his
T  2


244

help.  Certes,  cried  lie  of  Tortune,  jsince
thon  has  put  ihy  trust  in  me  for  protection,
1  will  meet  the  danger  before  it  siiall  reach
thee.  Wherewith  drawing  his  sword,  he
stood  ready  for  the  hon  ;  but  the  hon  stopt,
seeing,  him  to  be  man,  whom  all  things  by
reason  obey.  The  two  horses,  moved  wiih
fear  by  the  lion,  brake  their  bridles  and  ran
into  the  woods,  and  after  them  Selviam  hied
apace.  Present]}',  throngh  the  same  tliicket
came  a  man  of  large  body,  covered  with  hair
like  a  savage;  he  had  a  long  white  beard, lett
toarowasit  would,  and  his  face  was  now
wrinkled  :  in  his  left  hand  was  a  bow,  and  in
his  right  a  poisoned  arrow  ;  and  many  others
Avere  stuck  round  about  his  body  within  a
cord  which  he  wore  as  a  girdle.  Round  his.  arm
he  had  a  leash  coiled  many  times,  with  which
he  led  his  lion.  lie,  when  he  had  espied  the
knight  of  Fortune,  drew  his  bow,  and  let  fly
an  arrow  at  him  with  such  force,  that  it  pierc-
ed his  shield  through  and  through,  and  would
have  gone  through  his  arms  also  had  they  not
been  of  such  excellent  temper.  The  gentle
prince  knowing  him  to  be  his  father,  who
hud  nourished  him  so  long  in  his  cave,  knew


245

r,ot  what  to  do  ;  to  strike  him  was  what  ill
beseemed  him,  and  to  make  himself  known
required  more  time  than  the  other,  according
to  his  wonted  little  patience,  was  likely  to
allow  him.  By  this  time  the  lion,  losing
fear  now  that  the  presence  gf  his  master  en-
couraged him,  made  at  the  knight,  Avho
struck  at  him  and  smote  off  the  two  feet
which  he  had  fixed  upon  his  shield,  so  that
the  lion  fell  to  the  ground  :  then  having  his
eye  still  upon  the  savage's  bow,  he  received
two  other  arrows  in  his  shield;  and  springing
upon  him  before  he  could  let  fly  another,
caught  him  in  his  arms.  The  savage,  who
was  strong  by  nature,  struggled  to  get  loose;
but  before  he  could  effect  this,  he  of  Fortune
made  him  understand  who  he  was;  at  which
the  savage  was  so  joyful  that  he  embraced
him  closer  than  he  had  done  in  their  former
rude  grappling.  So  seating  themselves  be-
side the  fountain,  the  knight  told  him  all
that  had  befallen  him,  and  how  Selviani  was
in  his  compan}',  and  now  gone  to  follow  the
horses  ;  tlie  savage  not  knowing  what  to  say
for  astonishment.  Truly,  if  reason  and  un-
derstanding had  not  been  so  gross  in  bun,
y  3


246

he  would  have  found  enough  to  say,  and
enough  to  wonder  at.  But  though  his  nature
w^as  not  capable  of  any  more  than  just  to
feel  what  brutes  attain  to  by  force  of  in-
stinct,  yet  he  remembered  what  had  past,
and  the  peril  which  the  knight  was  in  from
his  hands  on  the  day  of  his  birth,  in  that  very
place;  and  at  times  he  was  minded  to  tell
him  all  he  knew  of  his  parentage  ;  but  then,
thinking  that  if  he  did  this  he  should  lose
him  wholly,  he  forbore.  So  talking  of  many
things  they  continued  till  night,  expecting
Selviam  ;  but  as  in  that  land  disasters  were
always  sure  to  attend  the  knight  of  Fortune,
so  one  had  now  befallen,  which  prevented
him  from  returning  so  soon.  So  they  went
at  last  to  the  cave,  where  the  savage  man's
Avife  knowing  Palmerin,  embraced  him  very
lovingly,  shedding  many  tears  for  joy,  and
in  remembrance  of  his  long  loss,  and  re-
questing what  was  become  of  her  son  Sel-
viam. Her  husband  did  declare  about  what
business  he  was  gone,  which  did  pacify  her
very  well,  and  so  she  desired  the  prince  to
rest  that  night  upon  a  bed  of  skins,  such  ano-
ther as  that  whereon  he  had  slept  many  a


247

night  in  his  childhood  ;  and  so  feeding  on  so
small  a  pittance  as  they  had,  they  went  to
take  their  rest.  On  the  morrow  the  woman
would  have  shewn  him  the  clothes  he  had
about  him  when  her  husband  brought  him
home;  but  he  would  not  suffer  his  wife  to
do  so,  because  he  should  not  esteem  him  for
his  father,  and  Selviam  for  his  brother,
whose  long  tarriance  abroad  all  that  night,
and  not  as  then  returned,  greatly  troubled  the
prince,  as  also  the  parents,  who  were  desi-
rous to  see  him.  At  last,  seeing  he  came
not,  the  prince  took  his  leave  and  departed
afoot,  to  see  if  he  could  meet  him  by  the
way,  because  he  doubted  some  harm  had
betalien  him  :  the  savage  man  and  his  wife
greatly  lamenting  for  his  departure,  as  also
because  they  might  not  see  their  son.


24S


CHAPTER  32.


Afr.cr  that  the  "knight  of  Fortune  was  departr
cd  from  the  savage  man,  he  travelled  on  foot
the  most  part  of  the  day,  not  knowing  Vvhi-
ther  he  went,  till  at  length  hearing  the  roar
of  tlie  sea  upon  his  left,  he  went  that  way,  and
came  to  a  place  which  he  recollected  to  be
the  very  spot  where  Polendos,  king  of  Thes-
salyhad  found  him.  The  calmness  and  beau-
ty of  that  day  then  came  into  his  mind,  and
the  fair  galley  in  which  he  had  glided  along
the  coast,  and  the  regular  stroke  of  its  oars  ;
then  casting  his  cjes  over  the  main  which  he
had  then  traversed,  he  thought  of  Constan-
tinople, and  the  bounty  with  which  the  em-
peror Palmerin  had  received  him,  and  how
he  had  been  bv  his  hand  «Jiiven  to   the  fair


249

Polinarda.  Tliese  recollections  brought  with
them  the  wonted  perturbation  of  spirit  ;  and
in  this  mood  he  ascended  a  rock  which  over-
looked the  sea  commandingly,  and  gazing
upon  it  then  when  its  waves  were  fiercer  and
louder,  thought  within  himself  that  they
were  calm,  if  compared  with  his  sorrows.  At
length,  worn  out  with  such  thoughts  as  these>
he  fell  asleep,  with  such  a  sleep  as  brought
no  rest  with  it  ;  and  ere  long,  suddenly  start-
ing in  great  fear,  he  awaked  ;  for  that  his
mind  did  persuade  some  ill  adventure  towards
him.  Then  looking  about  him  on  all  sides, he
saw  nothing  except  the  sea,  now  calmer  than
usual,  and  by  him  another  sea  of  tears  Avhich
his  eyes  had  made;  whereby  he  knew  that
even  in  sleep  his  sorrow  did  not  slumber*
Afterwards,  looking  landward,  he  espied  a
large  boat,  covered  with  green  boughs  ;  and
going  up  to  it  to  see  if  any  persons  were
therein,  he  beheld  two  men,  the  one  of
whom  seeing  him  so  young,  and  that  he  was
without  a  horse,  had  compassion  on  him,  de-
siring him  to  rly  if  he  had  regard  to  his  own
life.  But  then  up  came  four  armed  men,  in
brigandines,  andwithholbardsin  their  hands.


'250

who  broke  off  the  conversation.  They  brought
xvith  tliem  a  fifths  prisoner;  whom,  when
they  drew  nearer,  the  knight  of  Fortune
knew  to  be  Selviam,  his  squire.  Seeing  him
in  this  phght,  he  was  full  sorrowful  ;  and  step-
ping up  to  them,  Iresought  them  to  let  him
go;  but  one  of  the  four  at  that  laid  hold  on
him  himself,  and  said.  Look  now  for  some
one  to  release  yourself,  for  this  fellow  is  fast.
This  moved  the  knight  to  such  anger,  that
T\  ith  his  gauntlet  he  struck  him  so  sore  upon
the  face,  that  he  tumbled  him  clean  over*
Then  >vith  his  sword  he  assailed  the  other
three,  that  two  of  them  were  slain;  the  other
escaped  in  flight:  which  done,  he  cut  the
cords  with  which  Selviam  was  tied,  request-
ing him  to  report  how  he  chanced  into  that
mishap.

Selviam,  who  did  not  yet  feel  himself  safe,
answered,  Sir,  let  us  get  from  hence,  and  I
will  tell  you  as  1  go.  Nay,  said  he  of  Tor-
tune,  I  must  know  first,  that  I  may  then  de-
termine what  to  do.  He  had  hardly  began
to  answer  to  his  demand,  when  looking  aside,
they  espied  two  men  come  leading  their  two


251

horses^  and  after  them,  upon  a  Imgc  mul-
berry coloured  horse,  a  giant  of  bigness  out
of  measure,  armed  in  strong  white  armour,
Avithout  any  adornment  soever.  In  his  shield
he  bore  three  giants  heads  in  a  bloody  field,
being  in  memory  of  other  three  whom  he  had
fought  and  slain  in  field,  one  to  one.  This  is
what  I  feared,  cried  Selviam  ;  but  since  you
w  ould  not  get  out  of  the  way,  you  will  now
leam  from  this  devil,  more  than  I  can  tell
you.  The  kniglit  of  Fortune,  as  this  was
the  first  giant  whom  he  had  ever  seen,  was
somewhat  in  fear  at  his  monstrous  bigness,,
yet  not  so  as  to  forget  to  do  his  devoir.  The
giant,  seeing  his  men  slain,  stood  not  to  use
words,  but  growing  into  great  rage,  drew
out  the  sword  which  he  carried  in  his  girdle,
and  v>hich  was  out  of  all  ordinary  length  and
proportion,  and  smote  at  him,  thinking  to
bring  him  down;  but  he  stept  aside,  and  at
the  same  time  reaching  him  with  his  owna-
bove  the  knee,  gave  him  a  deep  wound,  cutting
away  a  slice.  The  giant  not  feeling  tliis,  by  rea-
son of  his  great  fury,  vrheeled  round,  and  struck
at  him  again  :  the  blow  was  such,  that  fall-
ing upon  the  shield,  it  cut  away  half  thereoff


252

and  the  giant's  own  horse,  swayed  on  with  the
weight   of  the  blow,   stumbled  against   the
root  of  a  tree,  and  threw  him  with  such  force
that  the«knight  thought  he  was  killed.     But
Camboldam,  for  so  he  was  called,  who  had
seen  himself  in  worse  danger  than  this,  rose
as  well  as  he  could,  though  he  now  felt  that
the  wound  in  his  thigh   somewhat  disabled
him.     So  to  it  they  went,  smiting  away  ;  and
though   the  giant's   blows   were   dealt  with
greater  force,  those  which  he  received  were
put  in,  in  such  good  time  and  place,  that
they  were  of  far  more  effect.     Wherefore  he
became  more  furious  and  more  melancholic
than  he  had  ever  been  at  any  former  time.
But  he  of  Fortune  knew  how  to  ward  himself
so  well,  that  he  made  him  lose  all  his  endea-
vours ;  and  in  requital  for  his  vain  blows,
gave  him  others  so  sure,  that  the  field  was
dyed  with  his  blood.     Now  the  giant,  seeing
that  all  his  fury  availed  him  nothing,  made
at   the  knight,  thinking  to  seize  him  in  his
arms,  and  crush  him  to  pieces;  but  it  was
not  so:  for  he  of  Fortune  stopped  him  with
a  stioke   between  the  fingers  of  his   right
l^nd,  such  as  to  sUt  it  up,  and  part  of  the


arm  also.  By  this  time  the  giant  became  so
desperate,  that  he  began  to  blaspheme  in  such
a  voice,  that  it  eclioed  for  a  while  in  the
hollow  which  the  sea  had  worn  in  the  rocks
around  ;  and  thinking  to  strike  with  his  other
hand,  found  so  little  skill  in  it,  that  none  of
his  blows  took  effect  ;  wherefore  he  of  For-
tune came  in  to  him  without  fear,  and  gave
him  so  many  wounds,  and  in  so  many  parts,
that  at  last  he  brought  him  down  ;  and  the
weight  of  his  huge  body  v/as  such,  that  it
seemed  like  the  fall  of  a  tower.  Then  the
knight,  seeing  this  monster  dead,  and  him-
self without  a  wound,  fell  on  his  knees,  giv-
ing thanks  to  God,  who-e  providence  did
aid  him  in  such  a  dangerous  combat.

The  men  that  led  the  two  horses,  came  and
fell  down  before  the  prince,  desiring  him  to
save  their  lives,  for  that  they  were  constrain-
ed against  their  wills  to  attend  on  that  mis-
chievous wretch.  Their  fair  intreaty  quickly
persuaded  him,  who  gave  them  other  re-
ception than  they  expected  ;  so  he  desired
them  to  report  what  this  tyrant  was,  and  af-
ter what  manner  he  hved.  Their  answer  was_,
TOL.  r.  z


254

lliat  lie  was  called  Camboldam,  of  Mtirzela,
lord  of  the  casilc  of  Pena  Broca  ;  one  of  the
cruellest  tyrants  in  all  the  world  :  who  hav-
ing knowledge  that  his  brother  Calfurnio,
who  lived  on  the  coast  of  Ireland,  had  been
slain  by  a  knight  in  green  arms,  bearing  in
his  shield  a  savage  in  a  white  field,  with  two
lions  in  a  leash,  he  vowed  to  take  sharp  re-
venge on  every  one  that  should  happen  into
his  hands.  Upon  this  occasion  lie  sailed
from  his  country,  and  landing  on  this  coast,
he  went  to  see  if  fortune  would  send  any  to
appease  the  hell  of  his  bloody  mind  ;  and
meeting  with  that  young  man,  running  to
catch  his  horses  which  had  strayed  from
him,  he  committed  him  to  those  which  lay
there  dead,  that  they  might  torment  him.
Thus,  said  they,  have  we  certified  all  we  can
say  ;  see  now  then  how  you  will  deal  by  us.

Then  the  knight  desired  them  to  go  and  cer-
tify unto  king  Fadrique,  how  the  giant  Cam-
boldam,  was  slain  ;  news  which  would  re-
joice him,  because  of  the  disservices  whicli
that  monster  had  done  him.  AViiom,  said
they,  shall  we  say  hath  done  this  service?


The  knight  of  Fortune,  he  replied  ;  for  as  yet
I  have  no  other  name.  They  promising  to
fulfil  his  request,  departed  presently  ;  and  he
and  Selviam  mounted  on  their  horses,  and
took  their  journey  on.  He  did  not  tell  Selvi-
am what  had  passed  with  the  savage,  his  father,
because  of  the  delay  it  would  be  to  return  and
see  him  ;  but  went  strait  on  towards  the  place
where  it  was  said  all  adventurers  were  lost,
which  was  now  nigh  at  hand; not  fearing  the
peril  which  he  sought,  for  he  was  adven-
turing worthily-  and  it  is  the  quality  of  vir-
tue to  think  little  of  difficulties,  and  less  of
pleasures.


z2


CôG


CHJFTER  33.


"^'ou  bave  heard  heretofore  how,  when  the
knight  of  Fortune  departed  from  Constanti-
nople the  first  time,  Selviam  carried  the
shield  of  the  pahn,  which  Daliarte  had  sent
him,  in  a  bag,  that  be  mij^ht  not  be  known
thereby  ;  reserving  it  for  some  great  need,  if
any  such  should  befall  him.  Now  because
his  shield  of  Fortune  was  demolished  in  his
battle  with  Camboldam,  and  that  in  this
country  arras  were  doubly  necessary  accord-
ing to  the  difference  of  adventures,  here  and
in  other  parts,  he  was  minded  to  take  it;  and
seeing  Selviam  without  it,  he  held  it  for  a
bad  sign,  weening  that  it  could  not  have
been  lost  without  some  mystcrj.


"151

Sir,  said  Sel  viam,  I  have  not  only  had  no
time  to  tell  you  what  has  happened,  but
moreover  feared  to  do  it,  because  of  the  grief
it  might  be  to  you.  Yesterday,  before  this
cruel  giant  took  me,  and  when  he  was  in
sight,  a  damsel  mounted  on  a  white  palfrey
came  crossing  over  the  forest  to  me,  and  said^
Sclviam,  deliver  this  shield  thou  bearest  to
me,  before  this  devil  who  comes  here  can  take
it,  which  would  be  a  greater  loss  than  thou
art  aware  of;  I  will  yield  it  into  thy  master's
hands  again  when  he  shall  stand  in  most  need
of  it.  Her  gentle  speech,  and  the  present
dan2;er  before  mine  eves,  did  urare  me  ratiier
to  give  it  her,  than  mine  enemy  should  en-
joy a  thing  of  such  honour:  wherefore  I  gave
it  her,  v>"ho  presently  departed  so  quickly,
I  could  not  tell  which  way.

Tlie  knight  of  Fortune  mused  at  the  event,
and  could  not  judge  to  what  end  it  was
v/rought  :  so  he  rode  on  thinking  silently  of
this  and  of  other  things  which  it  brou2;ht  to
mind,  till  Selviam  put  him  out  of  this  study
by  saying.  Sir,  do  you  hear  what  I  hear?  What
is  it  you  hear,  replied  he  of  Fortune,  for  I
z3


was  not  in  such  mood  as  to  attend  to  any  thing.
A  great  noise,  answered  Sel\  iam,  from  yonder
high  trees,  as  though  it  were  the  slashing  of
v*eapons  in  a  combat:  there  must  needs  be  a
great  battle  there.  With  that,  directing  his
course  thither,  he  espied  four  knights  on  foot,
t'Ao  on  a  side,  very  fiercely  assailing  one  an-
other ;  their  armour  so  bruised,  and  their
shields  so  battered,  that  he  could  hardly  per-
ceive any  of  their  devicts,  except  it  were  one,
which  was  the  head  of  a  white  bull,  belong-
ing to  Poinpides,  the  son  of  Don  Duardos  :
none  of  the  others  did  he  know,  though  their
feats  w^ere  such  that  he  knew  not  which  had
the  advantage.  So  beseeching  them  to  listen
to  him,  they  drew  asunder,  as  well  for  the
sake  of  resting,  as  at  his  desire.  Sirs,  said
he,  I  perceive  you  all  so  cruelly  handled,
and  the  strength  and  courage  of  each  so
equally  matched,  that  I  fear  this  combat  will
hring  some  hurt  with  it.  I  beseech  you,  if
the  cause  of  your  battle  be  such  that  it  may
he  excused,  give  it  over  for  love  of  me;  and
there  may  come  a  time  in  which  I  may  re-
quite you.  Sir,  answered  one  of  the  knights,
our  quarrel  is  grounded  on  so  li^ht  an  occa-


&ion,  that  to  end  it  nothing  more  is  neces-
sary than  that  this  knight  of  the  Bull  should
tell  us  why  he  is  seeking  another  knight,
concerning  whom  he  asked  news  of  us.  That,
answered  the  knight  of  the  Bull,  you  shall
never  learn  of  me,  so  long  as  1  have  this
hand  and  sword  to  defend  me.  These  words
procured  a  fresh  striie,  and  to  it  they  fell
again  very  fiercely,  and  without  any  regard
of  themselves,  hewing  away,  so  that  in  short
space  of  time  they  had  demolished  each
others'  aniiour,  still  fighting  on  as  hotly  and
strenuously  as  if  their  strength  was  no  whit
abated.  The  knight  of  Fortune,  grieved  to  see
such  courageous  minds  subject  to  so  great  a
hazard,  was  as  loth  to  tarry  and  behold  the
death  of  such  men  as  he  would  have  been  to
be  one  of  them  ;  but  who  can  control  the
wilfulness  and  obstinacv  of  vouna;  men  !  All
of  them  w^ere  wounded  in  many  places,  yet
all  in  temper  to  receive  more  wounds.  The
knight,  despairing  of  separating  them,  stood
looking  on;  and  though  they  were  all  excel-
lent in  arms,  one  who  was  in  white  armour
seemed  to  him  to  surpass  both  in  slight  and
skill  in  foyning;  nevertheless  he  was  in  such


260

plight,  that  all  the  vantage  he  could  expect
was  to  expire  the  last.  By  this  time  their
arms  were  so  utterly  unserviceable,  that  no
blow  could  be  given  which  was  not  to  great
hurt;  though  on  the  other  haad,  their  swords
were  now  so  blunted  that  they  were  of  less
danger.  The  knight  of  Fortune  thrust  him-
self in  among  them,  beseeching  them  to
cease,  as  their  quarrel  might  so  well  be  ex-
cused ;  but  they  were  so  severely  bent  the
one  against  the  other,  that  they  scant  knew
themselves  what  they  did.

At  this  time  a  sudden  darkness  overshadow-
ed them,  the  air  being  covered  with  a  thick
black  cloud,  in  which  they  lost  sight  one  of
another,  the  blows  still  sounding  as  if  they
were  given  with  greater  force  than  ever.
But  the  darkness  soon  became  such,  and  the
fear  because  of  it  which  each  felt  lest  he
should  strike  his  companion,  that  perforce
they  left  off  battle,  and  all  fell  to  the  ground
senseless,  their  memory  and  feelings  being
taken  from  them  by  enchantment.  Presently
the  cloud  opened,  and  the  knight  of  For-
tune saw  them  all  four  upon  a  bier^  which


261

was  laid  upon  a  chariot^  arid  drawn  by  four
black  horses  through  the  air.  Not  knovvitng
%vhat  to  think  of  this  portentous  sight,  he
went  up  to  the  squires,  who  were  with  the
horses,  lamenting  loudly  ;  and  he  asked  of
them  what  knights  they  were  that  had
fought  this  sore  combat.  One  of  them  an-
swered, that  the  knight  in  the  white  armour
was  Platir,  son  to  Primaleon;  the  other  was
Floraman,  the  prince  of  Sardinia  ;  who  were
seeking  after  the  knight  of  Fortune,  which
made  them  leave  the  emperor's  court;  en-
terprizing  likewise  the  adventure  of  Great
Britain,  if  they  might  meet  with  this  knight,
whose  friendly  company  they  always  desired  ;
but  as  they  arrived  here  in  Great  Britain,
these  two  other  knights  met  them,  the  one
being  Blandidon,  the  other  Poinpides.  Af-
ter they  had  greeted  each  other,  he  of  the
Bull's  Head  enquired  if  they  could  give  him
news  of  the  knight  of  Fortune  ;  upon  which
they  demanded  why  he  enquired  for  h.im.  So
words  arising  on  either  side,  they  fell  to  this
fierce  battle;  which  yourself  hath  partly
seen,  to  the  loss  (I  fear  said  the  squire)  of
their  lives;    and  here  we  are   left  without


262

Masters,  "arid  not  knowing  what  to  do  be-
cause of  the  bad  account  we  can  give  of
them.

The  knight  of  Fortune  consoled  them,  and
persuaded  them  to  go  to  London,  Vvhere,  if
their  masters  were  hving,  they  were  sure*
sooner  or  later,  to  repair.  So  leaving  them
well  contented  with  his  courteous  speeches
and  manifested  good  will,  he  went  his  way.
Far  he  had  not  ridden  before  he  espied  one
come  riding  towards  him,  with  his  horn
about  his  neck,  attired  like  a  hunter,  with  a
knife  in  his  girdle,  and  riding  upon  a  large
and  lean  horse;  who  began  in  this  manner  to
greet  him,  with  a  loud  voice  and  a  cheerful
countenance:  Lo  !  now,  Palmerin  of  England,
the  days  draw  nigh,  in  which  thy  deeds  shall
put  all  others  out  of  remembrance,  and
Great  Britain  shall  be  restored  to  its  lost
contentment.  Marvel  not  that  I  know  thy
name,  for  of  thee  and  thy  affairs  I  know
more  than  thou  kuowest  thyself.


The  knight  of  Fortune  marvelled  to  hear
himself    named    in   such   a  strange   place^


Q63

when  he  persuaded  himself  he  was  unknown
to  any  :  at  length  he  began  to  think,  that  it
might  be  the  sage  Daliarte  of  the  Dark
Valley  ;  yet  seeing  him  so  young,  he  doubted,
thinking  that  so  wonderful  things  were  not
to  be  looked  for  from  one  of  so  few  years.
He,  who  understood  his  thoughts,  said  to  him.
Sir  Palmerin,  my  desire  to  serve  you  is  such,
that  1  will  resolve  this  doubt.  Know  then
that  I  am  Daliarte,  your  servant  ;  and  though
I  could  give  you  good  account  of  your  own
affairs,  I  will  not  do  it,  because  in  few  days
you  will  know  all,  and  that  in  such  season  as
to  receive  joy  two  fold  greater  than  I  could
at  this  time  impart.

Sir  Daliarte,  (answered  the  knight  of  For-
tune) I  do  not  request  any  thing  which  you
are  not  willing  should  be  known,  being  well
assured  that  he  who  hath  shown  me  such
bounty  in  things  past,  will  not  v.ithhold  it
from  me  in  those  which  are  to  come.  So
walking  on,  at  last  they  came  to  the  Dark
Valley,  where  Daliarte  conducted  the  knight
of  Fortune  into  his  habitation,  and  shewed
him  many  rare  and  excellent   monuments  ;


«64

the  lively  shape  of  men  and  women,  in  fair
portraitures;  which  gave  a  great  delight  to
his  noble  mind,  so  that  he  thought  this
dwelling  place  the  fairest  that  ever  he  had
seen  in  all  his  life.  There  remained  he  so
long  as  him  pleased,  very  well  entertained  by
the  sage  Daliarte,  who  gave  him  to  under-
stand, how  Platir  and  the  other  knights
should  be  healed  of  their  wounds,  without
any  danger,  and  would  soon  repair  to  Lon-
don. There  remained  he  passing  his  time  in
good  exercise  and  discourse,  such  as  he
hoped  to  derive  fruit  from  :  for  the  virtuous
conversation  of  wise  men  is  not  a  little  to  he-,
esteemed.


2^.i


CHAPTER  34.


Tlie  knight  of  the  Savage  Man,  being  de-
parted irom  Orianda,  ia  the  castle  of  the
giant  Calfurnio,  so  long  continued  on  the
seas^  that  at  last  he  arrived  in  England,  in-
tending to  take  his  way  strait  to  London_,  be-
cause he  would  see  the  king  Fadrique_,  and  the
princess  Flerida  ;  not  expecting  to  be  inter-
rupted on  his  way.  But  in  those  days  the
roads  and  forests  were  so  frequented  by
knight's  errant  and  fair  damsels,  adven-
tures and  disasters,  that  no  one  could  travel
quietly,  as  he  thought.  So  it  bcfcl,  that  one
day  at  evening,  about  half  a  league  from  the
city  of  London,  he  espied  a  damsel  on  a
v/liite  palfrey  come  riding  toward  him,  her
iiair  spread  over  her  shoulders,  and  her  gar-
2.1


Q66

ments  seeming  to  be  greatly  misvised  ;  all
the  way  as  she  rode,  she  used  many  shrieks,
and  grievous  lamentations,  filling  the  forest
with  her  cries.  As  soon  as  she  saw  him,  she
-rode  lip  to  him,  saying,  Sir,  as  you  regard
the  honour  of  knighthood,  help  to  defend
me  from  this  wretch  that  seeks  to  dishonour
me.  He  seeing  a  knight  come  after  her,
who  was  well  armed  and  bravely  mounted,
rode  up  to  meet  him,  saying,  Í  perceive  both
knighthood  and  that  armour  is  ill  bestowed
upon  you,  that  employ  yourself  in  the  per-
secution of  a  damsel,  when  you  are  both
bound  by  duty,  and  by  law  of  anns,  to  de-
fend lier.

Sir,  (answered  the  strange  knight)  I  desire
you  let  not  that  wicked  one  deceive  you,  for
it  is  not  as  you  think.  He  ol"  the  Savage
however  still  crost  his  way,  saying.  Be  that
aï  it  may,  you  shall  do  battle  with  me  before
3'ou  injure  her.  The  strange  knight  seeing
him  so  fiercely  bent,  said.  Since  you  v,  ill  iri-
force  me  to  it,  I  must,  though  against  mv
will.  Whereupon,  couching  their  spc.-irf,
they  met  together  courageoiisly,  so  thu.  the


2Ô7

strange  knight  was  cast,  and  the  knight  of
the  Savage  ]\ian  fain  ro  leap  off  from  his
hoj-se  ;  and  drawing  their  swords,  they  laid
at  each  other  very  cruelly,  to  the  great  hurt
of  them  both,  and  more  perilously  than  ei-
ther of  themliad  expected.

In  the  mean  time  they  Avere  in  the  fight,  the
damsel  left  them,  and  returned  accompanied
with  two  knights  more,  shewing  them  the
Icnight  of  the  Savage.Man,  and  said.  Behold,
5.ir  knights,  the  man  that  hath  slain  my  father^
and  now  would  gladly  work  the  death  of  this
my  brother  ;  (pointing  to  the  knight  that  be
fore  had  pursued  her)  v/herefore  I  desire  you
to  take  revengement  on  him.  At  these
T.-ords,  one  of  the  knights  alighted,  and  per-
ceiving the  knight  that  the  damsel  named
her  brother,  to  be  very  sore  wounded,  step-
ped between  them,  saying  to  the  knight  of
the  Savage  Man,  Come,  traitor,  deal  with
me,  and  not  with  him,  whose  loss  of  blood,
and  weariness  beside,  requireth  rather  to
lake  rest  than  endure  the  combat.

The  knight  of  the  Savage  Man>   at  these
'2  A  ii


^68

"Words,  knowing  himself  to  deserve  no  sucU
name,  and  to  be  clear  of  all  infamy,  in  great
anger  would  not  make  him  any  reply  ;  hue
made  at  him,  thinking  to  strike  him  under
his  shield  :  but  he  with  whom  he  was  already
engaged  received  the  blow  upon  his,  saying.
First  finish  what  you  have  begun  with  me  ;
there  will  be  day  enough  left  to  deal  Avith
him  afterwards.  Then  turning  to  the  knight
wha.had  interposed,  he  said  to  him.  With-
draw vourself,  for  as  loner  as  I  can  defend
myself  I  do  not  want  your  help;  so  the
other  withdrew,  thinking  that  two  to  one
would  be  shameful.  But  he  of  the  Savage,
who  greedily  desired  to  begin  battle  with
this  second  one,  bestirred  himself  so  against
the  first,  that  ere  long  he  brought  him  per-
force to  the  ground  ;  yet  not  so  easily  but
that  he  himself  was  left  in  such  plight  as
was  to  be  expected  from  the  hands  of  him
with  whom  he  had  fought.

Then  the  second,  because  he  was  of  virtuous
inclinations  and  of  great  mind,  and  gene-
rous, seeing  him  somewhat  wearied,  and  his
armour  broken  in  many  places,  said  to  him.


169

Sir  knight,  it  would  be  dishonour  to  e^ive  yon
a  fresh  assault,  and  small  manhood  in  me  to
urge  you  to  extremity  ;  I  would  rather  not
do  battle  with  you,  since  so  little  honour  isto
be  gained  by  it.  He  of  the  Savage,  who
could  at  such  times  ill  govern  his  choler,  an-
swered bim  by  such  a  blow  upon  his  shield
as  cut  it  half  through  ;  saying.  Do  what  you
can  ;  for  I  shall  show  you  that  even  as  I  now
am  I  have  strength  enough  left  for  you.
The  other,  who  also  thought  no  httle  of  him-
self, seeing  his  forbearance  so  ill  requited,
laid  at  him  without  mercy.  His  companion,
"who  was  on  horseback  looking  on,  thought
the  valour  of  the  Savage  knight  such  that  no
other's  was  to  be  compared  to  it;  and  in
truth  he  demeaned  himself  so  valiantly  that  at
iength  his  antagonist  waxed  feeble,  not  being
able  to  stand  before  him  ;  his  armour  being
broken  in  all  parts,  and  his  fiesh  in  many
parts  pierced.  He  on  horseback,  grieving  to
see  his  companion  in  such  state,  and  fearing
that  if  the  battle  continued  he  of  the  Savage,
in  anger  at  his  words,  would  slay  him,
alighted  and  went  up  to  him,  saying.  Sir
knight  your  anger  ought  not  to  be  satisfied,
2  A3


270

and  this  quarrel  should  be  at  an  end,  since
t'le  hie  of  one  or  both  is  at  hazard  ;  ^Yhich
would  be  a  greater  evil  than  it  can  be  now  to
give  over.  Certes,  quoth  the  knight  of  the
Savage  Man,  that  will  [never  do  till  he  hatii
unsaid  his  words,  or  yielded  himself  into  my
hands;  which  else  shall  give  him  his  due
punishmeat.  If,  replied  lhe  other,  you  will
not  leave  battle  with  him  at  my  intreaty,you
must  do  it  with  me;  though  I  am  loth  it
should  be  so,  because  you  require  rest  rather
than  more  toil,  and  any  harm  which  might
befal  you  would  be  ill  employed.

Good  sir,  (quoth  the  kuight  of  the  Savage
Man,)  this  care  in  you  is  more  than  I  desire
you  should  use  unto  me  ;  assure  yourself  I
shall  finish  what  I  have  begun,  or  he  shall  do
as  I  say  ;  and  if  you  think  fit  to  protect  him
against  me,  I  am  ready  to  pass  the  rest  of  the
day  with  you  in  this  business.  While  he
was  speaking,  the  second  knight,  he  with
whom  he  was  engaged,  fell  all  along  on  the
ground  through  faintness  of  much  blood  that
bad  isiued  from  a  wound  in  his  throat;  at
which  his  companion  became  so  sorrowful.


that  forgetful  of  the  courtesy  on  which  he
stood  before,  in  his  grief  and  resentment  he
attacked  the  knight  of  tlie  Savage  rigorous-
ly, in  hope  to  have  revenged  his  friend's
death  \  but  he  found  the  knight  of  the  Sa-
vage Man  so  great  of  strength,  and  so  great-
ly affected  to  a  further  victory,  that  in  short
space  of  time  his  fear  was  greater  than  his
hope.  Nevertheless,  he  of  the  Savage  had
been  so  severely  handled  by  the  two  former,
and  this  was  so  good  a  knight,  that  certes
both  had  died  in  that  battle  if  it  had  hot
chanced  the  king  of  England  to  come
hawking  into  this  forest  ;  where  espying  these
two  knights  so  eager  at  their  fight,  their  pi-
tiful estate,  and  the  good  heart  with  which
the}'  still  pursued  the  battle,  he  thought  the
death  of  either  would  be  greatly  to  be  la-
mented ;  and  went  in  between  them  intreat-
ing  them  to  give  over,  if  their  quarrel  wa*
such  that  they  could  so  do.  They  presently
desisted,  seeing  it  was  the  king,  glad  to  see
themselves  escaped  from  so  great  danger,
and  of  the  just  excuse  for  leaving  off  their
combat.  The  knÍ2;ht  of  the  Savage  Man
lifting  up  his  beaver,  came  and  presented


272

himself  to  the  king,  who  seeing  him,  took
him  in  liis  arms  and  rejoiced  over  him,  as
the  man  whom  he  most  esteemed  in  the
world  ;  as  well  because  he  had  brought  him
up  in  his  household,  as  because  nature  led
him  so  to  do.  The  other  in  like  manner
made  himself  known.

When  the  king  saw  that  he  was  Graciano,
son  to  Arnedos  king  of  France,  he  alighted
irom  his  horse,  and  received  him  with  such
love  and  courtesy  as  were  his  due,  and  de-
sired him  to  shew  the  occasion  of  their  dis-
cord, as  also  what  the  other  knights  were,
that  lay  on  the  ground.

Sir,  replied  Graciano,  the  knight  that  lieth
hithermost,  and  is  nearest  to  your  grace,  is
Francian,  son  to  Polendos,  king  of  Thessaly,
in  whose  company,  to  mine  own  honour
and  either  of  our  contents,  I  travelled  from
the  city  of  Constantinople.

To  this  place  we  were  conducted  by  a  dam-
sel, sister  to  the  other  knight  that  lieth  dead
on  the  ground  :  she  gave  us  to  understand.


273

that  this  knight  (meaning  the  knight  of  th(^
Savage  Man)  had  ciuelly  slain  her  father  by
treason,  and  was  now  killing  her  brother  like-
wise ;  wherefore  she  desired  us  to  revenge
them.  Francian,  perceiving  her  brother  in
such  estate,  ashe  could  not  award  the  heavy
blows  this  knight  charged  him  withal,  en-
tered between  them  ;  and  this  your  knight
did  such  feats  in  arms  that  he  subdued  them
both,  and  last  of  all  brought  me  to  the  condi-
tion in  which  you  see  me.

The  knight  of  the  Savage  INIan,  amazed  at
what  the  prince  Graciano  had  said,  began  in
this  order  to  discourse  how  it  happened  :  The
damsel  of  whom  this  knight  hathspoken,came
riding  towards  me,  crying  how  this  knight
(whom  she  after  named  to  be  her  brother)
did  seek  to  dishonour  her,  and  therefore  de-
sired me  to  defend  her  in  so  great  extremit}'.
When  I  had  joined  combat  with  the  knight,
soon  after  she  came  again,  and  brought  these
two  knights,  reporting  to  them,  as  he  hath
informed  your  majesty  :  so  leaving  us  in  this
strife,  she  disappeared  we  know  not  whither.
The    king,  well   noting   the   deceit   of  the


274

damsel,  which  was  only  to  seek  the  ruin  of
those  nohle  knights,  caused  the  helmet  of
Francian  and  of  the  other  knight  to  be  taken
off;  when  feeling  the  air,  tliey  came  to  them-
selves again,  saving  that  their  womids  made
them  very  feeble.  Then  was  the  other
knight  known  to  be  Polinardo,  son  to  the
emperor  Trineo  ;  whereat  the  king  had  more
to  wonder  at  :  and  he  sent  for  Utters  to  Lon-
don, on  the  which  he  and  Francian  might  be
carried,  and  would  not  go  himself  till  they
arrived.  And  by  the  way  the  king  question-
ed with  Polinardo,  for  what  cause  he  pur-
sued the  damsel  when  this  noble  knight  took
in  hand  to  defend  her.  Sir,  (answered  Poli-
nardo,) I  think  she  was  the  most  wicked  and
dcceitfullest  damsel  on  the  earth;  for  through
her  persuasion,  Onistaldo  and  Dramiante  hi»
brother,  sons  to  Recindos  king  of  Spain,  are
dead  I  believe.  Having  changed  their  ar-
mour they  did  not  know  each  other,  and  had
almost  slain  one  another,  being  in  such  plight
that  they  could  scarcely  stir,  when  it  pleased
God  that  I  came  up  ;  and  knowing  them
both,  and  being  astonished  at  such  cruelty,
went  between  and  parted  them  ;  who  as  soou


275

as  they  recognized  each  other,  fell  one  on
one  side,  the  other  on  the  other,  as  dead.  I
followed  the  damsel  to  lay  hands  on  her,  and
know  why  she  had  done  this  thing,  when
this  knight  came  and  prevented  me,  as  your
grace  hath  heard.

The  king  was  greatly  displeased  at  this  mis-
adventure, and  sent  presently  ahout,  to  hear
tidings  of  Onistaldo  and  Dramiante,  that  if
their  hodies  were  found  dead  they  might  be
interred  according  to  the  nobility  of  their
birth.  But  it  was  found  that  the  brethren  of
the  Convent  of  V^ictory  had  carried  them
home  to  cure  them  ;  where  in  few  days,
though  their  wounds  were  great,  they  were
holpen.  This  monastery  was  one,  which
was  first  founded  by  Amadis  of  Gaul,  near
unto  Fenusa,  in  memory  of  the  kings*
whom  he  had  there  conquered  ;  and  thither
were  his  bones  carried  after  his  death.


*  The  battle  against  kingCildadan  and  the  hundred  knights,
Amadis  of  Gaul.  Book  2.  Chapter  16.


276

Then  the  king  caused  a  great  many  knights
to  pursue  after  the  damsel  ;  but  their  labour
was  in  vain,  for  her  mistress  Eutropa,  who
sent  her,  kept  her  safe  enough  from  them.
AVhen  tbe  king  was  come  to  the  court,  he
caused  the  princes  to  be  so  provided  for,  as
they  recovered  again  their  health  in  short
time  ;  and  the  knight  of  the  Savage  Man
lying  in  his  accustomed  chamber,  was  di Li-
gen  tlj'  looked  unto  by  the  princess  Florida,
who  felt  as  much  sorrow  at  the  siijht  of
his  wounds  as  if  she  had  known  the  tie  there
was  between  them.  The  king  also  would
often  visit  him,  as  well  to  see  him  as  to  hear
of  his  adventures,  which  were  so  famous
among  all  men  ;  but  never  could  he  pre-
vail upon  him  to  relate  them,  he  deeming  it
alike  unbecoming  to  praise  his  own  feats,
aad  to  dispraise  those  of  another.


277


CHAPTER  S5.


Daliarte  of  the  Dark  Valley,  (as  the  his-
tory declareth,)  caused  the  bodies  of  Platir
and  the  other  knights  to  be  brought  in  a
chariot  to  his  castle,  where  he  used  such
great  care  and  diligence  for  restoring  their
health,  that  in  short  time  they  had  escaped
the  point  of  danger,  and  were  in  as  good
constitution  of  body  as  they  had  been  be-
fore. For  this  occasion  urged  him  to  use
more  circumspection  to  them,  that  if  their
lives  had  failed,  as  perforce  without  his  help
they  must,  then  had  not  only  their  noble
kindred  been  oppressed  with  grief,  but  also
their  dominions  remained  destitute  of  their
ciiief  defence  j  for  which  he  had  thus  pro-
£  B


278

vided  for  them,  albeit  out  of  their  know-
ledge whence  such  friendship  should  pro-
ceed ;  neither  how  they  left  the  place  of
their  combat,  whose  was  the  victory,  or
where  they  were.

Platir  and  Floraman  were  lodged  in  one
chamber  ;  in  like  manner  were  Pompides  and
Blandidon,  where  the  same  princely  attend-
ance was  daily  used  to  them:  but  Daliarte
would  not  let  them  understand  either  what
he  was,  or  wherefore  he  used  such  great
courtesy  unto  tliem.  Neither  could  the
knight  of  Fortune  learn  from  him  where  they
were  lodged,  thougli  assured  of  their  reco-
very. When  time  served  that  they  were
able  to  travel,  they  knew  not  hovv  they
should  set  forth  ;  having  lost  their  arms  and
horses  in  the  battle,  wherein  they  had  lost
themselves  also.  With  this  thought  they
lay  in  their  beds  with  less  rest  than  they
had  done  till  now  ;  but  one  night,  when
Daliarte  thought  convenient,  by  force  of
his  charms  he  cast  them  in  a  dead  slum-
ber, and  brought  them  to  the  place  where
they  fought  their  combat  ;  where,  when  they


Q79

awaked  at  daybreak^  they  found  the  place
bestrewed  with  the  truncheons  of  their
spears,  and  pieces  of  their  armour,  and
fragments  of  their  shields,  on  which  parts  of
their  devices  might  still  be  traced,  and  the
grass  somewhat  dyed  with  the  eíFusion  of
their  blood.

Here  one  looked  at  the  other,  and  then  at
himself;  and  every  one  well  beholding  himself
to  be  sound  of  body,  in  perfection  of  health,
remained  awhile  silent  together,  in  a  great  ad-
miration. Certes,  quoth  Floraman,  at  length,
the  things  in  this  land  are  not  like  those  of
other  lands  :  here  was  our  battle,  and  from
hence  we  were  taken  without  knowing  how
it  ended  ;  and  as  it  seems  to  me,  sir  Platir,
these  knights  here  are  they  w  ith  whom  we
fought.  I  should  think  that  he  who  placed
us  here  meant  us  to  finish  our  battle,  if  he
had  left  us  arms  to  do  it  ;  but  we  are  unpro-
vided of  horse,  weapon,  or  armour,  so  that
I  know  not  what  his  intent  could  be.  Sirs,
said  Platir  to  the  other  twain,  if  you  know
more  about  us  than  we  do  ourselves,  I  be-
seech you  tell  us.  We  are  (answered  Pom-
2  B  2


280

piííes)  in  such  an  uncertainty  of  ourselvei,
that  had  not  you  moved  the  question  when
you  did,  mj'self"  would  have  requested  the
same  of  you.

After  a  httle  talk  passed  between  them,  they
fell  into  knowledge  of  each  other  ;  for  each
was  well  known  by  his  name,  according  to
his  good  exploits  ;  when  forgetting  their  for-
mer enmity,  they  embraced  one  another,  and
greatly  rejoiced  that  they  had  so  happily
met  unto  their  several  contentations.  To  break
off  their  friendly  purposes  of  salutations,  they
espyed  a  damsel  come  riding  towards  them,
more  ugly  than  handsome,  mounted  on  a  bay
palfrey,  attired  all  in  black,  and  her  counte-
nance bewraying  a  sad  and  sorrowful  dispo-
sition. When  she  was  come  unto  them,
restraining  the  bridle  of  her  horse,  and  well
eying  them  awhile,  she  said.  Sirs, you  seem  to
be  knights  who  have  lost  your  arms  by  some
adventure  ;  which  is  not  to  be  marvelled  at^
seeing  that  there  are  so  many  in  this  land.

Lady,  (answered  Blandidon,)  if  we  should
rehearse  in  what  manner  our  mischance  hath


2Sl

happened,  we  should  lose  the  time  necessary
for  men  who  have  to  seek  them.  Admit,
(quoth  the  damsel,)  myself  would  be  the
means  to  provide  you  all  of  horses  and  ar-
mour again,  would  you  grant  the  boon  I
should  put  forth  unto  you  ?  Lady,  (answered
Fioraman,)  our  own  need,  and  the  duty  we
owe  to  any  distressed  lady,  hath  wrought
that  in  me,  and  I  am  sure  the  like  in  all  my
fellows,  that  we  assent.

Every  one  confirming  what  Floraman  had
promised,  the  damsel  departed,  returning  in
short  time  with  four  esquires,  each  bearing
a  bundle,  with  four  more,  that  led  four  goodly
coursers,  all  of  one  colour  and  bigness.  Sirs^
said  she,  if  ye  fulfill  your  part  with  me  as  I
do  with  you,  I  shall  have  nothing  to  complain
of.  Then  she  gave  order  to  open  the  bundles,
and  take  out  the  arms,  which  were  goodly
ones  and  right  sumptuous,  not  differing  from
one  another  in  colour  and  richness.  Each
took  that  which  first  came  to  hand,  and  it  fitted
him  as  though  it  had  been  made  for  him  :
four  shields  were  hkewise  delivered  them,  the
devices  whereof  you  shall  understand  here-
2b  3


282

after.  Wlien  they  were  armed  and'moimted
on  horseback,  the  damsel  shewed  them  that
they  must  accompany  her  three  or  four  days^
in  which  time,  (through  their  assistance,)  she
should  end  her  sorrows  and  grievous  mis-
haps; giving  them  those  four  esquires  to  serve
instead  of  them  which  were  lost  ;  so  they
departed  in  company  with  the  damsel.

Here  we  will  leave  them,  and  return  to  lhe
knight  of  Fortune,  who  past  the  time  away
with  Daliarte,  to  his  heart's  content,  because
the  sage,  as  one  from  whom  nothing  was
concealed,  talked  to  him  of  his  love,  and  of
other  things  which  rejoiced  him;  yet  would
he  not  let  him  understand  his  birth  and  pa-
rentage, for  the  reason  which  you  have  heard.
At  length  the  knight,  remembering  how  long-
he  had  abode  there,  resolved  to  depart  ;  and
Daliarte,  who  knew  his  intention,  told  him  he
must  needs  do  so,  because  of  the  need  which
that  country  had  of  his  aid.  So  he  gave  unto
him  grey  arms  with  thorns  of  gold,  like  hi=^
former  ones,  and  a  shield  and  device  of  For-
tune, as  before  ;  and  one  morning  the  knight
took  his  leave^  Daliarte  beseeching  him   to


283

remember  hiin  in  all  places  where  he  should
stand  destitute  of  his  help,  for  there  he
should  ahvay  find  him  to  serve  him.

So    rode    the    knight    of  Fortune   towards
the  ancient  and  famous  city  of  London,  de-
sirous to   see  the    English  court,  the   fame
whereof  was  blazed  through  the  whole  world.
After  three  days  travel,  he   arrived    at   the
house  of  an  ancient  gentleman,  which  was  by
the  road  side,  two  leagues  from  the  city;  and
there  he  reposed  for  that  night,  conceiving
great  pleasure  to  confer  with  his  host  (who
loved   to   entertain   all   wandering  knights)
about  the  estate  of  that  country,  with   the
noble  adventures  in  old  time  passed,  as  also
at  that  present,  in  Great  Britain.     After  sup-
per, while  they  were  conversing  thus,  there
entered  through  the  gate  a  dame  of  middle
age,  accompanied  with  a  child,  v^•llo  request-
ed if  she  could  have  lodging  there  for  that
night.      The  master  of   the   house,   whose
custom  was  to  refuse   hospitality   to   none,
commanded  her  a  chamber,  and  offered  her
ail  things  she  should  stand  in  need  of.     She,
giving  thanks  to  her  friendly  host  for  his  so


284

great  courtesy,  came  and  sat  down  by  thjc
mistress  of  the  house,  who  was  a  lady  of  good
conversation.  The  knight  of  Fortune,  per-
ceiving that  she  was  oppressed  with  some
great  grief,  asked  her  if  she  did  not  bring
with  her  some  heavy  cause  of  sorrow  :  for  so
her  countenance  gave  token.

The  dame  at  this  taking  occasion  to  behold
him,  and  espying  hung  behind  his  back  the
shield  of  Fortune,  so  much  esteemed  and
famed  through  all  countries,  cast  herself  at
his  feet,  and  in  tears  began  this  sorrowful
discourse:  1  perceive  the  anger  of  Fortune
is  satisfied  with  the  former  injuries  that  she
liath  executed  on  my  poor  self,  in  that  I  have
found  the  knight  who  not  only  can,  but  (as
I  hope)  will  end  my  miseries.  So  it  is, (worthy
sir,)  that  some  time  I  had  a  son,  ingenious  to
every  exercise,  but  chiefly  well  nurtured  in
martial  afiairs  ;  and  had  his  fortune  agreed
with  his  towardly  behaviour,  1  had  been  a
matron  of  joy  where  I  am  now  the  mother
of  misfortune.  It  so  chanced  this  my  son
to  grow  amorous  of  a  young  beautiful  dam-
sel, who  had  retained   in    favour    another


CS5

knight  before  my  son  was  admitted  her  ser-
vant; but  such  was  her  affection  toward  my
son^  that  her  love  to  the  first  suitor  died
with  coldj  and  she  esteemed  him  as  worthy
of  her  good  will.

This  perceived  in  the  sight  of  all,  was  not
hid  from  the  knight,  who  began  greatly  to
stomach  it;  and  ftnding opportunity  tit  for  his
purpose,  assailed  violently  my  son,  who  (not-
withstanding the  danger  on  both  sides)
brought  his  enemy  into  hazard  of  iiis  life,  and
himself  the  better  into  his  lady's  liking.  But
his  enemy,  greatly  resenting  the  first  loss  of
love  and  this  after  defeature,  in  short  time
brought  a  knight  attired  in  green  armour,
bearing  in  his  shield  the  portrait  of  a  savage
man,  leading  in  his  hand  a  couple  of  lions  ;
who  seeking  revenge  on  his  behalf,  my  son
entered  combat  with  him  ;  but  being  unable
to  cope  with  him,  it  availed  him  nothing  to
yield  when  he  could  no  longer  fight,  for  this
strange  knight,  not  contented  with  the  vic-
tor}', cruelly  cut  off  his  head,  and  gave  it  to
his  mortal  enemy.  This  knight  is  so  dreaded
bv  all  for  his  g;reat   valour^  that   never  yet


285

have  I  found  any  bold  enough  to  do  batT<v.
with  him  and  revenge  my  untimely  loss;
wherefore  I  determined  not  to  leave  my
travel  till  I  had  found  you,  because  all  per-
sons told  me  that  only  from  your  hands  could
I  certainly  find  the  vengeance  which  I  de-
sire. For  though  till  now  I  never  saw  you,
the  device  upon  your  shield  tells  me  that  you
are  that  famous  knight  of  Fortune,  renown-
ed in  all  countries.

At  this,  as  it  was  not  his  nature  to  listen  to
his  own  praise,  he  stayed  her  thus  :  Ho-
noured lady,  the  compassion  which  I  feel  for
your  tears  and  sorrow  is  such  as  constraineth
me  to  believe  whatyou  have  said.  Wherefore,
though  there  be  not  that  in  me  which  you
have  heard  reported,  I  grant  you  my  person
to  revenge  your  wrongs,  if  this  knight  be
M  here  it  can  be  effected  ;  and  the  rather  for
that  there  remaineth  a  controversy  between
him  and  me  as  yet  unfinished  ;  and  now  your
mishap  shall  give  me  good  occasion  to  re-
compense him  for  both  together,  if  I  knew  in
what  place  to  find  him.  Sir,  (quoth  the  dame,)
he  is  now  in  the  city  of  London,  where  his


Í287

valour  is  held  in  such  estimatiorij  that  it  is
spoken  of  as  a  miracle.

The  knight  of  Fortune,  who  was  made  by
tliese  words  the  more  desirous  of  meeting
him  inbattie,  said  he  would  send  his  defiance
on  the  next  morning  by  his  esquire,  and  if
he  could,  revenge  her  and  satisf}'  himself;  to
which  the  dame  replied,  I  can  now  justify
wliat  I  have  heard,  for  in  your  arms  and  per-
son is  the  succour  of  those  who  need  it
certain.

The  master  of  the  house,  understanding
that  his  guest  Vvas  thé  noble  knight  of  For-
tune, esteemed  his  good  luck  more  than  he
could  any  way  disclose;  wherefore  he  desired
pardon  that  he  had  not  used  him  according
as  his  famous  report  desen^ed,  and  that  his
ignorance  might  serve  to  excuse  any  fault
committed.  This  honour,  he  said,  was  sufíi-
cient  requital  for  all  the  services  he  had  ever
rendered  to  errant  knights  ;  and  he  related
many  signal  exploits  of  the  knight  of  the
Savacce    Man:      which    the .  more    incited"


288

the  knight  of  Fortune,  and  made  liina:
eagerly  wish  the  day  was  come  in  which
he  might  accomplish  his  heart's  desire.
At  length,  he  being  in  these  thougiits,
they  brake  company,  and  departed  to
their  lodgings.  Tiic  knight  sustaining  small
rest  in  his  bed,  when  the  clear  morning-
appeared,  arose,  and  armed  him  with  all
speed.  The  dame  also,  who  had  slept  as
little,  arose  also,  and  taking  leave  of  their
liosi,  they  departed  towards  London.  And
drawing  somewhat  near  the  city,  he  took  a
great  pleasure  to  behold  the  brave  towers  and
strong  edifices,  which  by  the  shining  of  the
sun  gave  great  contentation  to  his  mind,  and
urged  him  to  alight,  because  he  would  take
good  view  thereof,  thinking  of  the  great
fame  of  that  ancient  city.  So  long  he  stayed
there,  till  he  supposed  the  aged  king  to  be
risen,  when  he  rode  into  the  city;  where  both
the  bravery  of  the  place,  and  the  remem-
brance of  the  famous  exploits  there  begun
and  finished  in  old  times,  provoked  him  to
some  haughty  attempt,  that  might  enroll
iiis  name  among  the  number  of  those  that


289

were  held  in  high  estimation.  For  that  the
report  of  noble  deeds  doth  urge  the  minds
of  the  courageous  to  be  equal  with  those  v>ho
bear  most  commendation  of  their  approved
valiancy.  And  this  is  the  good  fruit  of  ima-
cinationand  of  ancient  histories.


VCL.  I,  2c


290


CHAPTER  sa


ït  was  upon  a  Sunday  mcraing  tliat  the  knight
of  Fortune  reached  the  city  of  London  ;
where  in  those  days  was  all,  or  the  greater
part  of  the  chivalry  of  the  world.  And  be-
cause he  thought  that  he  could  not  do  battle
till  after  dinner,  he  withdrew  himself  to  an
lierraitage,  where  after  he  had  heard  mass,
he  was  desirous  to  see  the  ancient  monuments
that  were  in  the  chapel,  which  for  the
most  part  were  ruinated,  yet  some  of  them  re-
mained in  good  estate  of  their  beauty.  A-
mong  the  things  that  were  there  to  be  seen,
the  knight  of  Fortune  beheld  an  ancient  se-
pulchre, which  was  cunningly  framed  in
workmanship,  albeit  long  continuance  of
time  had  both  wasted  and  dimmed  the  works


291

and  figures  thereof,  so  that  one  could  hardly
discern  ^vhat  ^vas  engraven  about  it.  Round
about  it  were  Greek  letters  so  deadened  that
lie  could  only  read  a  small  part  of  them,  which
said,  Ar  banking  o  f  N  o  rt  h  W a  l  e  s  .  Then
knew  he  that  that  monument  had  remain-
ed there  since  the  days  of  the  famous  king  Li-
suarte,  lord  of  Great  Britain.  Upon  this  he
asked  the  hermit  whether  the  building  had
not  in  former  times  been  larger  than  it  now
was  ?  To  V.  hich  demand  the  hermit  answered.
Sir,  when  first  I  came  to  inhabit  this  place,
which  is  thirty-four  years  since,  it  was  just  in
the  same  estate  you  now  behold  it.  But  as  I
have  heard  of  many,  and  therefore  may  be
bold  to  report  ir,  when  the  infidels  invaded
this  land,  they  did  utterly  ruinate  and  spoil
it.  On  the  right  hand  is  another  tomb,  in
which  Don  Grumcdan  lies,  the  standard-
bearer  of  king  Lisuarte  ;  and  close  by  him
lies  Don  Guilan  the  Pensive*.  I  must  see
his  grave,  quoth  the  knight  of  fortune,  for  of


*  Many  readers  will  remember  their  old  fiiends.  They  who
do  not  may  be  introduced  to  these  excellent  good  knights
byAmadis  of  Gaul.

e  c  a


so  truc  a  lover  there  can  be  notliing  but  what
is  cood.

So  be  drew  nia;h  to  these  two  monuments,
which  were  near  the  door^,  and  stood  looking
at  them  a  while,  especially  at  Don  Guilan's,
to  whose  memory  he  was  greatly  afíected.
Then  came  into  his  mind  the  remembrance
of  his  lady  Polinarda,  of  whom  it  was  now  so
long  since  he  had  heard  any  tidings.  And  not
being  able  to  bear  those  thoughts  at  this
hour,  though  they  were  always  present  with
him,  he  threw  himself  upon  the  tomb  which
covered  the  bones  of  Guilan  the  Pensive,
that  true  lover,  with  his  hands  and  face  upon
the  grave,  silently  addressing  in  his  heart  a
thousand  enamoured  words  to  her  v/ho  did
not  hear  them,  so  lost  to  all  other  things,
that  both  the  hermit  and  the  dame  thought
some  sickness  had  come  upon  him.  But  Sel-
viara  told  them  not  to  marvel,  for  it  was  a
malady  which  often  afflicted  him,  and  which
noiic  knew  how  to  remedy,  lhe  knight  at
length  recovering  himself,  perceived  the
weakness  into  which  he  had  fallen  ;  and
wiping  his   eyes  arose,    and  strove  with  a


2^3

chearful  semblance  to  conceal  the  manifest
sorrow  which  yet  appeared  iu  him.     Selviam
gave  him  his  horse,  saying,  Remember,  sir,
what  you  have  to  do,  and  with  whom  you
have  to  do  battle  this  day.   Do  not  waste  the
day  in  any  other  employ,  for  great  part  of  it
is  now   past.     Let  us  go    then,  replied   the
knight  of  Fortune;  what  I  have  just  suffered
is  more  to  be  dreaded  than  that  whereof  thou
remindest  me.      So  taking  his  leave  of  the
hermit,  he  rode  toward  the  city,  taking  the
dame  with  him  ;  and  before  he  would  enter
it,  called  Selviam,  and  telling  him  what  to
do,    dispatched  him   forward,    awaiting  his
return  and  reply.

Selviam  in  short  time  arrived  at  the  palace  ;
where  going  up  into  the  great  hall,  he  perceiv-
ed the  king  was  newly  risen  from  dinner,  walk-
ing with  his  knights,among  whom  and  nearest
to  his  person  was  the  most  right  valiant  knight
of  the  Savage  Man,  being  well  and  perfectly
cured  of  the  wounds  he  had  received  when
lie  fought  against  Graciano,  Francian,  and
Polinardo.  Selviam  made  his  way  tliroush
them  to  the  presence  of  the  king  ;  wh(?re,  oa
2  c  3


his  knee,  with  such  duty  as  is  required  in
that  respect,  he  began  as  followeth  :  Moit
puissant  prince,  the  knight  of  Fortune,  my
iord,  by  me  kisses  your  royal  hands.  His
intent,  he  suith,  was  never  to  come  to  your
couit  except  to  do  you  service;  but  now  to
redress  the  wrongs  of  a  dame  who  accompa-
nieth  him  here,  he  is  constrained  to  defy  a
knight  of  your  household,  called  he  of  the
Savage  JMan  ;  and  he  beseeches  your  per-
mission to  come  safely  and  perform  this
"battle,  as  is  to  be  expected  from  so  excel-
lent a  prince.  I'he  king,  who  had  heard  the
fame  of  the  knight  of  Fortune  to  be  such  as
%vas  extolled  in  all  [«rinces'  courts,  was  sorry
that  his  arrival  should  move  such  a  request,
and  would  willingly  have  denied  the  com-
hat;  but  the  knight  of  the  Savage  Man,  who
perceived  his  inclination,  came  before  him
and  said.  This  is  not  a  man  to  whom  it  can
be  denied,  because  it  will  seem  that  fear  oc-
casions the  denial.  This  affair  is  mine;  I
beseech  you  to  grant  his  request,  that  he
may  have  liberty  of  battle  according  as  he
ought,  otherwise  I  will  go  to  him^  as  well  to
satisfy  his  desire  as- my  own.


295

The  king,  seeing  he  could  do  no  otherwise,
returned  Solviam  with  this  answer  :  Teii  thy
lord  I  am  sorry  he  should  come  to  my  court
with  any  occasion  ol'  displeasure  ;  yet  seeing
his  demand  standeth  with  the  law  of  arms,
which  I  can  no  way  justly  deny,  Í  grant  him
free  leave,  securing  him  from  all  except  him
whom  he  seeks,  from  whom  1  know  not  that
he  can  be  secured.

With  this  message  Selviam  returned  to  his
master,  who  thereupon  presently  made  his
enirance,  armed  at  all  points.  Many  went
out  to  see  him,  for  the  news  of  his  coming
was  bruited  abroad  every  where.  Entering
the  open  space  before  the  palace,  he  made
obeisance  to  the  king,  who  was  at  a  window
of  Florida's  apartment,  because  he  wished
her  to  iee  the  battle,  as  it  was  between  two
of  the  most  famous  and  best  knights  in  the
world.  All  the  field  and  the  windows  and
houses  round  about  the  lists  were  full,  for
the  citizens  repaired  thither  to  behold  this
combat,  which  wa-s  so  suddenly  noised
abroad  ;  so  that  the  place  was  filled  with
abundance  of  people.     Presently   in   came


£9(?

the  knight  of  the  Savage  Man,  armed  in  liis
own  arms  and  with  his  wonted  device,  all
being  so  new  that  only  yesterday  they  had
been  finished  by  the  armourer.  He  was
accompanied  with  many  knights  and  noble
gentlemen  ;  Argolante  brought  his  spear,
and  Don  Rosiram  de  la  Brunda  his  shield.
He  coming  up  to  the  knight  of  Fortune,
said  to  him,  1  know  not,  sir  knight,  what
should  be  the  cause  of  your  challenge,  but
this  I  know,  that  to  my  mind  it  is  the  great-
est favour  you  could  possibly  confer  upon
me.  He  of  Fortune  replit-d,  he  who  hath
so  mercilessly  slain  one  that  did  not  deserve
death,  ought  not  to  marvel  if  he  finds  one  to
chastise  him.  This  dame  complaineth  against
you;  you  must  satisfy  her  in  what  she  re-
quireth,  otherwise  here  am  I  who  will  take
for  her  that  atonement  which  she  desires
and  you  deserve.  Neither  to  this  dame,
(quoth  the  knight  of  the  Savage  Man,)  rfor  to
any  other,  have  I  ever  done  that  for  the
which  I  should  deserve  to  be  thus  accused  ;
but  since  the  battle  is  to  be  w  ith  you  I  shall
give  uo  reason  why  it  might  be  excused.
So  parting  themselves  to  fetch  their  career,


^97

at  the  sound  of  the  trumpet  they  met  bravely
together  with  all  the  force  that  their  horses
could  carry  ;  their  lances  were  broken  in
pieces^  their  shields  pierced,  and  they  past
by  each  other  as  men  who  had  not  received
an  encounter.  Presently  they  took  other
spears_,  for  he  of  fortune  besought  him  that
he  would  joust  again  ;  and  thus  they  ran  a
second  and  a  third  career,  the  meeting  being
such  as  it  seemed  impossible  that  any  could
sustain,  yet  neither  able  to  stir  the  other.
When  they  saw  they  could  not  dismount  one
another,  they  took  their  swords  and  cidarged
each  other  with  such  politique  behaviour  in
their  fight,  that  it  was  marvellous  to  hear
what  commendations  were  given  them.  They
laid  at  each  other  without  mercy  as  if  there
had  been  great  reason  for  this  rigorous  enmity,
each  now  putting  forth  finer  force  and  practis-
ing more  skilfully  than  he  had  ever  till  now
done,  because  nev'er  till  now  had  they  found
all  their  art  and  all  their  strength  so  needful.
One  strove  for  victory  over  the  other,  that
he  might  thereby  win  to  himself  the  fame  of
the  other's  exploits  ;  and  this  earnest  desire  in
small  space  of  time  brought  them  to  such


298

state  that  their  arms  were  demolished,and  their
horses  so  weak  and  weary  with  toil  and  with
their  burdens,  that  they  could  no  longer  bear
their  riders.  Then  the  knights  alighted,  and
then  the  battle  became  more  fearful  and  ri-
gorous :  for  now  they  could  close  more  at
pleasure.  The  king,  and  all  they  who  saw  tlie
cruelty  of  this  battle,  co\dd  ill  tell  to  which
the  victory  would  likely  fall  ;  neither  did  they
think  that  either  could  possibly  escape,  if  it
\\cre  suffered  to  continue  to  the  end.  For
their  shields  were  shivered  all  in  pieces,  their
armour  broken,  that  the  flesh  suffered  for  it.
And  now,  as  they  had  long  been  fighting,
they  separated  for  a  while  to  recover
strength  and  breath  for  prosecuting  the  bat-
tle» Each  looked  at  himself,  and  each  see-
ing his  armour  so  broken,  and  such  a  strong
enemy  before  him,  knew  not  what  to  expect,
except  that  this  day  was  the  last  of  his  hfe.
Little  time  had  they  taken  breath  when  they
turned  again  to  battle,  not  being  able  to
brook  delay.  And  now,  because  they  had  no
defence,  they  wounded  each  other  so  mortal-
ly that  the  field  was  all  dyed  with  their  blood,
and  it  seemed  as  if  none  could  be  left  in  tlieir


299

bodies.  Sometimes  they  grappleJ,  putting
out  all  their  strength  to  overthrow  one  an-
other :  this  was  in  vain,  aftd  the  strength  which
they  exerted  only  made  their  wounds  wider
than  the  sword  had  done.  The  day  was
waninii  fast  :  neither  had  the  advantacre  of
the  other  in  strength,  but  both  so  equal  that
it  could  not  be  judged  who  was  the  likest  of
victory.  The  princess  Flcrida,  v.'ho  beheld
them  through  the  bars  of  the  window,
grieving  at  their  great  effusion  of  blood,  de-
parted in  such  heaviness  as  if  she  had
known  it  to  be  the  blood  of  her  sons,  that
was  so  cruelly  spilt.  The  king  with  all  his
courtly  attendants  was  strucken  into  such
amaze  when  he  saw  them  take  their  swords
again,  that  he  thought  the  flower  of  ali  chi-
valry wiis  there  present  before  him,  and  no
former  battles,  neither  of  knights  nor  giants,
worthy  to  be  held  any  longer  in  remem-
brance.

At  last  both  separated  again,  for  they  could
no  longer  continue  without  rest.  And  now
it  Mas  believed  that  neither  could  possibly
escape.    The  knight   of  the    Savage  Man


300

seeing  himself  destitute  of  shield  and  ar-
mour, his  sword  notched  and  blunted,
his  strength  failing  him,  so  that  he  could
scarce  lift  his  arms,  and  remembering  with
how  mighty  an  enemy  he  had  to  deal,  began
to  apprehend  death  ;  yet  not  so  as  to  prevent
him  from  dying  as  became  him  :  for  this  ap-
prehension depriveth  not  brave  men  of  their
nature.  Said  he  to  himself,  I  die  in  the
flower  and  prime  of  mine  age,  and  repine
not  that  it  is  so  soon,  but  because  death  will
not  leave  me  time  to  repay  the  king  and  Fle-
rida  the  bounty  which  they  have  shown  me,
nor  to  try  the  adventure  which  hath  enda-
maged so  many  good  knights,  whereto  I  did
ever  bend  minç  afíection,  as  the  only  enter-
prize  to  win  me  renown,  and  to  be  the  end
of  my  life  or  of  my  victories  ;  but  I  will  yet
so  behave  myself  upon  mine  enemy,  as  when
he  hath  won  the  uttermost  he  shall  not  boast
of  his  conquest  ;  and  such  a  writ  v,ill  I  deliver
him  to  seal,  as  shall  crave  no  other  signet
but  his  life's  blood.

In  like  manner  the  knight  of  Fortune  stood
debating  with  himself],  as  well  upon  his  pre-


301

sent  danger  as  also  his  fore-passed  dolour,
not  forgetting  lîis  lady  Polinarda,  to  whom,
as  had  she  been  present,  he  said  within  him-
self, Lady^  now  is  the  time  in  which  I  need
your  aid  :  if  it  doth  not  succour  me  now,
there  will  never  be  another  occasion  for  me  to
request  it.  This  man  is  not  like  other  men,
and  therefore  \"our  help  and  all  my  force  are
needed  against  him.

Then  fell  they  to  the  combat  again,  not  able
to  charge  one  another  so  fiercely  as  at  the
first,  yet  more  determinately  than  ever,  la-
bouring earnestly  to  end  tiieir  strife.  The
blov.'s  which  they  dealt  were  now  less  deadly,
Iccause  their  swords  had  lost  their  edge;  but
what  they  had  already  done  was  such  that
no  other  knights  could  have  borne  a  third
part  of  it.  The  king,  not  able  to  bear  the
sight,  came  down  into  the  lists,  accompanied
by  many  of  his  ancient  lords,  meaning  to
separate  ihem,  for  the  sorrow  it  would  be  to
let  perish  the  two  best  knights  that  CTcr  he
had  seen.  Bat  such  was  their  desire  of  vic-
*  >!•}-,  and  so  courageous  their  minds  in  the
liiidst  of  moit  danger,  their  covetousncss  of
2  D


302

honour  so  great,  and  their  reason  so  blinded,
that  they  would  gi^'e  no  ear  to  his  persua-
sion ;  but  losing  all  sense  of  obedience,  fell  to
again,  in  such  close  battle  that  with  the  hilts
of  their  swords  they  battered  and  thrust  at
each  others' helmets,  driving  through  to  the
head.  The  sun  t\as  now  set,  and  neither  had
any  vantage  over  the  other,  except  that  tlie
knight  of  Fortune's  arms  were  less  destroyed
than  his  enemy's.  The  king,  who  could  not
be  at  peace  with  himself,  went  to  the  cham-
ber of  Flerida.  Daughter,  said  he,  if  Dou  Du-
ardos  be  living,  and  may  be  delivered  by  the
valour  of  any  earthly  creature,  there  is  not  a
man  in  the  world  by  whom  his  deliverance  can
be  elfccled  unless  it  be  one  of  these  knights,
w^ho  are  now  on  the  point  of  losing  their  lives.
I  beseech  you  for  mercy's  sake  go  and  sepa-
rate them.  They  vviU  not  give  over  for  mo,
and  unless  they  do,  both  must  perish,  and  the
hope  be  dead  for  ever  which  Í  have  till  now
cherished.  The  princess,  who  since  the  ab-
sence of  her  lord,  had  never  come  abroa;!.
but  alway  kept  her  chamber  in  her  wonted
sorrow,  though  she  was  right  loath  to  break
her  accustom.ed  seclusion,  yet  at  the  request


303

©r  tiie  aged  kiu^  came  ..Jie  down,  and  also  be-
cause the  trouble  wlùcli  she  felt  for  her  own
blood  incited  her.  So  down  into  tlie  square
she  went,  the  king  leading  her  by  the  hand,
and  four  damsels  attired  all  in  blaek  attend-
ing on  her,  herself  apparelled  also  in  black
cloth  of  coarse  texture,  conformable  to  her
affliction,  on  her  head  the  coif  of  a  holy
woman*  which  came  over  her  eyes;  yet  being
still  as  beautiful  as  in  the  days  of  her  joy.

The  surprise  at  seeing  her  in  the  palace
square  was  so  great,  and  the  noise  and  tumult
ifuch,  that  the  knights  forbore  their  strife  to
sw  what  it  might  be.  Tlerida  went  up  to
them,  and  came  to  the  knight  of  Fortune,
and  took  him  by  the  sleeve  of  his  mail,  say-
ing, I  beseech  you,  knight,  if  you  hold  your-


•  ijana  keatilha  ie  ra;îo.  I  need  not  say  how  difficult,
or  impossible  it  is  to  find  equivalent  terms  in  English  for  fo-
reign a.ricles  of  dress.  The  phrase  in  the  original  is  rcmari-
abla  for  this  rrason  that  i-jssa  seems  to  signify  the  materials
of  rhtieurunj,  not  the  fashion  ;  and  in  that  caie  the  word
is  wrongly  conjectured  in  the  ElucUurio  Portu^urz,  t«  mejn
a  hood  or  c^o-xh

2  I) '2


304

self  bound  at  any  time  to  do  aught  for  so  wn-
fortunate  a  woman  as  myself,  that  it  may  be
to  leave  off  from  this  battle,  by  which  nothing
can  be  gained  except  the  peril  of  both  your
lives.

The  knight  of  Fortune  fixed  his  eyes  upon
her,  and  perceiving  her  to  resemble  the  coun-
tenance of  his  fair  Polinarda,  so  to  the  life
that  he  could  have  thought  that  it  had  been
her  very  self;  he  humbled  himself  on  his
knee,  with  these  words  :  Lady,  this  com-
bat is  that  which  of  all  others  i  most  desired
to  finish  ;  but  I  desist  from  it  because  Í  serve
you  in  so  doing,  and  the  honour  may  remain
to  the  kniiîht,  as  in  truth  he  hath  well  deserved.

That  (quoth  the  kr.lght  of  the  Savage  Man)
I  do  not  wish,  except  when  I  gain  it;  and  if
you  desire  to  have  done,  [  confess  that  I  de-
sire so  also:  since  you  do  what  the  lady  lle-
rida  requires,  ill  would  it  become  me  to  do
otherwise,  who  am  hers,  and  in  duty  bound
to  obey  her.  Flerida  thanked  them  for  their
words,  and  returned  to  her  apartment,  little
knowing  that  this  was  not  the  first  time  they
had  received  life  irom  her.


503

Then  the  king,  not  a  little  pleased  at  this
good  event,  commanded  the  knights  should
be  brought  into  his  palace.  But  the  knight
of  Fortune  would  not  accept  the  king's  offer
at  that  time,  being  in  truth  ashamed  that  he
had  \vith  so  little  respect  turned  a  deaf  ear  to
his  interposition  ;  and  seeing  near  him  his
host  who  had  entertained  him  the  last  nights
and  was  now  come  to  behold  the  battle,  of
him  he  again  requested  hospitaUty.  So  his
host  carried  him  to  the  apartment  of  a  friend,
and  binding  up  his  wounds,  placed  him  on  a
little  carr,  on  which  he  was  borne  to  his
house  ;  where  such  provision  was  ordained
for  him,  that  by  the  help  of  the  gentleman's
daughter,  who  was  marvellous  expert  in  the
art  of  medicine,  his  weak  estate  was  relieved
into  indifferent  good  plight.  Nothing  could
he  learn  of  the  dame  who  was  the  cause  o£
this  combat.  It  was  said,  that  so  soon  as  they
had  entered  the  fight,  she  secretly  shrunk
away  through  the  press,  so  that  they  could
gain  no  knowledge  of  her.

The  knight  of  the  Savage  Man  was  conduct-
ed to  his  chamber,  where  he  had  such  great
'2d3


306

attendance  in  the  curing  of  his  wounds,  as
by  any  means  they  could  devise  v.hat  might
best  serve  tor  remedy.  For  never  were  his
hurts  so  dangerous  as  those  that  lie  had  re-
ceived at  that  combatj  nor  his  hfe  in  greater
hazard  then  it  was  at  this  present;  wliich
made  the  princess  so  diligent  about  him,
that  she  enterprised  as  much  as  the  simplest
that  had  any  occasion  to  travail  tor  his  iiealth.
But  the  king  and  all  they  of  his  household,  re-
gretted that  the  knight  of  Fortune  would  not
accept  lodging  in  his  palace,  where  he  also
might  have  been  honourably  attended.


m


CHAPTER


It  is  V.  ritten  in  the  ancient  Chronicles  of  Ens:-
land  from  whence  this  history  hath  been  taken^
that  Eutropathe  enchantress^  and  aunt  to  the
giant  Dramuziando,  seeing  her  castle  well
stored  Avith  good  knights,  and  fearing  the
time  drew  nigh  to  |)revcnt  her  wicked  pur-
pose, she  sought  to  set  such  discord  among
the  knights  that  were  latelv  arrived  in  En^^
land,  as  they  should  without  knowledge  spoil
the  lives  of  each  other.  For  to  this  end  and
purpose  she  framed  her  intent,  that  if  she
could  execute  her  vvili  on  the  courageous
knights  who  endeavoured  themselves  in
the  search  of  the  strayed  princes,  holding
some  prisoners,  procuring  the  others  to  he
slainj  so  that  the  world  should  be  destitute


308

of  them  ;  then  would  she  acquahit  the  lords
of  the  pagans  therewith,  who  might  then
with  little  difficulty  ruinate  and  spoil  all  the
dominions,  and  be  lords  over  all  the  king-
doms aud  countries  of  Christendom.

The  better  to  bring  her  devices  to  pass,
she  sent  damsels  continually  abroad  through
the  circuit  of  Great  Britain,  to  set  strife  and
dissention  between  all  travelling  knights  ;
and  the  damsels  were  so  diligent  in  their
mistress's  command,  that  they  daily  brought
many  good  knights  into  hazard  and  danger,
as  you  have  partly  heard,  and  shall  do  here-
after. One  of  these  damsels  was  the  occa-
sion of  the  combat  between  Polinardo  and
the  knight  of  the  Savage  Man;  the  very
same  damsel  was  she  who  made  the  battle
between  Onistaldo  and  Dramiante  his  bro-
ther. Another  brought  the  horses  and  ar-
mour to  the  prince  Platir  and  his  compa-
nions. The  dame  was  also  another  who  set
the  strife  between  the  knight  of  Fortune  and
tlie  knight  of  the  Savage  Man  :  lor  this  wo-
man had  tears  at  her  command,  and  such
subtle  reports  for  the  service  of  her  mistress^


509

thnt  she  ^\•a5  chiefly    beloved  and   esteemed
uith  Eutropa.

The  knicfhts  that  were  lately  come  frcnn
Constantinople,  and  remained  a  while  for
their  pleasure  in  the  English  court,  were
now,  after  this  great  battle  had  been  fought,
ready  to  take  their  departure,  and  to  seek
adventures.  So  some  disguised  their  ar-
mour and  changed  the  devices  of  their
shields,  least  they  should  be  known  ;  and
all  separating,  put  themselves  in  travel  which
way  they  were  informed,  to  find  the  castle
of  the  giant  Dramuziando.  So  that  by
reason  of  this  disguise,  it  many  times  for*
tuned  that  friends  encountered,  and  were
brought  to  great  peril  of  their  lives  before
they  discovered  each  other.  But  because
it  would  be  long  to  relate  tlie  adventures
Avhich  each  separately  went  through,  I  w^ill
not  fill  the  paper  ^^ith  the  deeds  of  others,
and  so  leave  unrelated  those  of  him  from
whom  the  book  taketh  its  name.  Never-
theless, because  a  battle  in  which  they  were
well  nigh  all  present,  is  one  of  the  chiefest
and  most  famous  thinirs  n\  hich  fell  out  in  those


310

days,  I  will  relate  the  manner  of  it,  M'hich  it
would  be  error  to  overpass.  The  damsels
whom  Eutropa  sent  out,  each  using  subtlety
with  tears  and  lying  stories  which  craved
help  for  some  just  cause,  had  brought  all
these  young  knights  of  lhe  emperor's
court,  into  the  field  where  the  castle  stood,
severing  them  into  two  companies,  the  river
running  between  them  ;  where  their  tents
were  pitched  about  two  bow-shots  asunder,
like  two  camps,  as  though  they  had  deter-
mined to  fight  amain  battle.  On  the  one  side
was  prince  Graciano,  Ouistaldo,  and  Dranii-
ante,  Francian,  Polinardo,  Tremoran,  Clari-
baltc  of  Hungary,  Vasiliardo,  Frisol,  Luy-
manes  of  Burgundy,  Dridem,  son  to  May-
ortes,  the  Great  Khan,  Flaminiano,  and  Esme-
raldo the  Fair  :  on  the  other  side  wbj  the
prince  Beroldo,  Estrelante,  Gcrmam  of  Orle-
ance,  Don  Rosuel,  Belisarte,  Goarim,  Tene-
bror,  Rocandor,  Pompides,  Platir,  Floraman,
Blandidon,  and  Crispian  of  Macedonia.
Neither  could  tell  what  the  other  were,  yet
either  party  were  so  well  contented  to  find
themselves  met  together,  that  each  thought
the  other  side  must  needs  be  weaker  than  hi.s


311

own.  At  last,  forth  of  the  castle  came  two
dames,  the  one  accompanied  like  a  person  of
great  gravity,  the  other  having  no  body
with  her  but  a  child.  She  went  to  the  pa-
vilions next  the  castle,  and  the  other  to
prince  Graciano  and  his  company  that  were
on  the  farther  side  of  the  river.

After  she  was  come  into  the  presence  of
the  princes,  and  very  gently  and  courteously
entertained,  all  being  seared  under  a  tree
ai'ound  about  which  the  tents  were  pitched,
preparing  herself  to  a  deceitful  course,  and
intermeddling  her  talk  with  tears,  she  began
in  this  manner  :  Sir  knights,  the  renown  of
of  your  noble  deeds  and  continual  úune  of
your  well  employed  knighthood,  is  sufficient
to  confound  all  such  as  swell  against  honour-
able duty.  Well  then  may  they  whose  bare
report  aiiVayeth  their  enemies,  dismay  them
with  their  own  persons.  This  castle  which
you  here  behold,  doth  belong  to  me  that  have
lived  in  it,  both  a  heavy  and  happy  time  ;  in
that  in  times  past  I  have  been  better  ac-
quainted with  pleasant  conceits,  as  they  to
whom  mv  misfortunes  are  knov.n  can  wit*


31í2

ncss  the  great  alteration  of  my  former  e&tate.
Fortune  a;ave  me  a  dauiihter  to  be  the  onlv
heiress  of  my  great  patrimony,  and  nature,  for
my  farther  evil,  made  her  so  perfect  in  beau-
ty, so  pure  in  modesty,  so  precise  of  her  per-
sonage, and  so  exquisite  in  her  usual  beha-
viour, that  great  hath  been  the  intrcaty  of
many  honourable  personages  to  have  her  in
marriage  ;  which  I  long  time  denied,  not
daring  to  make  choice  of  one  above  all  the
other,  because  of  the  contention  which  1
knew  would  ensue.  At  length,  however,  Í
consented  to  her  espousal.  This  being
known  toa  knight  who  had  long  time  been
a  suitor,  he  now  prcsumeth  upon  his  strength
to  take  lier  from  me  by  force  ;  in  sign  where-
of (pointing  to  the  pavilions  of  the  other
knights  on  the  farther  side  of  the  river,)  be-
hold where  he  hath  placed  his  tents  to  invade
my  castle;  and  through  the  help  of  his
friends,  purposcth  to  ruinate  thi;,  mine  an-
cient dwcL'ing,  and  to  use  violence  tohcr  who
is  betrothed  to  anotlîCr.  ^V'hen  I  considered
there  was  no  means  to  roinedy  the  necessity
of  my  case,  but  either  to  keep  my  hold,  and
tiiere  be    iainlihed,  or   vield  mvsclf  to  mv


313

foes,  and  so  be  dishonoured,  I  sent  my
damsels  to  seek  succour  for  me  ;  at  ^vhose
request  you  are  here  arrived  in  this  place,
where  you  may  behold  my  usunjing  enemy,
and  the  great  danger  I  stand  in  of  the  hard
award  of  fortune.  And  once  more  have  I
sent  that  dame  Avhom  you  saw  come  out  of
the  castle  with  me,  by  way  of  intreaty,  to
will  them  break  up  their  siege,  and  not  to
trouble  me  for  her  whom  they  cannot  have.
But  such  is  the  great  malice  of  this  knight,
and  his  intent  linked  to  such  an  extreme  pur-
pose, that  I  doubt  neither  gentleness  may
intreat  him,  nor  fair  demeanor  serve  to  per-
suade him.  Wherefore,  noble  sirs,  as  vou
respect  the  honour  of  an  oppres:>ed  virgin,
and  the  oath  that  your  knighthood  hath
avouched  in  tiiis  behalf,  stand  now  her
I'riend  v»ho  is  void  of  all  defence,  and  main-
tain her  cause,  which  will  be  for  your  re-
nown for  ever.

She  having  ended  her  coined  protestation,  at
last  the  prince  Graciano,  (they  having  refer-
red all  to  his  disposition)  thus  shaped  hh
answer:  Lady,  since  this  honourable  com-
2  E


314

pany  have  appointed  me  (unworthy)  to  an-
swer on  their  belialf^  and  that  we  are  per-
suaded you  would  not  ini'orm  us  of  any  mis-
report;  thus  I  dare  warrant  for  them  all,
that  you  shall  find  thcni  as  ready  to  deiend
you,  as  your  enemy  dare  presume  any  way
to  molest  you.  The  dame  hearing  the  an-
swer to  be  such  as  served  lit  for  her  purpose,
gave  them  all  hearty  thanks,  and  calling  her
tears  again  into  remembrance,  urged  the
Jcnights  to  such  pity,  that  they  greatly  de-
sired to  enter  combat  with  the  other  com-
pany. And  now  the  other  dame  came  from
the  opposite  pavilions,  and  said  to  her.  La-
dy, the  enemy  to  your  honour,  and  friend  to
iiis  own  damage,  will  agree  to  nothing  l)ut
battle,  affirming  that  he  will  soon  show  you
the  weakness  of  your  succours.

These  words  urged  Onistaldo  unto  such  an-
ger, he  being  hasty  by  nature,  that  he  pre-
sently exclaimed,  I  wish  we  were  engaged,
that  they  migiit  receive  the  chastisement  of
their  peremptory  brags.  We  are  so  near  it,
cried  Vasiliardo,  that  I  fear,  sir  Onistaldo,
he  will  fare  the  worse  for  your  anger.     Then


315

Francian  was  desirous  to  send  ihem  defi-
ance ;  but  this  the  dame  prevented,  least  her
deaUngs  should  be  espied,  saying,  she  would
send  once  more  to  will  them  to  depart
presently,  whereto  if  they  made  denial,  she
besought  them  to  be  ready  armed  for  the
fight.  The  other  dame  then  returned  to  the
opposite  pavilions.

There,  when  at  her  first  going  she  had  told
a  false  tale  how  those  other  knights  were
about  to  take  away  her  lady's  castle  wrong-
fully, prince  Floraman  having  well  pon-
dered her  words,  returned  this  answer  :  Al-
beit our  duty  is  to  defend  any  distressed  per-
son, more  especially  any  injured  lady,  yet
are  we  bound,  ere  we  begin  hastily,  to  bt;
well  acquainted  with  the  cause  :  for  that  the
rightful  cause  hath  always  the  victory.
Wherefore  we  will  first  know  if  your  reports
be  of  truth  or  no,  lest  we  enter  into  such
defects,  a^  we  may  perhaps  repent  us.

But  then  the  damsel  who  had  given  arms

and  horses  in  the  valley  to  him  and  Pom-

pides,  Blandidon  and   Piatir,  on  condition

2  E  2


316

îhat  t.hc}'  should  grant  her  a  boon,  and  ^vho
■was  there  present,  repHed,  Remember,  sir
knight,  when  you  and  your  companions  stood
in  need  of  my  aid,  I  looked  for  no  excuse  in
granting  it.  This  dame  speaks  truly,  and
this  is  the  boon  which  I  required  of  you  ;  see
no;v  thatyoa  perform  it,  as  1  performed  the
condition  on  my  part.  Trust  me,  (cried  Pla-
tir)  these  are  not  persons  who  would  deceive
us:  Tellus,  lady,  doth  your  enemy  still  re-
main r^olute  in  his  determination;  if  so  we
•will  do  that  for  which  we  came  here;  and
albeit  my  companions  should  deny  to  aid
you  as  they  have  avouched,  yet  will  I  abide
by  you  to  the  death.

What,  sir  Platir,  cried  Beroldo,  prince  of
iSpain,  think  you  that  we  would  stand  Dy  and
behold  3-ou  in  danger!  Lady,  see  you  if  yon-
der knights  will  desist  from  their  tortuous
enterprise;  and  if  they  refuse,  we  are  then
at  your  service.  It  was  then  that  the  crafty
dame  crost  over  to  her  accomplice  in  the  op-
posite tents  ;  from  whence  now  returning  all
in  tea^s,  she  cried.  Now  sirs,  your  quarrel  is
of  more  force  than  before  :  for  they  haviny;


317

my  lady  and  mistress  in  their  hold^  have
vowed  not  to  let  her  depart,  without  she
will  render  to  them  her  castle.  And  more-
over, they  send  you  defiance,  saying,  that
they  are  ready  to  deal  with  you,  if  you  dare
come  forth,  either  to  détend  the  cause  of
my  lad}',  or  to  make  proof  of  your  own
courage.

As  the  hearts  of  3'oung  men  are  easily  ex-
cited, without  farther  deliberation  they  be-
gan to  take  arms  and  equip  their  horses  j
and  they  of  the  other,  camp  seeing  their
readiness,  prepared  in  like  manner  as  fast  as
they  could;  little  knowing  the  nearness  of
blood,  and  what  is  more,  the  near  friend-
ship there  was  between  them  and  these  whom
they  were  about  to  engage  in  battle.  In-
stead of  this  knowledge,  friend  was  now  so
enraged  against  friend,  kinsman  against
kinsman,  and  brother  against  brother  at  this
hour,  that  nothing  short  of  the  death  of  all,
or  of  the  most  part  of  them,  was  to  be  looked
for.  This  was  the  effect  of  listening  too
easily  to  the  fair  seeming  of  a  lying  tongue.

2  E  3


318


CHAPTER  38.


Now  that  the  dames  had  thus  well  woven
their  falshood,  they  departed,  leaving-  the
knights  on  both  sides  horsed  and  armed,  in
readiness  to  enter  the  battle.  Now  because
they  had  so  changed  their  armour,  and  tbe
devices  of  their  shields,  that  they  had  no
knowledge  one  of  another,  the  manner  of
each  shall  be  related,  as  also  that  of  person-
ages so  signal  as  these,  nothing  may  remain
unsaid.  The  prince  Graciano  was  attired  in
green  armour,  quartered  with  white,  and
over  it  a  foliage  of  the  same  colours  ;  in  his
shield  he  bare  a  leopard.  Onistaldo  had  his
armour  black,  made  with  plates  of  steel  in


3)9

the  manner  of*  scales,  after  a  new  and  artifi-
cial device;  and  in  his  shield  he  bare  a  sea.
argent  in  an  azure  iield.     His  brother  Dra-
miante  was  armed  in  the  sauie  manner,  sav-
ing that  he  bore  in  his  shield  a  starry  sky.
The  armour  of  Vasiliardo  was  green,  thick,
beset  with  lions  of  gold,  bearing  in  his  shield
for  his  device   an  eagle  with  bloody  talons.
Francian  had  his  ar»nour  resembling   little
flames  of  nre  ;  in  his  shield  likewise  a  fire  in
a  field  sable,  so  to  the  iife  that  it  seemed  as  if
they  were  indeed  flames,  which  yet  did  not
burn  him.     Dridem  was  armed  in  black  and
yellow,  with  grey  griffins  tliereon,  bearing  in
his  shield  the  tower  of  Babylon,  drawn  from
the  life  in  a  field  sanguine.     Poiinjrdo  bad
his  armour  of  a  sandy  colour,  whereon  v.as
painted  many    broken   spears,   in  token   he
had  lost  tlie  victory  against  tlie  noble  ilora-
man,  when  he  adventured  for  the  beauty  of
fair  Poiinardo  ;  and  having  for  his  device  ii"^
bis    shield,    a   spear  broken    in  the    midst-.
Frisol  had  his  armour  r^d,  with  bla-ck  joints  ;
and  in  his  shield  a  bon  rampant  in  a  field  or.
Tremoran  was  attired  in-a  carnation  coloured
armour,  beset  with  silver  pelicans  j  an.d  rlie


320

<îevic«  in  his  shield  was  an  image  with  bow
and  arrows  in  his  hand.  Luymanes  of  Bur-
gundy, and  Claribalte  of  Hungary,  had
their  armour  white,  and  golden  fruit  of  the
arbutus  in  a  green  field  upon  their  shields.
Flaminiano  and  Esmeraldo  theFair,h;id  theirs
mulberry-colour  and  red,  with  gold  finches  of
many  colours  ;  and  in  their  shields  the  resem-
blance of  a  thick  cloud  in  a  field  of  silver.

The  knights  on  the  other  side  of  the  river,
"were  in  like  manner  bravely  harnessed,  giv-
ing shew  to  their  enemies  of  their  haughty
courage.  Prince  Beroldo  wore  his  armour
black,  whereon  was  cunningly  bespread  sil-
ver tears,  and  in  his  shield  a  body  rent  in
pieces.  Don  liosuel,  and  Belisarte  his  bro-
ther, came  in  armour  of  green  and  carnation
colour,  checquered  like  a  chess  board,  and
rivctted  with  the  flowers  which  are  called
you-love-me-not,  of  white  and  yellow,  aad
in  their  shield  a  waning  moon  in  a  field  of
azure.  Estrelante  wore  plain  grey  arms
without  adornment  ;  in  his  shield  an  ounce
in  a  v^hite  fi^ld,  so  large  that  it  filled  it.
Tenebror  bad  his  armour  green,  whcteoa  was


lÈgured  maay  golden  poppies,  and  in  lus
sliield  he  bare  Troy  Town.  Goarim  Wai  i.i
white  araioui,  like  a  knight  novel,  bearing'
in  his  shield  a  peacock,  a*  bcauti.'uily  bla-
zoned as  that  biid  is  by  nature,  llocaudor,
and  Crespian  of  Macedon,  \.ere  both  armed
alike,  in  their  accustonied  manner.  Gerniaai
of  Orieance  had  his  armour  of  plates  of
steel,  and  such  strong  ones  as  were  needful
in  that  land,  bearing  in  his  shield  argent  ine
bust  of  a  ivoman,  in  remembrance  of  the
fidr  Florenda,  daughter  to  Arnedos,  king  of
France,  for  ^Yllo^e  sake  he  determined  to  try
the  adventure  of  Great  Britain  ;  Piaiir,  Flo-
raman,  Blaadidon,  and  Pompiiles,  to  v.hom,
the  daiijsel  ot  Eutropa  had  delivered  horses
and  armour,  as  you  have  heard,  came  forth,
their  horses  ad  alike,  iron  grey  vvith  black
spots,  and  their  armour  black,  beset  with
silver  >vvan5,  their  helmets  sumptuously  gild-
ed, and  adorned  with  black  pearis  ;  and  in
their  shields  their  devices  were  all  aiike,
which  was  the  smoaky  forge  and  anvil  of
god  Vulcan  the  smith.

Both  the   companies  came  for^Yard  stcpjjy


322

step,  marvelling  at  the  bravery  of  the  others
accoutreuients.  Aiid  as  alway  when  the  time
of  danger  is  come,  conndence  is  changed,
so  novv  did  one  party  stand  more  in  fear  of
the  other  than  they  had  weened  to  do.  Be-
ing now  near  enough  for  the  meeting,
talving  occasion  as  it  served,  they  couched
their  spears,  and  encountered  together  very
valiantly:  all  on  both  sides  came  lo  the
ground,  some  with  the  force  of  the  shock,
others  by  fault  of  strength  in  their  horses,
except  Platir,  Beroldo,  and  Folinardo,  who
speedily  alighted  that  they  might  the  better
help  their  friends.  All  being  then  on  foot,
their  swords  drawn,  th^ir  shields  upon  the
arm,  there  began  the  cruellest  and  most  fear-
ful battle  that  could  be  seen  in  the  world.
They  were  as  hot  upon  it  and  as  heartiU'  en-
gaged, demeaning  themselves  as  well,  with
the  same  excellent  courage  and  skill  at  arms,
as  might  have  been  expected  from  them  if
they  had  fought  w  ith  those  w^ho  knew^  them.
Ko  vantage  was  to  be  perceived  on  either  side,
nor  sign  of  weakness  in  any;  all  being  so  ex-
cellent that  it  was  impossible  to  say  any  one
excelled.      The  splintering  of   shields  was


323

such  that  it  strewed  the  field.    Those  goodly
etnblazoaments   and   adornments,  and   rare
devices^  and  those  arms  oï  so  great  cost,  in
which  they  were  accoutred,  were  soon  de-
molished, and    brought  to    such   state    that
their  bravery  was  no  longer  distinguishable  ;
contrariwise,  they  were  so  clotted  with  blood
that  no  other  colour  was  to  be  seen.     The
din  of  their  blows  sounded  through  all  parts
of  the  valley.     Prince  Beroldo,  who  v.as one
of  the  most  conspicuous  on  the  one  side,  en-
countered his  brother  Onistaldo,  doing  won-
ders on  the  other  ;  and  they  gra}  pied,  striv-
ing each  with  all  his  force  to  overthiow
other.     Here  the  press  thickened,  eaci.  pas  y
crouding  to   the  rescue  ;  so  that  the  hu'-.e
was  renewed  with  greater  fury   than   c   :.
And  as  by  this  time  the  hurt  v.hich  thci.
swords  could  do  was  not  answerable   to  the
will    with    which  they   wielded   them,  they
laid  hands   on   each    other,  coming  to  fair
trial  of  fine    force.       There    was   not    one
among  them  of  whom  it  could  be  :liought
that  he  did  that  day  less  than  his  devoir.

Don  Duardo5,  Pxiaaaleon,  Poiendos,  Recin-


3^4

cios,  Arnecîos,  Bclcar,  Vcniao^  and  the  soïdan
lielagriz,  who,  from  the  castle,  beheld  the
fierce  assaults  of  these  courageous  knights,
^vithout  knowing  for  uhat  cause  they  were
so  cruelly  engaged,  nor  who  they  could  be  ;
yet  each  of  these  noble  personages  had  a
secret  feelmg,  that  peradventure  he  was
ncarl}'  concerned  in  the  issue  of  the  battle  :
and  this  feeling  made  them  grieve  as  if  they
felt  the  wounds  theniM?lves.  Certes,  said
Don  Duardos,  I  have  seen  nrany  a  notable
battle  ;  yet  comparing  them  with  this  which
I  now  behold,  I  must  needs  say,  only  this  is
worthy  eternal  commendations.  Indeed,
quoth  Primaleoii,  1  must  commend  tliis  for
the  most  knightly  adventure  that  iu  all  my
i'ifc  time  i  have  had  sight  of.

Dramuziando  hkcwise,  who  beheld  it  front
the  battlements  of  his  castle,  thought  that  iu
these  men  all  the  valour  of  the  world  was  com-
prized ;  and  knowing  it  had  come  to  pass  by
ihe  means  of  his  aunt,  and  fearing  lest  in
tliis  battle  so-me  of  them  should  be  slain,  Ixr
went  10  her,  and  intreated  her  to  pacify  it  y
but  her  mind  was  bent  to  such  crueh  v,  that


325

she  would  use  no  respect  to  his  words.  They,
meantime,  being  now  so  wounded  a^d  yet
so  fierce  that  the  beholders  expected  nothing
but  their  deaths,  continued  their  strife  till
they  had  neither  uraiour  for  defence,  nor
strength  to  strike  withal  ;  and  being  now  at
the  last  extremity,  all  had  soon  been  over
if  Daliarte  had  consented  thereto.  But  be,
resolved  that  Eutropa  should  not  enjoy  that
evih  came  now  into  the  field,  in  the  sem-
blance of  an  aged  man,  upon  a  serpent  huge
and  fearful  to  behold  ;  and  bearing  in  his
hand  a  v/and  of  fire,  with  whi-h  he  touched
them,  and  incontinently  they  all  fell  sense-
less to  the  ground.  This  done  he  approach-
ed the  castle,  and  the  serpent  breathed  out
from  his  mouth  and  nostrils  such  volumes  of
black  and  tiiick  smoke  that  all  the  air  was
filled  tiierewith,  and  neither  within  the  cas-
tle nor  without  thereof  could  any  thing  be
seen,  except  living  flames  which  at  times
flashed  froji  the  darkness,  as  if  they  would
have  consumed  whatever  came  in  their
course.  This  was  deemed  by  all  who  wit-
nessed it  to  be  a  great  miracle  ;  but  Eutropa
marvelled  at  it  most  of  all,  she  being  the
TOL.  I.  2  F


326

more  dismayed,  inasmuch  as  the  mystery
excelled  all  the  power  of  her  art.

At  last  thÍ3  great  darkness  began  to  melt
away,  and  discovered  the  field,  whereon
nothing  could  be  seen  but  the  knights,
that  lay  all  grovelling  upon  the  ground,  in
appearance  more  dead  than  living.  The
giant  Dramuziaiido  seeing  himself  freed
from  other  fears,  went  out,  accompanied  by
his  noble  prisoners,  upon  whose  faith  he
had,  as  ye  have  heard,  full  reliance  ;  and
ordering  the  bodies  to  be  carried  into  the
castle,  they  were  there  disarmed  that  their
wounds  might  be  holpen.  But  then  when
their  armour  was  taken  off,  king  Recindos
knew  his  children,  and  the  king  Arnedos
his;  Polcndos  knew  Francian  his  son,  Belcar
Don  Rosuel  and  Belisarte,  and  Mayortes
Dirdan.  As  for  Platir,  when  his  father  Pri-
maleon  left  him  he  was  so  young,  that  he
V\'as  not  known  till  afterwards.  In  brief^
they  all  lamented  to  see  their  kindred  and
friends  in  such  plight,  thinking  this  the  M'orst
evil  tliat  had  befallen  them  ;  howbeit  this
their  grief  abated  \\  hen  in  short  time  they


3^7

had  good  hope  to  recover  them  from  this
danger.  In  this  manner  these  knights  re-
mained prisoners^  in  company  v.ith  their  pa-
rents and  brethren.

Now  did  Dramuziando,  seeing  that  he  had
now  in  his  hands  all,  or  the  greater  part,
of  the  men  whom  he  desired,  resolve  speedily
to  conquer  the  Isle  of  the  Bottomless  Lake;
which  as  yet,  however,  he  would  not  make
known  to  any  of  the  knights.  Meantime  he
treated  with  the  same  love  and  courtesy  as
ever,  hoping  thereby  to  win  their  true  friend-
ship, as  he  greatly  desired.


2  f2


3í28


CHAPTER   39.


Glad  was  Eu  tropa  that  she  had  gotten  these
l<nii^bts  her  prisoners,  whom  she  stood  in
groat  fear  ot",  and  Christendom  in  most  need
of;  and  iu)'.v  would  she  practise  another
mischief,  w  orse  than  any  she  had  yet  affect-
ed :  she  was  advertised  of  the  death  of  do-
rique, the  great  soldan  of  Babylon,  and  hus-
band of  Alchiana,  wlio  was  so  dear  friend  to
the  emperor  Palmerin  ;  he  had  a  son  re-
maining ahve,  not  of  the  gentle  nature  of
his  father,  but  a  great  enemy  to  the  whole
estate  of  Christendom.

This  serving  fit  for  her  devili.^h  purpose^
she  gave  him  by  letters  to  understand*
what    great    and   grievous   mischances,    his


329

progenitors  had  received  by  the  emperors
of  Greece,  in  that  many  princes  of  his  blood
and  lineage,  had  been  cruelly  slain  before
the  walls  of  Constantinople,  wliich  natural
love  and  diitv  did  enforce  him  to  roven2;e.

As  for  a  convenient  time,  he  could  wish  for
no  better  than  was  at  that  present.  Con-
stantinople had  no  other  ranipier  of  de-
fence than  the  aged  cnnx;ror,  whose  years
forbade  him  to  enter  the  field  ;  the  knights,
whom  all  the  world  feared,  and  who  were
the  only  safeguard  to  that  famous  city,  were
in  a  place,  where  they  had  need  of  succour
themselves.  Yea,  and  all  other  realms  were
so  unprovided,  that  neither  could  they  help
him,  or  promise  safety  to  themselves  ;  so
that  if  he  v.o«ld  he  might  bring  under  his
obeisance  the  most  part  of  all  Christen-
dom.

Their  letters  were  conveyed  to  the  soldan
of  Babylon,  who  was  so  stirred  thereby,  that
forthwith  he  provided  for  the  attempt  which
Eutropa  had  willed  him.  Where  to  his.
determination  we  will  forsake  him  at  this
2  F  3


330

time,  till  we  gain  more  fit  occasion  to   dis-
course of  his  proceedings.

The  knight  of  the  Savage  Man  having  re-
covered  from   the  wounds   received   in  his
last  combat,  was  purposed  now  to  seek   tlie
adventures  of  Great  Britain  ;  for  which  cause
lie  took   leave   of  king   Tadrique,  and  the
princess   Flerida,   proceeding   in  his  travel,
■whither  his  horse  would  ;  but  as  the  hour
was  come,  on  the  seventh  day  and  at  noon,
Poriune  brouglit  him   to  the  Valley  of  Per-
dition, wherein  he  did  not  proceed  far  be-
fore he  espied  the  tower  edified  in  the  midst
of  the  river,  and  surrounded  by  green  pop-
lars,  which  rose  from    the  water    to    such
height  that  the  battlements  were  under  the
shadow     of  their    leaves.       Much    did    he
desire   to    know   whose  was   this  so   fair   a
dwelling,    and    in    this     desire    drew   near
to    the  fortresi;.      Not    Ions:   h^d    he  stood
to  behold  it,  before  he  perceived    to  issue
forth   a  brave  company  of  well    appointed
knights,  before  whom  were  giants  of  a  mon-
strous stature,  with   their  faces  uncovered,
and  the  fierceness  therein  with  which  nature


331

endowed  them.  Now  albeit  be  bad  never
before  seen  this  castle,  yet  seeing  the  com-
pany come  forth,  he  presently  knew  that  it
was  the  place  now  so  much  spoken  of;  yet
he  could  not  understand  how  it  was  that
knights  so  well  armed  should  accompany
these  giants  ;  and  he  thought  within  him-
self, that  if  this  were  the  adventure  which
he  was  seeking,  the  mishap  of  all  was  more
certain  than  the  victory  of  any.  And  be-
cause he  saw  that  one  of  the  knio-bts  was
preparing  himself  to  joust,  taking  a  lance  in
hand,  and  lacing  on  his  helm,  he  commend*
ed  himself  to  fortune,  and  putting  heels  to
his  horse,  charged  toward  Recindos  king  of
Spain;  for  he  it  was  who  awaited  him.  For
it  fell  out  that  that  day  Dramuziando  sallied
out  to  the  chace,  accompanied  by  him  and
by  Don  Duardos,  Primaleon,  and  Arnedos^
and  his  two  fierce  giants  came  also  over  the
bridge,  beyond  which  they  never  passed
without  express  order  from  Dramuziando,
alway  remaining  to  keep  the  tower.  AVhen
they  saw  the  knight  of  the  Savage  Man,
they  all  stopt,  thinking,  as  was  the  custom,
Don  Duardos  should  huve  the  first  course  ;


332

but  king  Uecindos,  who  from  the  day  that
he  had  entered  there  had  never  till  now
borne  arms,  obtained  leave  first  to  try  his
strength.  And  though  in  hii»  time  he  was  as
renowned  a  knight  as  in  the  book  of  Prima-
leon  is  recorded,  it  did  not  fall  out  so  well
in  this  encounter  but  that  he  was  sent  to  the
earth.  Arnedos,  who  had  alvvay  in  travail,
born  him  company,  prevailed  through  earn-
est desire,  that  he  was  granted  the  second
joust  ;  but  he  was  enforced  to  bear  king
llecindos  company.  Primaleon  seeing  his
sister's  husband  receive  sueh  dishonour  be-
fore his  face,  without  taking  leave  of  Bon
Duardos,  took  his  spear  and  ran  courage-
ously against  the  knight  of  the  Savage  Man,
when  they  brake  their  spears,  yet  neither  of
them  any  thing  shaken.  Dramuziando,who
rejoiced  to  see  this  noble  tilting,  commaud-r
ed  store  of  spears  to  be  presently  brought
forth  ;  when  each  of  them  took  their  choice,
and  fell  to  their  enterprise  again.

Their  second  encounter  past  in  like  manner
as  the  first.  At  the  third  attempt  Primaleon
went  to  the  earth,  with  his  saddle  between


333

his  legs,  the  girth  breaking  in  two  or  three
places  with  the  force  of  the  shock.  Neither
did  he  of  the  Savage  keep  his  seat,  but  hold-
ing the  reins  still,  he  mounted  again  as  fresh
as  if  he  had  not  fallen.  Don  Duardos  be-
holding such  deeds  in  one  unknown,  took  a
spear  from  the  many  which  the  giant  had
had  brought  out,  and  seeing  that  the  other
was  ready  with  his  in  the  rest,  with  full  pur-
port to  revenge  the  others,  or  bear  his  share
of  their  shame,  gave  the  encounter  to  the
knight  of  the  Savage  Man  ;  which  was  dis-
charged with  so  great  magnanimity,  that
both  their  horses  and  themselves  were  laid
on  the  ground.  That  of  Don  Duardos  had
its  right  shoulder  broken,  and  lay"  upon  one
of  his  legs,  whereby  he  might  have  sustained
some  hurt,  if  the  knight  of  the  Savage  had
not  holpen  him  and  turned  the  horse  over,
saying,  Albeit,  sir,  I  have  never  before  to-
day received  such  an  encounter  as  yours,  I
will  do  you  this  service,  that  you  may  give
such  to  others  hereafter.  Certes,  replied
Don  Duardos,  whether  or  not  my  attaint
appeared  a  good  one  to  you^  yours  was  the
best  I  ever  yet  received.


334

At  this  up  came  the  terrible  Pandaro,  armed
with  the  same  weapons  with  which  he  al-
way  combated,  and  giving  these  words  to  the
knight  of  the  Savage  Man  :  Since  you  have
done  more  in  the  joust  than  every  one  sup-
posed to  be  ill  your  power,  you  must  now
endeavour  yourself  to  deal  with  me  a  while  ;
for  that  all  such  as  enter  this  valley  are
hound  to  fuliil  this  custom.  If  your  heart
serve  3'ou  not,  yield  yourself,  which  will
be  less  danger  than  you  may  receive  at  my
hands.  Isay,  replied  the  knight,  I  hold  it
woivse  than  that  wherewith  thou  threatenest
me.  The  giant,  who  was  not  disposed  for
many  w'ords,  began  at  this  to  charge  the
knight  with  his  iron  mace,  and  he  to  change
blows  with  his  good  sword  ;  so  that  between
them  passed  such  notable  behaviour  in  fight,
that  Dramuziando,  Don  Duardos,  and  Pri-
maleon,  commended  marvellously  the  har-
diness of  the  knight  of  the  Savage  Man  ;
perceiving  the  great  difference  between  him
and  all  others  whom  they  had  ever  yet  seen.
But  he,  suspecting  that  when  he  had  con-
quered this  giant  there  remained  for  him
other  greater  dangers  to  pass  through,  be-


33J

haved  himself  so  skilfully  in  this  that  he
made  Pandaro  lose  most  of  his  blows^  and
dealt  his  own  at  such  good  time^  that  ere
long  he  had  him  at  his  pleasure.  Yet  Pan-
daro^ in  his  courage,  knew  so  well  how  to
dissemble  the  weakness  to  which  his  wounds
had  brought  him,  and  dealt  on  his  part  such
mortal  ones  with  his  mace,  that  the  shield
of  the  knight  was  well  nigh  demolished,
and  his  other  arms,  and  he  himself  had  been
so  abo,  if  the  nimbleness  with  which  he
fought  had  not  protected  him.  Thus  they
went  on  long  while,  fiercely  smiting  away
without  rest  or  respite.  And  Pandaro  at
length,  what  w  ith  the  weight  of  armour  and
of  his  own  huge  body,  not  being  able  to
stand  up  longer,  his  mace  dropt  from  his
hands,  and  he  fell  upon  the  ground,  his
strentrth  beino;  clean  sone  from  him.

o  o  Q

The  knight  of  the  Savage  presently  began
to  unlace  his  helm,  meaning  to  cut  off  his
head  ;  and  he  had  sent  his  head  from  his
shoulders  had  not  the  giant  Daliagam  come
presently  upon  him,  who  in  such  time  was
always  ready  as  promptly  as  his  help  \va*


336

needed.     Then  was  he  constrahied  to  leave
Pandaro,  and  award  the  mighty  blows  which
this    other     giant    charged    him    furiously
withal.    So  a  second  battle  began,  so  cruel
and  fearful  to  behold,  that  they  who  beheld
it  could  not  judge  whether  this  or  the  for-
mer were  the  more  so  ;  and  greatly  did  they
praise  the  strength  of  the  knight,  who  was
as  active  as  if  all  the  day  he  had  done  no-
thing.    But  the  giant,  who  was  fresh,  struck
him  in  so  many  places,  maugre  all  his  skill
and  activity,  that  the  blows  left  heavy  marks
both  upon  his  armour  and  liesh  ;  the  knight
on  his  part  paying  well  for  what  he  received.
In    this  manner  they   handled  each   other,
that    it    was    little    expected    either    could
escape  with  life.     And  because  to  relate  at
length  all  that  passed  in  this  battle  would
weary  the  reader  ;  let  it  suffice  to  say,  that
it  lasted  long,  being  as  stoutly  contested  as
was  to  be  expected  ;  and  in  line  the  knight,
when  his  enemy  was  out  of  breath  witli  long
continuance  in  fight,  came  upon  him  with
such  fresh  delivery  of  blows,  and  followed
his  enterprise  with  such  exceeding  courage,
that  he    brought   stout    Daliagam   likewise


S37

under  his  feet;  himself  remaining  in  such
plight  that  he  could  scant  uphold  himself.

Dramuziando  then  came  up  to  him  on  horse-
back, with  his  head  unarmed,  thinking  that
he  would  slay  the  giant.  Sir  knight,  said  he_,
the  victory  which  you  have  this  day  won  is
so  great  that  you  would  do  well  to  remain
content  therewith,  and  having  respect  to
your  wounds,  yield  yourself  to  my  friend-
ship •  otherwise,  I  shall  be  urged  to  that  I
would  be  loth  to  do,  which  is  to  give  you  a
iVcsh  assault,  when  the  estate  you  are  in
doth  rather  require  ease  than  fresh  labour.

These  words,  answered  the  knight  of  the
Savage  Man,  would  deserve  to  be  thankfully
received  by  a  sound  and  well  conditioned
man:  how  much  more  bv  one  that  is  so  sore
as  I  in  body.  But  as  it  seemcth  to  me,  you
are  lord  of  this  castle,  that  at  this  present
dctaineth  the  flower  of  all  chivalry  ;  I  would
not  have  the  best  knights  and  greatest
princes  in  the  world  perceive  in  me  so  great
weakness  ;  since  not  to  yield  myself,  but  to
deliver  them  do  I  come  here.
2  o


338

It  is  fit  then,  replied  the  giant,  that  I  slioiild
show  you  how  good  my  advice  was,  and  how
vain  your  own  presumption  ;  so  arming  his
head,  and  fastening  his  shield  upon  his  arm,
he  came  on  foot,  sword  in  hand,  against  the
knight  of  the  Savage  Man,  saying,  I  would
wish  a  knight  hardy  as  yourself,  and  in  bet-
ter condition,  that  my  blows  might  be  given
with  a  better  will.  Nevertheless,  since  you
will  not  believe  the  hurt  they  can  do,  you
must  needs  feel  it.

The  knight  of  the  Savage  Man  made  him  no
answer,  but  taking  up  the  shield  of  Da-
liagam,  which  was  ia  better  estate  tluiii  his
own,  he  advanced  himself  to  Dramuziando,
shewing  such  agility  and  nimble  behaviour
in  his  fight,  as  though  he  had  not  been  so
wearied  as  he  was  ;  and  demeaning  himself
more  warily  than  in  his  former  fights,  as
indeed  v.as  needful  against  Dramuziando,
who  was  one  of  the  strongest  knights  under
the  sun,  and  in  the  use  of  arms  nothing  his
inferior.  The  knight,  who  knew  this  enter-
prize  to  be  the  greatest  that  he  had  as  yet
attempted,  the  happy  ending  wlicrcof  werf'


339

sufficient  to  win  him  perpetual  renown,  did
eufleavour  himself  more  than  ever  ;  and  as
oftentimes  the  desire  and  hope  of  victory
doth  supply  strength  to  win  it,  this  strong
will  gave  him  such  power  besides  his  natural
strength,  that  verily  his  endeavour  that  day
surpassed  all  his  former  doings  ;  and  against
Dramuziando  all  vras  needful.  Don  .Duar-
dos  and  Primaieon  verily  supposed  the  per-
fect nobility  of  kniohthood  to  remain  in  the
knight  of  the  Savage  Man.  At  length  he
and  Dramuziando  drew  back  to  take  breath.
For  certain,  said  the  giant,  thy  courage
makes  me  pity  thee  more  than  I  expected  ;
it  can  last  nc  longer  than  till  that  blood  has
done  flowing,  and  if  thou  shouldst  die,  there
dies  then  the  best  knight  in  the  world.  I
beseech  thee  do  not  let  the  battle  proceed
further.  Look  at  yourself,  the  ruin  of  your
armour,  the  sore  wounds  on  your  body,  and
the  blood  that  hath  coloured  the  grass
under  your  feet  ;  and  though  you  have  thus
long  persisted,  yield  yourself  now.  Good
counsel  is  better  late  followed  than  never.
Quoth  the  knight  of  the  Savage  Man,  your
request  doth  ask  such  a  good  answer,  that
2  G  ii


340

î  rather  choose  lo  renew  the  combat,  than
to  give  it.  With  these  words  they  went  to
it  again  cheerfully,  delivering  such  force-
able  blows  to  each  other,  that  in  short  time
their  w'eakness  in  some  degree  withdrew
them  from  more  hurt.  For  though  the
knight  of  the  Savage  Man  were  in  great
debility,  Dramuziando  was  brought  into  as
great  danger,  that  the  regardants  knew  not
to  whom  to  impute  the  most  hurt  ;  though
in  truth  the  knight  was  nearest  his  end,
though  his  unfatiguable  and  invincible
spirit  dissembled  all.  Primaleon  and  Don
Duardos  came,  desirous  to  separate  them,
because  they  feared  the  death  of  the  knight
of  the  Savage  Man  ;  but  no  persuasion  could
withhold  him,  greatly  as  they  endeavoured
it.  The  knight  now  taking  his  sword  in
both  hands,  thinking  this  would  be  the  last
blow  he  could  give,  having  neither  breath
nor  strength  for  more,  took  the  giant  above
his  shield  upon  the  helmet,  wherewith  his
sword  brake  in  a  great  many  pieces  ;  and
one  fragment  entered  through  into  his  head,
at  "(vhich  Dramuziando  was  somewhat  tor-
mented, yet  not  so  much  but  that  he  came


541

and  caught  the  knight  about  the  middle,
who  received  him  in  like  manner,  that  they
threw  each  other  to  the  ground  with  great
violence,  being  both  as  men  deprived  of
their  lives,  so  that  it  could  not  be  said  who
had  the  victory.  And  as  it  was  now  night
when  the  battle  finished  ;  and  Daliarte,  who
now  came  up,  made  it  by  his  art  darker  than
it  naturally  would  have  been,  the  knight
of  the  Savage  Man  was  taken  awa}^,  no
body  could  imagine  how  or  which  way  ;
and  the  giant  remained  stretched  out  upon
the  field,  still  having  his  recollection,  which,
the  true  presumption  is,  he  of  the  Savage
had  lost.

Dramuziando  was  conducted  into  his  for-
tress, where  he  was  diligently  attended  b}'
his  aunt  Eutropa  ;  who,  fearing  lest  at  this
time  the  knights  would  make  means  to
escape  awa}%  she  locke^l  them  into  a  great
dwelling  which  overhung  the  river,  having
no  other  entrance  than  a  grate,  through
whicli  they  received  such  things  as  were
needful.  In  this  order  she  used  them,  till
Dramuziando  and  his  giants  had  recovered
2  G  3


542

their  former  health  ;  when  he  brought  them
forth  again  into  their  accustomed  cliambers,
greatly  displeased  that  they  should  have
been  thus  treated  ;  for  such  was  the  con-
fidence lie  reposed  in  their  faith,  that  he
exempted  all  discourtesy  from  his  heart.


343


CHAPTER    40.


The  reno^sTied  knight  of  Fortune,  (whom
through  occasion  we  left  to  speak  of)  re-
mained so  long  in  the  house  of  the  ancient
gentleman  his  host,  that  his  wounds  were
perfectl}^  healed,  and  his  body  well  able  to
endure  the  bearing  of  armour.  When  Sel-
viam  had  provided  him  new  armour  like  his
other,  and  a  shield  with  his  usual  device  of
fortune  upon  it,  he  departed  which  way  he
thought  surest  to  find  the  ca'itle  of  Dramuzi-
ando.  At  last,  after  many  days  travelling,
night  overtook  him  at  the  foot  of  a  mouii-
taJn  hard  by  in  a  valley,  whose  freshness  the
darkness  overshadowed  and  concealed  ;  he
espyed  a  little  pavilion,  wherein  were  lighted
torches  ;  this   moved  him  to  take  his  way


34-i

thither,  to  see  \vhat  it  might  be:  as  he  clretv
nigh  he  perceived  none  within  excepta  dead
knight  stretched  upon  a  bier,  and  one  by  him
making  great  kmientations  over  him,  vvhom
he  presently  knew  to  be  Don  Rosiram  de  la
Brunda,  the  nephew  oF  the  king  of  England;
■which  niade  him  suppose  that  the  knight  on
the  bier  w^as  some  man  of  great  authority
and  estimation.  So  alighting  from  his  horse,
he  went  in,  meaning  to  console  him.  But
Don  Rosiram,  seeing  him  to  be  the  knightof
Fortune,  rose  up,  saying,  Now,  sir  knight,  be
satified,  for  thj  man  whom  you  have  ever
held  your  enemy  is  dead.  Here  lies  the
knight  of  the  Savage,  over  whom  you  so
greatly  desired  the  victory,  yet  could  not
win  it.  He  of  Fortune,  hearing  these  words,
the  tears  came  into  \m  eyes;  for  it  is  the
cjuality  of  gentle  hearts  to  have  compassion
for  the  misfortunes  even  of  their  enemies.
Certes,  said  he,  never  had  I  more  desire  to
prevail  against  any  man  ;  and  such  desire,
both  against  him  and  any  other,  it  is  well
that  I  should  have  ;  and  since  in  life  our
enmity  was  such,  you  shall  see  what  1  willj
now  do  to   revenge  him.     I  beseech  3'ou,


$45

shevT  me  the  place  where  he  hath  received
this  fatc^  and  revenge  him  I  will^  or  share
the  like.

Sir  (answered  Don  Rosiram)  I  arrived  here
only  half  an  hour  ago,  and  found  him  in
this  state.  A  man,  however,  who  is  gone
from  hence,  informed  me  that  he  received
these  wounds  at  the  castle  of  the  Giant^
where,  it  is  believed,  the  best  knights  in  the
w:orld  are  lost  j  and  though  he  did  such  sur-
passing things  in  aims  as  were  never  seen  m
others,,  yet  in  fine  was  he  left  in  this  plight
wherein  you  behold  him,  not  having  been
able  to  finish  this  so  perilous  adventure.

The  knight  of  Fortune,  whose  very  heart
was  grieved  to  behold  this  great  mischance,
began  to  conceive  greater  estimation  of  the
adventure  than  ever  be  did  before.  Then
taking  up  the  armour  that  lay  there  by  him,
he  saw  it  so  defaced  and  hacked  in  so  many
places,  that  he  could  not  but  needs  marvel  at
them  who  had  the  strength  to  use  it  so,  but
more  at  the  man  that  had  the  might  to  resist
such  an  extrem.e  danger,  even  for  ever  so


346

short  a  time  ;  whereupon  he  said,  Well  now
may  the  hope  to  end  this  adventure  be  alto-
getlier  lost,  the  knight  being  dead  who  had
the  puissance  to  finish  all  other.     At  these
words  he  approached  to  the  bier,  to  see  if
he  v/ere  clean  deprived  of  life  ;  when  lifting
lip  the  sheet  of  silk  with  the  which  his  face
was  covered,  he  perceived  his  countenance  so
grim  and  hardy,  as  it  was  at  the  time  he  re-
ceived his  wounds.  But  looking  at  him  more
wistfully,  on  a  sudden  his  heart  smote  him,  as
if  he  knew   the  face;  and  nature,  who  ia
these  cases  manifests  every  thing,  brought
back  to   his  remembrance  the  loss  of   hii
brother,  by  certain  signs  which  made  him.
think  this  was  he.     And  he  called  Selviam  to
look  at  him,  and  both,   after  earnestly  re-
garding him,  were  certain  it  was  so.     Upon
this,  the  knight  of  Fortune  besought  Don
Rosiram  to  certify  him  of  the  name  of  the
knight  of  the  Savage  Man,  insomuch  as  it
would  not  disprofit  him  who  was  now  no
more,   and  would  resolve   him  of  a  great
doubt.     Don  Rosiram    answered.  So    little
can  be  risked  in  this,  that  I  will  not  with-
hold from  you  what  I  know.     His  true  name


347

is  Of  the  Desert  : — His  father,  ncitîier  I
nor  any  other  know,  though  to  me  who  was
his  nearest  friend  he  hath  sometimes  con-
fessed, that  a  savage  brought  him  up,  who
called  him  Of  the  Desart  also,  and  whom  he
supposed  to  be  his  father.

The  knight  of  Fortune,  whom  these  Avords
touched  to  the  very  heart,  knowing  that  it
was  indeed  his  brother,  fell  upon  the  bier  as
if  his  heart  was  not  made  to  endure  worse
dangers.     But  at  this  time  four  men  entered
the    tent,  and    placing  the  bier  upon    two
palfreys  which  they  brought  with  them  for
that  purpose,  departed  with  the  body.     He
cf  Tortune  would  have  followed  them,  but
they  willed  him  to  the  contrary,  saying,  that
if  there  was  any  remedy  for  his  life  it  should
be  given  him  without  his  presence.  With  this
persuasion,  thinking  it  bootless  to  follow  him,
he  returned  to  Don  Rosiram,  to  know  which
wa}'  he  intended  to  travel  ;  because  he  had
determined  himself  to  go  die  upon  the  place
where    this   good  knight  had   received  his
wounds,    or   to  revenge  him.     Sir,    (quoth
Don  Pcosiram)  I  take  mv  way  towards  Lon-


348

âon,  with  thesc^  his  arms,  which  I  shall  give
to  the  king,  (at  whose  hands  he  received  the
order  of  knighthood)  that  he  may  order  them
to  be  preserved  and  held  in  sucii  veneratwu
as  the  exploits  of  their  living  lord  have  de-
served. Can  you  tell,  said  he  oi"  I'Wtune»
which  way  the  fortress  lies  where  all  adven-
turers Hnd  their  end  ?  to  whom  Don  Rosiram
replied,  i  know  iiot,and  believe  nobody  know*;;
but  as  it  should  seem,  it  cannot  be  far  hence,
by  what  the  man  told  me;  and  also  tlie  battle
with  the  knight  of  the  Savage  was  fougkt
yesterday,  and  he  could  not  have  bcea
brought  from  far  in  so  short  space  of  time.

Tims,  they  departed,  each  going  his  way-
Don  Rosiram  rode  on  all  that  night,  and  oei
the  next  day,  towards  evening,  he  entei-ed
London,  bearing  before  him  flie  armour  of
the  knight  of  the  Savage  ^lan.  Being  c^om^
to  the  court,  he  found  the  king  well  nigh  de-
serted by  the  noble  knicflus  that  were  wont
to  keep  him  company,  so  that  teai^  came
into  his  eyes,  thinking  they  were  all  îost.
He,  making  way  through  the  few  which  si  ill
remained,  bearing  sufficient  sorrow   in    hi?


349

countenance,  went  on  till  he  came  to  the
king,  and  kneeling  before  him,  took  the
aims  of  the  knight  of  the  Savage,  and  said,-
Sir,  these  are  all  which  are  left  to  your
highness,  in  consolation  for  the  death  of  him
who  bore  them.  These  were  the  arms  of
him  of  the  Desert,  your  right  excellent  good
knight  of  the  Savage  Man  ;  by  the  blows
which  they  have  received,  you  may  judge  of
the  state  in  which  he  is  left.  He  died  in
your  service.  And  since  nothing  remains  of
his  person  but  this  memorial,  give  order  that
his  armour  may  beautify  some  place  of  ho-
nour, to  witness  the  virtuous  behaviour  he
was  wont  to  employ  it  in.  Then  told  he
him  all  he  had  learnt  from  the  man  in  the
tent,  and  how  he  met  the  knight  of  Fortune
at  the  pavilion,  who  took  such  great  and  ex-
treme grief  for  his  mischance,  that  he  was
gone  to  revenge  him.

The  King  strove  to  suppress  the  trouble
which  these  tidings  gave  him  ;  but  not  able
to  master  his  extreme  grief,  he  brake  forth
into  words  of  great  lamentation,  complain-
ing of  Fortune,  who  persecuted  him  to  the
2  H


350

utterance  of  the  loss  of  his  son  Don  Dmirdo.s,
with  his  princely  children,  which  had  oc-
casioned the  loss  of  ali  the  best  knights  in
the  world  ;  and  now  all  hope  for  them  was
lost,  since  the  knight  of  the  Savage  Man  was
dead,  in  whom  he  placed  sure  trust  for  their
delivery.  As  for  the  knight  of  Fortune,  he  fear-
ed his  own  fortune  would  in  like  manner  pre-
vent him  from  finishing  the  adventure. —
Then,  taking  the  broken  armour,  he  went
with  only  Don  Rohiiram  to  the  chamber  of
the  Princess  Fleiida,  where  he  found  the
queen,  shewing  them  these  last  memorials
of  the  knight  of  the  Savage  Man.  But  the
pityful  bewailing  which  they  made  for  these
unhappy  tidings  is  not  to  be  told,  because  I
will  not,  gentlewomen,  that  you  should  con-
ceive any  sorrow  thorow  their  deahngs  5  I
refer  their  lamentations  to  your  gentle  judg-
ments.

Then  the  king  commanded  the  armour  of
this  good  knight  to  be  placed  where  the
kinffs  of  Ensfland  were  of  old  accustomed  to
deposit  such  trophies,  and  which  was  called
the  Tower  of  the  Worthies  5  and  in  which


351

there  were  but  few,  for  few  were  worthy  of
receiving  such  honour.  Here,  among  the
arms  of  the  valiant  Morlot,  and  also  of  sir
Lancelot  du  Lake,  as  also  of  divers  of
the  knights  of  the  Round  Table  :  in  this
place,  and  as  much  above  them  all,  as  to
show  how  much  his  feats  had  surpassed  hem,
the  armour  of  the  knight  of  the  Savage  Man
was  royally  hanged  up.

The  king,  having  thus  lost  all  hope,  now
laboured  in  devotion,  setting  his  mind  on
everlasting,  true,  and  permanent  things.  As
for  the  other,  as  they  were  transitory  and
vain,  so  to  their  frailty  he  gave  them  over^
thanking  nature  for  nothing  so  much  as  for
having  given  him  judgment  to  know  the  dif-
ference, that  being  in  truth  the  best  of  ali
her  gifts.


«H  2


S5Q


CHAPTER  41.


After  the  knight  of  Fortune  had  taken  leave
of  Don  Rosiram,  he  had  not  travelled  far
along  the  valley,  when,  because  it  was  night,
and  he  knew  not  well  which  way  to  take,
he  alighted,  sitting  down  at  the  root  of  a
tree,  where  he  determined  to  sleep  until
morning  ;  but  this  he  could  not  do,  such
was  the  grief  he  felt  for  the  knight  of  the
Savage  Man,  with  sundry  other  cogitations
that  tormented  his  mind  ;  at  times  repent-
ing that  he  had  not  forced  himself  upon  iiis
company,  and  presently  passing  to  a  sorrow
for  the  uncertainty  of  their  birth.  These
troyblous  thoughts  made  him  more  desirous
to  be  at  the  castle,  where  he  might  have
that  to  do  which  perforce  would  put  theui


353

out  of  mind,  and  where  he  -ivould  prove  his
fortune,  and  make  an  end  of  the  adventure
or  of  himself,  as  so  many  others  had  done.
In  the  morning  Selviam  brought  him  his
steed,  when  presently  they  mounted  on
horseback,  and  rode  on  wliich  way  he
thought  soonest  to  end  his  pretence  ;  of
every  one  they  met  they  asked  news  of  the
castle  of  the  giant,  which  none  could  give
them  ;  and  though  every  day  they  passed
near  it,  Entropa  would  not  sulf^^r  him  to
enter  within  the  line  of  her  spells,  till  her
nephew  and  his  giants  were  once  more  in
condition  for  battle.  In  this  manner  he
wandered  about  in  search  of  it  for  forty
days,  during  which  time,  though  he  met
Avith  many  adventures,  none  of  them  are
worthy  to  be  recounted.  At  the  end  of
that  time,  the  giant  Drarauziando  and  his
two  others,  being  restored  to  their  wonted
health  and  strength,  he  found  his  way  into
the  Valley  of  Perdition  by  the  upper  end
thereof;  and  proceeding  along  beside  the
river,  the  place  appeared  to  him  so  cool
and  delightful  in  all  ways,  that  he  judged
it  to  be  the  best  in  the  world.  So  on  he  rodcj
'2  H  3


employing  his  eyes  upon  the  verdure  of  the
field,  the  clearness  and  quickness  of  the
water,  and  his  mind  in  remembrance  of  his
lady  Polinarda,  in  such  amorous  absence,
that  for  the  danger  in  which  he  stood  hê
had  no  sense  lelt.  From  this  maze  he  was
awakened  by  Selviam,  and  he  saw  that  he
was  close  by  the  bridge,  and  Don  Duardos
upon  it,  prepared  to  joust.

This  sight  caused  him  presently  to  couch  his
spear  ;  when  on  a  sudden  a  damsel  came
riding  on  a  white  palfrey,  with  a  shield  in
her  hand,  saying.  Stop,  sir  knight,  and  be-
fore you  begin  your  combat  take  this  shield,
for  this  is  the  day  you  shall  have  most  need
of  it,  and  this  day  it  shall  stand  you  in
chiefest  stead.  Here  ending  her  talk,  and
delivering  him  the  shield,  immediately  she
departed  by  the  way  she  came.  Then  he
delivered  his  shield  of  Fortune  to  Selvi,am,
fastening  the  other  upon  his  arai,  when  he
knew  it  to  be  the  shield  of  the  Palm  Tree,
that  was  taken  from  Selviam  on  the  day
when  he  slew  the  giant  Camboldam.  Well
was  he  then  aware    that  it  had   not  been


355

given  him  at  this  time  without  some  mystery,
the  more  so,  remembering  the  words  the
damsel  spake  wlien  she  took  it  from  Scl-
viaiii,  liow  that  she  would  restore  it  again,
when  he  should  have  most  need.  And
though  with  that  other  shield  and  its  de-
vice of  Fortune,  he  had  atchieved  many
feats,  and  was  now  affectioned  unto  it,  yet
he  rejoieed  rather  in  this  of  the  Palm,  be^
cause  of  the  speeches  of  the  damsel  beforq
the  emperor  of  Constantinople,  when  first
she  brought  it  to  him,  as  you  have  heard
before;  likewise,  because  this  was  the  most
dangerous  adventure  that  in  all  his  life-time
he  cnt(M-prized:  for  his  forebodings  told  him
that  this  was  the  fortress  of  the  giant.
By  this,  time  Don  Duardos  being  weary  of
delay,  was  calUng  out  to  him  to  joust;  so
lowering  lance  and  advancing  shield,  they
r;in  their  career  with  full  force.  The  spear
of  Don  Duardos  brake  ia  pieces  without
making  dint  upon  the  shield  of  the  Pahii,
whereat  he  of  Fortune  had  better  hope  of
surmounting  any  danger,  seeing  that  so
mighty  an  encounter  had  done  it  so  little
hurt.     Tliat  of  Don  Duardos  failed,  and  his.


356

arms  also,  and  he  uas  something  wounded,
yet  not  so  much  as  to  fall,  nor  even  to  move
in  his  saddle,  remaining  as  firm  as  though
he  had  not  heen  touched.  And  because
there  were  no  other  spears  ready,  and  Don
Duardos,  by  the  custom  of  the  castle,  was  not
to  do  battle  with  the  sword,  the  gate  of  the
tower  was  presenth'  opened  by  the  hand  of
the  dreadful  Pandaro,  and  Don  Duardos
went  in,  hurt  from  the  encounter.  He  of
Fortune  determining  to  prove  what  his  for-
tune would  be,  made  such  speed  that  he  en-
tered with  him  ;  which  when  Pandaro  per-
ceived, expecting  indeed  nothing  less,  he
shut  the  gate,  and  came  vaunting  with  his
mace  toward  him.  The  good  knight  received
him,  protecting  himself  with  his  new  shield,
upon  the  which  his  blows  made  no  more  im-
pression than  if  they  had  fallen  upon  a  rock,
he  the  while  smiting  the  giant  mortally,  so
that  in  short  time  he  had  handled  him
worse  than  ever  he  had  been  handled  by
might  of  man  before,  except  it  were  the
knight  of  the  Savage  ;  nevertheless,  though
he  perceived  how  little  effect  his  blows  took
upon  the  shield  of  his  enemv,  he  ex<?rted


J


3i7

himself  so  bravely  to  bear  up  in  dial.bi\tt]e»
that  this  was  the  day  in  which  he  more  than
ever  displayed  the  hist  extent  of  his  might
and    main.       But  the    knight    of    Fortune
prest   him   so  hard^    that  he   had  not  only
demolislied  his  shield,  but  wounded  him  in
many  places,  so  that  Dramuziando,  Prima-
leon,and  Don  Duardos,  thought  it  a  miracle,
praising  his  skill  in  arms,  as  in  truth  it  was
worthy  to   be    feared  and  admired.     Now,
though  the  knighx  of  Fortune  did  not  bear
his  accustomed  shield,  yet  were  there  many
knights  of  the  emperor's  household  in  the
castle,  who  knew  him  by  that  of  the  Palm,
because  it  had  cost  them   dear  when  they
combated   for  it   with  the    knight    of    the
Savage;  and  they  all  affirmed,    that    if  he
failed  to  end  the   adventure,  their   captivity
must  be   perpetual.     The  perturbation  was
such  that  they   knew  not  whether  was   the
greater,    the  joy   they   lelt    at    seeing   hiui
Avithin   those   walls    for  their   salvation,  or
their  fear  for  the  peril  he  was  in  ;  but  besides
the  knowledge  of  what  he  was,  the  goodness
of  his  shield    gave    them   great    hope.     By
this  time  the  giant  was  become  so  mortally


358

AveA'  that  he  could  scant  uphold  himself;  and
he  of  Fortune  perceiving  it  laid  on  him  such
load  of  blows,  that  perforce  he  brought
him  to  the  ground  senseless,  like  one  dead,
as  he  was.  Forthwith  he  unlaced  his  hel-
met to  cut  off  his  head.  This  however  he
did  not  do,  as  well  because  it  was  not  ne-
cessary, as  because  Daliagam  did  not  allow
him  time.

The  knight,  though  at  that  time  he  had
need  of  some  little  repose,  seeing  that  it
was  not  the  giant's  intention  to  give  him
any,  welcomed  him  in  his  own  wa\\  And
in  less  than  an  hour  brought  him  to  such
state  that  he  wanted  to  rest  himself.  Then
they  drew  back  awhile.  He  of  Fortune  saw
that  his  shield  was  as  sound  as  if  he  had  re-
ceived no  blow  upon  it  all  day;  but  his  ar-
mour was  broken  in  some  places,  and  he
was  somewhat  wounded  ;  and  he  well  per-
ceived, that  without  such  a  companion  as
that  shield  he  could  never  pass  through  the
perils  of  this  adventure.

Dramuziando  seeing  Daliagam  so  shrewdly


259

handled^  knew  not  well  what  to  say  ;  he
thought  it  difficult  to  conquer  this  knight,
having  such  a  shield  as  could  not  all  this
while  he  pierced  ;  yet  on  the  other  hand
had  such  confidence  in  his  own  strength^
that  he  trusted  his  blows  would  demolish
it.  Prese;nly  the  knight  and  giant  turned
to  it  again,  with  more  force  and  fury  than
hefore  ;  but  the  battle  did  not  last  much
Ioniser,  for  thousrh  Dalia2;am's  strength  was
great,  and  he  did  that  day  even  more  than
was  expected  from  him  ;  he  of  Fortune  see-
ing the  battlements  and  windows  of  the  for-
tress full  of  his  friends,  and  remembering
that  they  wcre^  in  captivity,  and  the  confi-
dence which  they  placed  in  him,  fought
with  such  heartiness  and  hardihood,  that  by
dint  of  blows  he  laid  the  giant  at  his  feet,
and  unlacing  his  helm  smote  off  his  head,
reckless  of  the  cries  and  entreaties  of  Dra-
muziando.

When  Dramuziando  saw  that  Daliagam  was
slain,  in  a  greut  rage  he  called  f  r  his  ar-
mour. The  knight  of  For.une  sate  himself
down  upon  a  stone,  being  so  vrea'  y  that  he


360

^oiild  not  venture  to  ascend  the  steps  till
he  had  taken  some  rest.  So  from  thenee
he  entered  into  speech  with  his  friends.
JJon  Duardos  came  unto  him,  requesting
such  friendship  at  his  hands,  as  he  would
suffer  him  to  have  a  sight  of  his  face.  Flo-
raman  seeing  that  he  hesitated,  said  to  him,
Sir  knight,  he  who  asketh  this  is  Don  Du-
Ardos;  do  it  therefore,  for  to  him  notliing
should  he  denied.  When  the  knight  of
Fortune  heard  Don  Duardos  named,  he
fixed  his  eyes  upon  him,  and  judged  from
the  appearance  of  his  person  that  it  nmst
indeed  be  he.  Then  taking  off  his  helmet,
he  appeared  so  flushed  with  his  past  labour,
that  that  very  labour  heightened  his  natural
comeliness.  Now,  I  believe,  said  Don  Du-
ardos, as  God  hath  endowed  you  with  such  a
seemly  and  honourable  shape,  so  he  hath
reserved  you  to  be  in  all  things  as  diiferent
from  other  men.  I  beseech  you,  if  fortune
do  allow  you  the  victory,  use  all  courtesy  to
this  giant,  who  prepareth  himself  to  encoun-
ter with  you  :  for  never  yet  was  man  who
bore  that  name  so  deserving  of  it.  The
night  of  Fortune  had   not  the  leisure  to


sei

nialce  him  answer,  because  be  perceived  Dra-
niuziando  coming  towards  him  ;  when  hav-
ing armed  his  liead  he  went  into  tlie  mid-
dle of  the  court,  covered  with  his  shield,  to
receive  him.  Dramuziando,  being  some-
what mastered  by  anger  for  the  death  of  Da-
liagam,  chose  to  employ  the  time  in  fulfilling
liis  wrathful  will,  rather  than  in  words  ;  so
that  now  began  the  proof  of  the  fight,  for
all  that  had  passed  before  was  nothing  in
respect  of  this  present  exploit.  The  strokes
of  Dramuziando  entered  the  knight  of  For-
tune's shield,  as  easily  as  it  would  have  done
in  any  other,  which  urged  the  knight  to
some  fear,  neholding  this  difference  at  a  time
v4ien  it  was  so  little  necessary.  On  the
other  hand,  he  riglitly  conceived  that  he
who  had  sent  it  him  had  thus  ordained  it,
that  should  he  win  the  victory  in  this  great
enterprise,  it  should  not  be  attributed  to  the
\irtue  of  the  shield.  GuardinG:  himself
therefore  more  warily  from  Dramuziando
than  he  had  heretofore  done,  he  made  him
deliver  his  blows  in  vain,  any  one  of  which
would  else  have  put  him  in  great  peril.
Yet  those  which  did  attain  him  did  rough

VOL.    I.  2    I


362

work  ;  his  shield  was  demolished,  and  his  ar-
mour well  nigh  so  ;  to  speak  uprightly,
small  was  the  advantage  on  either  side,  for
they  were  both  sore  wounded,  both  alike
wearied,  iind  both  in  great  danger  of  present
death.  The  blood  which  ran  from  them  was
no  much,  that  nothing  but  the  courage  with
which  they  fought  supported  them,  and
that  was  so  great  as  to  move  pity  in  all
their  fiiends  who  beheld  them  thus  destroy-
ing each  other.  But  their  unweariable
hearts  would  not  allow  them  to  rest.  They
continued  the  battle  v/ith  such  fury,  that
lhe  beholders  surely  thought  neiihev  could
ever  survive  for  an  after-figlit;  whereat  most
of  the  knights  and  princes  then  held  in
captivity  felt  such  grief,  that  liefer  would
they  have  remained  for  ever  in  bondage
than  that  their  deliverance  should  be  pur-
chased with  the  life  of  such  aman.

Dramuziando  and  he  now  drew  back  awhile
to  take  breath.  The  giant  began  to  sus-
pect that  this  was  the  knight  should  bring
him  u'idcr  obeisance,  of  whose  coming  his
aunt  Eutropa  did  always  cast  a  doubt  j  and


s  63

he  mused  within  himself  whethei*  it  were
not  best  to  otTer  him  some  compromise,  and
so  leave  off  tVie  battle  ;  but  when  he  consi-
dered that  to  present  such  a  condition  to  his
enemy,  might  express  cowardice,  he  deter-
mined rather  to  end  his  lite.

The  knight  of  Fortune,  who  stood  also  in
the  same  apprehension,  said  within  himself.
If  I  do  lose  ray  life  in  the  deliverance  of
so  many,  here  better  than  any  where  else  it
will  be  bestowed.  Then  turning  his  thoughts
to  his  lady  Polinarda,  in  this  manner  he  be-
gan to  invoke  her  silently,  saying.  If,  lady,  at
any  lime  you  remember  me,  let  it  be  now,
if  only  that  you  may  know  how  bs"^  your
help  so  great  a  victory  was  atchieved.

While  he  vras  thus  commending  to  her  care
the  peril  of  this  battle,  he  saw  Dramuziando
coming  at  him  with  his  sword  lifted  in
both  hands,  for  neither  of  them  now  had
shield  wherev.ith  to  defend  himseli';  and
lightly  avoiding  the  blow,  he  made  him  de-
liver it  in  vain  :  in  this  manner  he  still  saved
himself,  dealing  in  his  ov.n  the  while  v/i:h
2  I  2


seí4

sure  aim,  yet  sometimes  receiving  hurt:,
%vhich.  Hide  as  it,  was,  yet  brought  him  to
such  weakness  in  his  present  state  that  he
could  scarcely  bear  up.  All  who  beheld  the
battle  were  astonished  at  the  sight.  But  at
length,  neither  of  them  having  blood  or
breath  left  to  bear  up,  nor  ought  more  than
the  liveliness  of  their  invincible  spirits  to
sustain  them,  they  became  at  the  same  in-
stant so  exhausted,  that  Dramuziando  fell,
and  the  knight  of  Fortune  sat  down  by  him,
not  vcnturins;  to  continue  on  foot  while  he
unjaced  the  giant's  helmet.  Immediately  all
the  prisoners  came  down.  Don  Duardos
Avent  to  Dramuziando,  took  off  his  helmet
that  he  might  receive  the  air,  desiring  the
knight  of  FortiTie  to  content  himself  with
the  victory,  and  not  to  work  his  death.
To  which  he  answered  :  Although  mine
intent  was  otherwise,  I  will  forbear  to
part  his  head  from  his  shoulders,  because
you  command  mo,  and  also  because  both
he  and  Í,  I  believe,  may  rather  be  ac-
counted dead  than  living.  Prince  Prima-
leon,  Polendos,  and  the  other  knights,  then
took  him  in  their  arms,  seeing  that  with  loss


2,65

of  blood,  a  deadly  faintness  came  over  him.
The  sorrow  which  they  felt  took  away  all
thought  of  the  victory.  At  this  time  they
heard  a  great  knocking  at  the  gate,  which
prince  Piatir  opened,  and  beheld  an  ancient
man,  apparelled  after  the  Grecian  fashion,
who  entered  the  castle, accompanied  with  two
damsels,  carrying  in  their  hands  two  goldea
boxes  of  precious  ointment.  And  v.ith-
out  delay  searching  the  wounds,  both  of  the
giant  and  the  knigiii  of  Fortune,  the  old
man  cleaned  away  the  blood  and  ai.plied
remedies  to  both,  with  equal  diligence,  not
sutfcring  any  one  else  to  touch  them  ;  and
ordering  them  to  be  laid  each  in  his  bed,  he
told  the  princes  to  be  of  good  cheer,  for
these  v/ere  not  the  woun;ls  which  v/ere  to
bring  either  to  his  end.  This  promise  did
greatly  content  the  princes,  who  desired
nothinir  so  much  as  the  health  of  the  kniciht
of  Fortune  ;  in  that  bv  his  conquering  the
giant,  they  had  received  their  former  liberty
agaiq,  and  all  the  cruel  enchantments  that
Eutropa  had  practised  in  the  Valley  ot  Per-
dition, were  now  fully  finished.  The  ancient
man  then  departed,  leaving  the  damsels  to
2  1   3


S66

complete  the  cure.  All  the  princes  accom-
panied with  the  knight  of  Fortmie,  except
Don  Duardos,  who,  though  he  went  to  see
him  twice  every  day,  remained  the  rest  of
the  time  with  the  giant  Dramuziando,  be-
cause he  would  not  be  ungrateful  for  the
friendship  he  had  found  at  his  hands.


ENI>    OF    THE    FIRST    PART.


HERE    BEGIKNETH

THE  SECOND  PART

OF  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  RIGHT  VALIANT  KXIGHT

PALMERIN  OF  ENGLAND,

"WHICH    TREATETII    OF    HIS    GREAT    FEATS    OF
CHIVALRY  ;    AXD  ALSO  THOSE  OF  PRIXCE

FLORIA  N  OF  THE  DESERT,

HIS    BROTHER.


CHAPTER  42.


Dramuziancio  being  thus  happily  overcome,
the  princes  would  not  depart  from  thence^,
till  the  knight  of  Fortune  was  able  to  bear
them  company,  to  whom  the  damsels
neither  spared  labour  nor  good  endeavour,
SO  that  they  had  good  hope  in  short  time,
he  should  be  cf  strength  to  travel  with  them,


368

Tn  the  mean  time,  they  determined  with
themselves  to  send  a  messensyer  to  the  kins:
of  England,  that  he  might  understand  the
good  fortune  which  would  make  amends  for
the  great  sorrow  he  had  sustained  of  a  long
time.

The  prince  Floraman,  because  he  was  held
to  be  the  most  eloquent  of  the  whole  com-
pany, was  appointed  by  geneial  consent  to
bear  these  glad  tidings  ;  who  went  into  the
armoury  belonging  to  Dramuziando,  and
put  on  his  own  armour,  battered  and  broken
as  it  was.  When  he  was  armed,  he  took  his
leave  of  them  all,  and  on  the  second  day
arrived  at  London.  As  he  entered  he  saw
none  but  common  people  in  the  streets,  and
even  their  countenances  displayed  as  much
sorrow  as  if  thev  had  been  of  noble  race;
with  which,  at  that  time,  the  tower  of  Dra-
muziando was  better  filled  ihan  the  city.
All  went  out  to  look  at  him  as  something
new,  w'ondering  at  the  manner  of  bis  arms  ;
for  not  only  had  the  blood  never  been
cleaned  away  since  that  fearful  battle,  in
which    he  and  his  friends  were  made  pri-


569

soners  ;  but  they  were  so  hacked  to  pieces^
that  it  appeared  a  thing  against  reason  for
any  one  to  bear  them.

At  length  he  came  to  the  court,  as  the  king
v/as  ready  to  ride  out  with  his  hawks,  and
taking  off  his  helmet  to  kiss  hands,  the
king  who  knew  him  embraced  him,  saying.
Certes,  sir  Floraman,  your  armour  doth
witness  the  great  danger  through  which  you
have  past;  though  no  such  witness  is  need-
ful, except  to  those  who  know  you  not.  If
you  bring  good  tidings,  I  beseech  you  de-
liver them,  and  though  they  should  be  bad
deliver  thenj  as  they  are:  for  I  am  so  accus-
tomed to  bad  tidings  that  they  cannot  sur-
prise me  much.  Sir,  answered  Floraman,
return  to  the  queen  and  the  princess  Flerida,
for  in  their  presence  I  would  deliver  my
report.

At  these  words  the  king  took  Floraman  by
the  hand,  and  walked  with  him  to  the  cham-
ber where  the  queen  and  princess  were  sit-
ting, who  welcomed  him  graciously,  accord-
ing as  his  noble  birth  required.     Floraman,


who  never  before  this  instant  had  seen  the
princess  Flerida,  thought  her  one  of  the
fairest  women  that  he  had  ever  beheld,
though  sorrow  had  bereft  her  of  much  of  her
natural  beauty,  and  he  esteemed  himself  the
gladdest  knight  alive  to  bring  such  tidings  to
her.  Then  after  he  had  done  his  duty,  ac-
cording as  the  place  and  persons  beseemed,
he  began  to  salute  them  with  these  speeches
following  :

Certes,  sir,  if  for  all  the  labours  consequent
upon  pursuit  of  arms,  I  had  never  reaped
other  reward  than  that  of  this  hour,  so  great
is  that,  that  I  could  have  esteemed  none
other  so  much.  But  before  I  deliver  the
tidings  with  the  which  I  am  here  commis-
sioned I  beseech  your  highnesses,  that  as  ye
have  alway  hitherto  had  hearts  to  sustain
the  shocks  of  adverse  fortune,  so  ye  will  now
receive  with  moderation  the  news  of  joy
which  ye  are  to  hear  from  me:  for  often-
times the  CiTect  of  sudden  joy  is  like  that  of
sorrow.  Don  Duardos  3'our  noble  son,  Pri-
maleon,  the  other  princes  and  knights,  so
long  time  lost  and  now  found  at  last,  do  all


371

kiás  the  hand  of  your  majesty;  letting  you
know  that  they  are  now  hi  full  liberty,,  and
near  your  city  of  London,  where  I  have
left  them,  waiting  for  the  recovery  of  the
renowned  knight  of  Fortune,  by  whose
hands  they  have  been  delivered  from  the
captivity,  in  which  they  have  till  now  been
kept  by  the  dreadful  giant  Dramuziando.

Tliese  words  moved  them  to  look  to  each
other,  doubting  whether  they  might  give
creuance  to  the  report  of  Floraman  or  no  ;
who  seeing  tliem  all  in  such  amazement,  us
though  they  rather  beUeved  what  they  heard
to  be  a  dream  than  \ery  truth,  confirmed
his  tidings,  saying,  Be  sure,  sir,  your  son
Don  Duardos  is  alive,  and  yesterday  I  left
him  with  tlic  other  princes.

The  king,  who  began  at  these  last  words
to  gather  somewhat  more  assurance,  rose
up  and  embraced  him,  saying,  Sir  Floraman,
what  shall  I  do  to  convince  you  that  from
you  nothing  but  truth  can  be  expected  ?
but  my  ill  fortune  has  been  so  accustomed


372

to  such  far  different  news,  that  it  would  not
suffer  me  entirel}"^  to  believe  you.

The  qneen  and  Flerida  withdrew  themselves
into  a  chamber,  in  so  death-like  a  state  that
many  remedies  were  needful  to  recover  them;
joy  producing  such  agitation  in  those  who
do  not  expect  it,  that  sorrow  is  oftentimes
less  hurtful  ;  but  when  they  had  recovered
they  embraced  each  other  over  and  over
again,  as  though  they  had  just  met  after
long  separation.  Yea,  such  were  the  seve-
ral motions  of  gladness  that  took  place
within  their  sorrowful  minds,  as  themselves
had  not  power  to  express  it,  nor  I  the  lei-
sure to  declare  it.  The  king  vvas  desirous
to  know,  by  whom  Don  Duardos  and  the
other  princes  had  been  so  long  time  kept
prisoners,  as  also  how  the  knight  of  Fortune
behaved  himself,  in  that  ?o  many  had  ven-
tured, yet  none  so  happy  to  prevail  as  ho.
Floraman  rehearsed  the  wliole  state  of  their
imprisonment,  from  the  first  to  the  last,  with
the  continuance  of  accidents  happening  in
that   time  ;  but  when,  he  declared   the  last


O  I  O

combat  of  tlie  kniçht  of  Fortune,  ao;ainst
the  ijiant   Drarauziando,  the  king  Avas  taken
v.ith   a    marvellous   astonishment;    and    he
said,   thinking  on  the  strong  guard  Avhicli
Dramuziando  kept  in  his  fortress,  and  of  all
that  had  happened,  The  war  that  the  giant
Franarque  made  against  mv  father  was  not
enough,  but  even  the   relics  of  it  were    to
bring  mj  life  into  this  danger  !  I  give  thanks
to  God.  who  appointed  it  so,  that  he  hath
not  been  pleased  the  end  of  my  days  should
be  as  joyless   as   I   looked  for.     Then    he
asked  if  Dramuziando  were    slain.     Flora-
man  replied,  that  he  was  not,  and  that  Don
Duardos  was  as  desirous  that  his  life  should
be  preserved  as  his  own,  and  had  besought
him    to    request   the   king,  when   the  giant
should  come  to  court,  to  receive  him  as  a
person  to  v.hora  much  vras  due,  for  he  had
never   seen   any    other   giant    deserving    of
much  honour.     Lpon  this  the  king,  though
lie  had  no  will  so  to  do,  yet  hearing  of  his
courteous  dealing  tov/ards  his  son  and  the
other  prisoners,  promised  to  fulfil  the  desire
of  his  son  in  any  thing.    And  so  he  went  to
the   chamber    of  the    princess  Flerida,    to
£   K


374

whom,  taking  her  in  his  aims,  he  rehearsed
all  the  talk  that  had  passed  betvvcea  hiin  and
tiie  prince  Floraman.

This  news  was  so  blazed  thorow  the  ciiy
OÍ'  London,  that  man}»^  came  to  welcome  the
prince  Floraman,  and  man}^  took  the  way  to
the  castle  of  the  giant  Dranuiziando,  the  j 03^-
fulness  ibr  recovery  of"  their  lost  prince  being
as  general  as  the  passed  sorrow.  Such  rejoic-
ings were  made  by  the  people,  as  might  be
expected  from  those  w  ho  had  been  so  long
time  without  joy.  Flerida  hearing  the  up-
roar of  their  merry-making,  had  not  yet  so
far  exiled  from  her  heart  all  her  former  fear,
but  that  she  still  feared  the  joy  would  not
yet  be  perfect.  But  when  the  day  was  over,
being  past  in  visits  and  congratulations,  many
persons  who  had  been  at  the  lower  of  the
giant  arrived,  and  confirmed  the  news.

The  king  thought  good  immediately  to  give
knowledge  of  this  happy  cliuncc,  to  the  em-
peror Palmerin  of  Constantinople,  ^\  ho  had
so  long  lived  in  sorrow  for  the  loss  of  his  son
and  of  his   daughter's  husband;  and  caliiug


375

Argolante_,  son  to  the  duke  of  Ortam^  grivè
liim  his  commandment  foIlo^vin2:.  Because
you  carried  tidings  to  the  emperor,  when  the
great  mishap  fell  to  my  son,  I  am  minded
you  shall  now  go  give  him  a  cause  of  as  great
joy  as  then  you  did  of  heaviness.  Argo-
lante  kissed  his  hands  for  this  great  favour,
and  taking  his  arms  without  delay,  departed
speedily  towards  Constantinople.

The  palace  was  immediately  hung  with  rich
tapestry,  all  except  the  apartments  of  Fle-
rida,  who  would  not  consent  to  the  change
till  she  had  seen  Don  Duardos.  Three
days  after,  the  king,  desirous  to  see  his  son,
and  the  other  princes,  determined  to  ride
to  the  castle  of  Dramuziando:  but  sir  Pridos
arrived  at  this  time,  and  dissuaded  him,  say-
ing, that  the  knight  of  Fortune,  and  the
giant  Dramuziando,  were  well  nigh  recover-
ed, and  as  soon  as  they  were  able  to  abide
travel  the  whole  company  would  come  and
kiss  his  hands.  When  the  king  beheld  sir
Pridos  he  well  knew  that  all  which  had  been
told  him  was  indeed  true  ;  and  taking  him  in
his  arms,  he  led  him  to  llerida,  who  was
2  K  2


376

veil  nigh  as  much  relieved  at  the  sight  of
him,  as  if  it  had  been  Don  D uardos  himself.
The  king  was  so  joyful  a  man,  that  those
grey  hairs  of  his  vvliich  had  borne  so  many
sorrows,  seemed  rather  to  belong  to  another,
than  to  one  who  had  endured  so  much,
Pridos  said  to  him  that  Don  Duardos  be-
sought him  when  he  should  see  Dramu-
ziando  to  treat  him  not  as  an  enemy,  but  as
the  greatest  friend  he  had  in  the  world.
Already,  replied  the  king,  prince  Floraraan
hath  requested  that,  and  though  my  will  was
otherwise,  I  shall  do  as  he  requests,  as.well
because  the  courtesy  of  this  giant  deserves  it,
as  because  I  know  that  it  is  Icsss  glory  to  tak^
vengeance  upon  a  yielded  enemy  thaa  tg
forgive  him.


>í7


CHAPTER  45.


The  knight  of  Fortune  and  the  giant  iJra-
muziando  had  at  last  attained  such  strength,
as  they  could  well  endure  to  hear  armour,
ivhen  they  concluded  to  abandon  the  fortress.
But  before  they  departed,  Don  Duardos
would  appoint  such  a  knight  to  govern  it,
as  should  render  it  into  his  hands  when  he
were  willing  to  receive  it.  And  to  Eu  tropa
(albeit  her  discourteous  dealings  deserved
small  favour)  he  would  give  another  castle,
as  well  to  manifest  his  noble  mind,  Avhich
had  the  power  to  pardon  her,  as  also  be-
cause he  hoped,  by  heaping  bounties  upon
her,  to  win  her  friendship.  This  granted,
and  well  esteemed  by  general  consent,  the
prince  Beroldo  was  appointed  to  give  her
'2  K  3


378

knowledge  thereof;  but  while  they  weie  de-
puting him,  they  felt  such  an  earthquake  in
the  castle,  as  they  supposed  it  would  have
fallen  down  on  their  heads  ;  beside,  there
arose  suddenly  such  a  terrible  darkness  as
they  could  not  behold  one  another.  At  last
in  the  air,  as  they  judged,  they  heard  a  voice
which  sounded  in  their  ears  after  this  man-
ner :  Don  Duardos,  seek  not  to  pleasure  her,
who  shall  requite  thy  friendship  with  un-
thankfulness.  I  am  that  Eutropa,  who  all
this  while  hath  plagued  thee  and  thy  friends,
and  will  continue  in  tormenting  thee  and
thine,  until  death  hath  made  an  end  of  me.
I  go  now  to  the  place  where  I  shall  have
leisure  from  all  other  thoughts  to  bend  my
mind  wholly  upon  this,  which  I  have  most
at  heart.

These  words  thus  ended,  and  the  air  waxing
somewhat  clear  again,  they  might  perceive
the  enchantress  in  the  air,  environed  with  a
dark  and  gloomy  cloud,  and  how  she  cut  the
air  with  fiery  flashes  about  her.  When  she
was  departed  forth  of  sight,  they  remained
in   a  great  amazement  ;  yet  being  all  glad


379

that  they  were  rid  of  her^  who  was  so  ill
affected  to  them.

The  damsels,  who  by  the  commandment  of
the  ancient  man,  had  staid  there  till  the
j^aights  were  perfectly  recovered,,  now  came
to  the  prince  Don  Duardos,  using  these
words  :  Sir^  give  us  leave  now  to  depart.
That  for  which  we  came  hither  is  completed,
and  our  presence  is  needed  elsewhere.  Trust
me,  ladies,  said  Don  Duardos,  your  great
courtesies  hath  so  severely  bound  me,  that  I
might  be  justly  reproached  of  ingratitude,
to  suffer  you  to  depart,  not  using  such  ho-
nourable recompence  as  you  have  _^well  de-
served. Nevertheless,  what  I  owe  you  is  so
much,  and  what  I  can  here  repay  you  so
little,  that  I  much  beseech  you  either  to
come  to  the  English  court,  or  tell  me  where
I  may  see  you,  and  you  shall  then  perceive
how  greatly  I  hold  myself  your  debtor.

Sir,  quoth  the  damsels,  the  virtue  which  is
alway  resident  in  your  noble  mind,  and
fameih  vour  kni^htlv  deeds  throuG;hout  the
wliole  world,  is  known  so  well,  that  to  us  r,o


380

proof  of  it  is  needed.  If  our  presence  at
London  may  at  any  time  profit  you,  we  will
be  as  ready  to  come  as  you  can  be  desirous
to  wish  us  there,  if  he  who  left  us  here  should
send  us  ;  but  to  tell  you  where  we  may  be
found  is  what  we  must  not  do,  for  in  so  do-
ins:  we  should  err  açainstliim  who  hath  for-
bidden  it.  All  we  now  ask  is  license  to  de-
part ;  other  bounties  are  so  certain  in  you
to  all  who  need  them,  that  it  would  be  great
distrust  in  any  one  to  think  that  at  any  time
he  could  lose  any  thing  by  you.  So  taking
their  leave  of  the  knight  of  Fortune,  with
all  the  other  princes,  they  went  to  the  gate
of  the  castle,  where  they  found  two  palfreys
ready  appointed  for  them,  and  being  mount-
ed thereon,  took  their  way  toward  the  place
whither  they  were  to  go.

Don  Duardos  seeing  all  were  now  in  good
readiness,  determined  to  depart;  but  first  he
ordered  that  the  castle  should  be  held  for  the
knight  of  Fortune.  This  the  knight  would
not  permit;  contrariwise,  he  besought  Don
Duardos  so  earnestly  to  accept  it  at  his  hands
that  he  made  him  so  do,  but  upon  this  con-


381

dition  bv  the  prince  demanded, — that  from
tliat  time  forward  it  should  be  called  the
Tower  of  Fortune,  in  remembrance  of  him
who  had  won  it.  So  leaving  Pompides  there
to  keep  it  till  another  should  be  sent  in  his
place,  they  departed  all  towards  London,
each  armed  in  his  own  armour,  which  Dra-
muziando,  as  trophies  of  his  victories,  had
hung  up  in  his  armoury.  The  giant  himselt"
went  in  that  which  he  had  worn  in  his  last
battle,  because  upon  that  might  be  seen
the  marks  of  the  great  prowess  and  excellent
strength  of  the  knight  of  Fortune.  So  they
travelled  on  with  such  great  pleasure  as  may
be  imagined,  till  night  overtook  them  in  a
valley  two  leagues  from  London,  where  tents
were  pitched  in  readiness,  and  all  things
needful  provided.  There  they  remained
that  night,  and  on  the  morrow  at  the  uprise
proceeded  on  their  way,  as  contentedly  as
who  remembered  the  prison  from  whence
they  were  going,  and  the  liberty  which  they
now  enjoyed.

The  citizens  being  admonished  of  the  com-r
ing  of  their  long-lost  prince  Don  Duardos.^


3S2

gathered  themselves  in  such  heaps  in  the
fields  and  roads,  that  the  princes  could  hard-
ly break  through  them  witli  their  horses.
Some  of  them  pleased  to  see  ])on  Duardos,
because  he  hi^  been  so  long  absent  from
them  ;  other  some  to  see  the  giant  Dramu-
ziando,  marvelling  that  the  knight  of  For-
tune had  the  power  to  conquer  him  who  had
subdued  so  many.  Thus  passing  on  the}'
arrived  at  last  in  sight  of  the  great  city  of
London,  where  Don  Duardos  seeing  Florida's
apartments  among  its  populous  edifices,  the
tears  trickled  down  his  cheeks,  remember-
ing how  long  time  he  had  been  from  thence,
and  had  not  seen  her  whom  he  most  honour-
ed, and  entirely  loved  ;  but  seeing  he  was
come  again  at  last,  and  that  his  happiness
should  recompence  what  had  been  amiss,  he
quieted  himself  lest  any  should  behold  his
weakness.

When  they  drew  near  the  city,  the  king
went  out  with  a  solemn  procession  to  meet
them,  and  all  alighted  to  accompany  him.  He
received  them  all  graciously,  giving  them
such  princely  entertainment,  as  their  nobi-


383

lity  oí"  biiîb,  and  honourable  estate  required.
Don  Duardos  was  one  of  the  last  :  he  came
leading  Drarauziando  in  his  hand,  and  hav-
ing knelt  upon  the  ground  and  kissed  the
king's,  he  said  to  him  :  My  sovereign
lord  and  father,  if  I  either  ha*e  or  may  find
favour  at  your  liands,  entertain  this  giant,
not  as  the  son  of  his  fatiier,  but  even  as  one
of  the  best  men  in  the  world.  The  king
embracing  his  son,  received  him  in  his  arms
from  the  ground,  bedewing  his  white  and
hoary  beard  with  abundance  of  tears,  which
through  mere  love  he  shed  for  the  presence
of  Don  Duardos,  when  he  began  to  answer
him  in  this  manner  :  What  is  he,  my  son,
uho  conceiving  so  great  desire  as  I  of  long
time  have  to  see  you,  could  find  in  his  heart
to  deny  any  thing  that  you  should  require.
Then  coming  to  Dramuziando,  who  en-
deavoured to  kiss  his  grace's  hand,  em-
bracing him  in  his  arms,  he  thus  began  :
Certes,  Dramuziando,  I  could  little  have
thought  that  T  could  have  wished  so  well
to  one  who  hath  wrought  me  so  much  evil;
but  your  great  bounty  and  gentleness  have
had  such  power  as  not  only  to  deprive  me


384

oF  all  liatredj  but  even  so  change  it  to  good
Avili^  that  I  know  not  if  any  one  could  now
be  j'our  enemy  and  not  be  mine  also.  Now
perceiving  that  the  knight  of  Fortune  was
coming  up,  1)£  took  him  in  his  arms  and
said  :  Who  was  it  that  alway  secretly  told
me,  that  if  any  good  were  in  reserve  for  me
it  must  be  from  your  hands  ?  From  God'«
hands,  may  your  highness  say  that  it  luuh
come,  replied  the  knight,  mine  were  not  of
such  power  ;  if  they  had  not  been  instru-
ments of  his  mercy,  the  giant  Dramuzianda
could  not  by  hand  of  man  have  been  sub-
dued.

This  meeting  being  over,  they  ali  went  fol-
lowing the  procession  to  the  chief  cliurch  of
London,  where  mass  was  performed  with
such  solemnity  of  song  and  instrument,  ii?
had  not  of  long  time  been  celebrated  there.
Tliis  done,  the  princes  and  knights  made  the
kin<r,  almost  by  force,  mount  on  horseback,
and  they  accompanied  him  on  foot  to  the
palace,  where  the  queen  and  Flerida  carne
out  to  receive  them.  Both  of  them  took
Don  Buardcs  in  thf.ii  :Hms.  as  if  each  found


that  if  she  delayed,  it  were  possible  agaiu  to
lose  him.  The  king  took  the  queen  by  her
sleeve,  and  said.  Your  son  is  now  in  your  own
house,  where  a'ou  may  every  day  see  him  ;
speak  now  to  these  princes  and  knights,  to
whom  we  are  so  greatly  beholden  for  the
peril  in  which  they  have  all  placed  them-
selves, because  of  their  wish  for  the  recovery
of  Don  Duardos.  Then  he  shewed  her  the
prince  Primaleon,  to  whom  she  v.ent,  receiv*
ing  him  as  beseemed  the  royalty  of  his  per-
son. The  like  she  did  to  Vernao,  the  king
Polendos,  Recindos,  and  Arnedos,  with  ail
the  princes  and  knights.

Then  Flerida,  thinking  that  now  Don  Duar-
dos was  indeed  secure,  coming  to  her  bro-
ther Primaleon,  embraced  him  with  these
w^ords;  Forgive  me,  sir,  that  I  did  not  thi?
sooner,  for  sure  the  glad  coming  of  my  lord
Don  Duardos  made  me  unmindful  of  every
thing  beside.  Your  reason,  sister,  is  allow-
ed, answered  Primaleon,  and  though  you
had  tarried  longer  without  remembering  me,
there  had  been  no  fault.  Then  taking  her
by  the  hand,  and  Don  Duardos  escorting  ia
2  L


38G

like  manner  the  queen  his  mother,  they  ltd
them  to  their  apartments  ;  the  king  then
went  out  in  person  to  see  that  their  lodg-
ings should  be  presently  provided,  which
they  found  in  every  point  so  royally  adorned,
as  they  eould  not  speak  sufficient  in  praise
of  the  court  of  England.  They  were  lodged
in  the  palace  in  this  manner.  Primaleon,
Vernao,  and  Belcar,  together  ;  the  kings  of
France,  Spain,  and  Thessaly,  together  in
another  part  ;  the  knight  of  Fortune  in  an-
other apartu'.eiu,  with  prince  Beroldo,  and
Graciano  ;  Platir,  Polinardo,  and  Franciano
in  company  ;  and  Dramu/iando,  with  M  av-
ortes and  the  soldan  Belagriz  ;  and  all  the
other  in  like  manner,  three*  together,  which


•  Very  probably  three  in  a  bed.  A  lady,  whose  MS.  jour-
nal of  a  tour  through  the  whole  of  England,  in  queen  Anne's
reign,  is  now  before  me,  says  of  Buxton — "  Two  beds  in  a
room,  some  three  beds,  and  some  four,  so  that  if  you  have
not  company  enough  of  your  own  to  fill  a  room,  they  will
be  ready  to  put  others  into  the  same  chamber  ;  and  some-
times they  are  so  crowded  that  three  must  lie  in  a  bed."  She
adds,  "  We  staid  two  nights,  by  reason  one  of  our  company
was  ill  ;  but  it  was  sore  against  our  wills^  foi  there  is  no  peace
nor  quiet.'*


3sr

they  could  well  away  with,  as  well  because
the  apartments  were  among  the  best  in  the
world,  as  because  for  errant  knights,  great
personages  as  they  were,  less  would  have
sufficed.  Thus  thev  abode  awhile  there,
each  desirous  to  go  his  way  as  soon  as  might
be,  more  to  satisfy  the  longing  of  their  long
absence,  than  for  the  wish  of  resuming  their
governments.


2  L  2


388


CHAPTER  44,


When  report  was  blazing  in  all  countries,
how  the  princes  and  knights  that  had  been
so  long  time  lost,  and  could  not  be  heard
of,  were  now  at  liberty,  and  the  adventure  of
Great  Britain  fully  ended,  it  soon  reached
Trineo,  the  emperor  of  AUemaigne,  who
had  spent  his  days  in  great  sorrow  and
grievous  complaints  for  his  two  sons  Vernao
and  Polinardo  ;  and  though  the  effect  of
this  long  grief  had  been  such  as  with  the
weight  of  his  years,  which  were  now  many,
had  brought  him  to  such  weakness  that  his
death  was  daily  looked  for,  it  was  yet  ordained
that  he  should  hear  the  tidings  of  their  de-
liverance ;  whereat  his  heart  was  surprised
with   so    great  joy,  that  he  determined  to


S8ÍÍ

travel  till  became  into  EiiG-land.  So  accom-
panied  with  the  empress  Agriola,  who  be-
sides her  desire  to  embrace  her  sons,  of
whom  she  had  lost  all  hope,  wished  also
before  she  died  to  see  her  native  country
once  more,  he  passed  through  Germany,
where  at  divers  of  his  cities  he  was  honour-
ably received,  and  at  last  landed  on  the  coast
of  England.  King  Fadrique  bad  knowledge
of  his  coming,  wherefore  he  commanded  the
chamber  should  be  provided,  wherein  the
empress  from  her  childhood  was  nourished,
and  where  Trineo  had  courted  her,  at  such
time  as  Palmerin  de  Oliva  and  he  came  to
present  their  service  to  the  king  of  England.
.'Vll  the  knigbts  prepared  to  go  meet  him
three  leagues  from  the  city  of  London,  and
the  king,  accompanied  with  Vernao  and  Po-
linardo,  went  with  them.

But  to  rehearse  unto  you  the  royal  and  gra-
cious entertainment  they  received  by  the
king,  with  the  sumptuous  and  rare  devices,
framed  by  the  citizens  to  welcome  him
withal,  would  ask  a  greater  time  than  I  can
well  stay  so  long  from  discoursing  of  our
2  L  3


590

history  ;  but  so  great  was  the  king's  favour,
and  so  liberal  the  expences  of  his  dutiful
subjects,  that  they  said  within  themselves,
England  had  no  fellow.  When  they  were
come  to  the  palace,  the  queen  and  the
princess  Flerida,  being  gorgeously  attired
against  the  comine;  of  such  a  2;rcat  state,
received  him  with  such  royahy  as  is  not
here  to  be  spoken  of.  With  great  honour
they  were  conducted  to  their  chamber,  all
retiring  back,  except  Vcrnao  and  Polinardo
their  sons,  whom  the  empress  would  have
tliat  night  to  sleep  in  her  chamber,  being
scarce  able  to  persuade  herself  that  she  had
verily  and  indeed  recovered  them.  Now
because  they  were  weary  with  their  journey,
there  was  no  bail  that  night  as  had  been  in-
tended. But  all  the  knights  busied  them-
selves in  preparing  for  the  sports  which  were
to  be  celebrated,  each  trusting  to  do  such
things  as  should  evince  what  loss  Christen«i
dom  had  had  during  their  captivity.

The  emperor  would  often  declare  to  Agriola
what  sharp  assaults  he  had  endured  in  that
chajnberj,  being  amorous  of  her  love,  and


391

wishing  for  the  time  again^  wherein  he  spent
his  flourishing  youth  so  valiantly  ;  and  if
those  clays  could  have  returned^  though
with  greater  danger  than  before^  both  would
gladly  have  given  in  exchange  for  them  their
wdiole  sovereisrntv.  But  knowinsr  that  this
desire  was  impossible  to  be  recovered,  he
delighted  to  rehearse  what  pleasant  conceits
had  passed  between  him  and  her,  as  wdl
when  she  was  coy,  as  when  she  made  ac-
ceptation of  his  courtesy  ;  and  shewed  her
the  secret  places  of  danger,  which  full  many
a  time  he  made  hazard  in,  v.hen  he  had  do-
sire  to  speak  with  her.  Thus  betv/een  teari
and  pleasant  talk,  he  passed  this  remem-
brance in  his  thoughts  ;  at  other  times  talk-
ing of  the  doubts  and  fears  of  Agriola  in
those  days,  and  the  feats  of  the  famous  Pal-
merin  de  Oiiva,  then  an  errant  knight;  in
these  and  such  like  discourses  passing  the
night  with  less  repose  than  they  would  have
found  elsewhere.


The  next  morning  galleries  and  scaffolds
were  made  about  the  tilt-yard,  where  the
tournament  was    to  be  held.     The  knÍ2:hts


S93

of  England  and  Allemaigne  held  oiie  side
together,  and  the  other  side  was  maintained
"by  the  knights  of  the  emperor  Palmerin's
court,  and  the  other  strangers  ;  each  deter-
mining to  do  wonders,  as  well  the  valiant  as
those  who  were  not  so  :  for  in  these  cases
both  good  and  bad  are  equally  desirous  of
glory.


39:


CHAPTER    45.


Argolante,  who,  by  the  commandment  of
the  king  of  England,  was  departed  on  hli
voyage  towards  Constantinople,  to  declare
unto  the  emperor  Palmerin  the  good  suc-
cess, endeavoured  himself  so  well  in  his
journey  (through  the  help  of  good  wind  and
weather)  tliat  at  last  he  attained  the  end  of
his  travail.  On  a  Monday,  at  the  hour  of
vespers,  he  reached  the  great  city  of  Con-
stantinople, which  was  in  those  days  desti-
tute of  those  of  whom  it  had  now  greater
need  than  had  been  felt  in  any  former  time.
Before  he  entered  the  gates,  he  perceived  a
few  men  on  foot,  labouring  to  provide  the
walls,  and  among  them,  upon  a  black
hackney,  the  emperor,  now  grown  so  gray


534

witli  anguisli  of  mind,  and  his  face  so  wan,
by  reason  of  his  continual  mourning,  that
he  stood  in  doubt  whether  it  were  the  empe-
ror or  no  ;  but  that  be  was  certined  thereof,
by  the  people  which  made  tlu  ir  recourse
through  the  streets,  who  told  him,  that
report  was  given  abroad,  how  the  soldans
of  Babylon  and  Persia,  had  gathered  a
mighty  arm}',  intending  to  besiege  their
city,  which  made  the  emperor  in  his  own
person,  to  go  to  see  the  fortifying  of  the
walls,  that  his  rampiers  of  defence  might  be
ready  to  resist  the  enemy.  Argolante  coming
before  the  emperor,  (who  presently  knew
liim)  alighted,  and  kneeling  down,  humbly
kissed  his  hand,  to  whom  tlie  emperor  thus
spake  : — You  see,  Argolante,  into  what  ne-
cessity the  city  of  Constantinople  is  now  un-
happily fallen  ;  in  times  past  if  1  had  heard
tha'.  enemies  were  preparing  to  come  against
it,  I  would  have  ordered  the  walls  to  be
thrown  down  for  them,  that  they  might  enter
if  they  could  ;  now  it  is  left  so  desolate
and  so  full  of  fear,  that  I  am  constrained  to
fortify  It,  hoping  to  have  some  defence  in
ramparts,  since  there  is  no  other  to  hope  for.


395

Biit  now  mouat  thy  horse  again,  and  tell  me
how  fureih  thv  sovereisrn  lord  the  kins;  of
England:  to  demand  for  other  tidings  I  weli
know  Were  bootless.


Argolante  answered.  The  king,  my  sovereign
lord,  saluteth  your  imperial  estate  with  all
iiappiness  that  he  can  wish,  or  you  possibly
desire.  As  for  my  charge,  if  you  will  vouch-
safe the  place  where  the  empress  Gridonia,
and  the  other  ladies  may  be  present,  you
shall  all  be  certified  thereof.  The  emperor
at  these  words  went  straÍ2;ht  to  the  chamber
of  Gridonia,  where  he  sent  and  desired  the
empress  to  come  and  hear  news  of  her
daughter  Tlerida.  The  empreãs  accordingly
came;  and  x^rgolante  seeing  that  Basilia,  wife
to  Vernao,  was  not  present,  said  to  the  em-
peror. Sir,  the  lady  Basilia  would  also  have
her  share  of  this  visit,  wherefore  I  kiss  the
hand  of  your  majesty  in  that  you  will  be
pleased  to  send  for  her.

These  words  began  to  disturb  the  emperor,
and  his  heart  began  to  forebode  what  was
coming:   so   that  ia  bis  eagerness  to  hear


556

tlie  whole    tidings,    and    knowing  likewise
Basilia  would  hardly  leave  her  chamber,  he
went   for   her  himself;  when  being    all  set
down    together,    Argolante  in  this  manner
uttered  his  embassage,  in  a   loud  voice,  that
all  might  hear  :    Well  must  your  majesty  re-
member, that   at  the  time   when   my  lord
prince  Don  Duardos  disappeared,  1  was  he
who  brought  the  sad  news  of  his  loss  to  this
court,  whereby  was  occasioned  the  loss  of
all  the  knights  of  your  house,  and  first  of  all
of  your  son  Primaleon,   who  was  in  those
days  the  mirror  of  all  who  bore   arms.     Ill
therefore,     should    I  again    present   myself
where  my  former  news  caused  such  grief,
without  I  might  bring  those  tidings  as  should
(in  recompence)  cause  a  mutual  and  general
gladness.

I  know  not  if  \'our  majesty  hath  at  any  time
heard  the  knight  of  Fortune  named,  though
])is  feats  are  such  as  blazon  him  in  all  parts,
and  indeed  I  have  heard  that  it  was  here  he
vanquished  prince  Floraman,  in  the  combat
concerning  the  image  of  Altea.  He,  in  his
chivalry,    the  only   lamp  and  loadstone  to


397

draw  the  adventurous  miad  to  all  valiant  at-
tempts ;  after  all  the  knights  who  had  land-
ed  in  Great  Britain,  and  were  in  truth  the
flower  of  the  world,    were  lost  there,  and
none  knew  how,  and  the  kingdom  remained
destitute  of  all  knighthood,  he  reached  the
tower  of  the  giant  Dramuziando,  son  to  Fra-
narque,  whom  you  slew  in  England,  to  the
which   tower  none  could  approach  without
the  consent  of  the  great  enchantress,  Eutropa,
Dramuzianuo's    aunt,  who   had  laid    spells
upon  the  forest  all  round  about,  to  the  end
that  she  might  take  vengeance  for  her  bro-
ther's death.     Ana  jousting  first  with  Don
Duardos,  according  to  the   custom   of  the
castle,  entered  afterwards  into  single  combat
with  the  dreadful  Pandaro,  of  no  less  strength,
and  valour  than  fierceness,  whom  by  might
of  îu:ms  he  conqueredand  slew.  Then  had  he
another  full  fearful  battle  with  Daliagam  of
the  Dark  Cave,  who  was  nothing  less  in  stature
than  the  other  giant,  and  even  of  greater
might,  but  by  fine  force  he  conquered  and
slew  him  also.     Lastly,  and  all  this  in  the
same  day,  he  fought  with  the  giant  Dramu*
aiando,  of  whom  your  majesty  piay  believe

VOL.    I.  2  M


398

according  to  the  report  of  all^  that  he  hatli
so  much  the  advantage  above  allother  giants,
both  ill  strength  and  skill  at  arms,  and  well
nigh  siirpasseth  all  belief.  In  this  battle  was
the  knight  of  Fortune  so  cruelly  handled.

The  emperor  suddenly  staying  Argolante  at
these  words,  said,  1  beseech  you  before  you
proceed  further,  resolve  me  whether  the
knight  of  Fortune  be  alive  as  yet  or  no  ;  for
till  I  am  delivered  from  this  fear,  I  can  ill
listen  to  what  you  have  further  to  discourse  :
to  which  Argolante  replied,  I  left  him  in
such  good  disposition  as  himself  could  wish,
or  your  majesty  desire;  though  when  he  had
conquered  the  giant  Dramuziando,  he  re-
mained in  such  plight  that  it  was  not  be-
lieved he  could  live  two  hours  to  enjoy  his
victory.  But,  said  the  emperor,  you  say
that  after  all  he  is  alive?  Certainly  so,  re-
plied Argolante  ;  and  in  condition  to  go
through  another  such  danger  as  this  last.
Now  then  proceed,  said  the  emperor  ;  no-
thing whicli  you  can  have  to  say  can  make
me  sad,  nor  any  other  news  rejoice  me  so
grtiatly  as  this.     Nay,  replied  Argolante,  if


S99

your  highness  rejoiceth  so  greatly  in  his
victory,  there  is  more  reason  for  it  than  you
have  divined,  for  thereby  the  forest  of  that  dis-
loyal Eutropa  is  subdued  from  all  her  enchant-
ments; and  Primaleon  your  son,  and  Don
Duardos,  and  all  the  other  captive  princes,
in  despite  of  her  and  the  giant  Dramuziando,
are  relieved  from  their  long  imprisonment.
Then  turning  to  Basilia,  And  for  you,  lady,
that  your  portion  of  this  joy  may  not  be  the
least,  3'our  Vernao,  v.ho  v,";L'ld  not  be  behind
his  kinsmen  and  friends  in  danger,  but  was
their  companion  in  captivitj',  is  delivered
v\  ith  them,  in  health  even  to  your  wish.

Gridonia,  now  like  one  whom  sudden  joy
had  made  beside  herself,  rose  up  and  em-
braced Basilia,  whom  these  words  had  well
nigh  rendered  senseless.  The  empress  came
and  took  them  both  by  the  hand,  conduct-
ing them  into  her  oratory,  where  in  hearty
devotions  they  gave  thanks  to  God  for  this
prosperous  success.  In  the  meanwhile,  the
emperer  remained  with  Argolante,  hearing
at  length  all  that  had  passed,  and  enjoving
this  happiness  so  moderately,  that  none
C  M  2


400

could  perceive  in  him  any  emotion  ;  on  the
contrary,  he  questioned  and  hstencd  with
the  same  coolness  as  if  the  conversation  had
been  upon  some  every-day  subject.  After
he  had  heard  the  names  cf  such  noble
princes  and  knights,  as  were  partners  in  this
long  captivity,  he  said.  Certes,  though  tfie
captivity  of  Don  Duardos  had  been  to  no
other  end  than  to  certify  him  of  the  friend-
ship of  such  men,  that  were  so  greatly  to  be
esteemed,  that  it  might  well  suffice  to  put  all
past  sorrow  out  of  remembrance.  Then  re-
turning to  new  enquiries  after  the  knight  of
Fortune,  he  called  to  remembrance  the  letter
sent  by  the  Lady  of  the  Lake,  of  the  Three
Fates,  the  same  day  as  Polendos,  king  of
Thetsal}',  delivered  him  that  royal  present.
Through  all  the  city,  was  presently  noised
the  recovery  of  the  princes,  which,  beside
the  joy  that  it  occasioned,  caused  every  one
to  make  small  account  of  the  soldans  of
Babylon  and  Persia,  in  that  they  judged
themselves  under  sure  defence,  now  they
h^id  obtained  those  whom  they  had  lost.

Argolante,  taking  leave  from  the  emperor.


40i

departed  the  next  morning,  leaving  Con-
stantinople as  joyful  novv  as  he  liad  left  it
sorrowful  on  bis  former  embassao-e.  But
such  are  the  changes  and  mutabilities  of
Fortune,  ^ho,  when  the  heáiTis  drowned
in  grief  past  any  good  hope,  she  sendeth  a
happy  success  to  requite  the  former  mis-
chance; and  likewise,  whçre  most  pleasure
hath  residence,  there  she  provideth  the
greatest  mishap.


Q  M


402


CHAPTER  46.


Eight  clays  after  the  emperor  Trinco  v.as
arrived,  scaffolds  and  galleries  were  bnik
a^.QUt  the  tilt-yard  ;  and  the  Sunday  being
come,  on  which  the  tournament  was  to  be
held,  all  the  city  awoke  at  day-break  with
the  sound  of  arms  and  instruments  of  war.
At  the  hour  appointed  forth  issued  all  those
personages,  nobly  accompanied.  The  king
went  firît,  leading  the  empress  his  sister  by
the  hand.  The  emperor  Trinco  led  Flerida,
and  Primaleon  led  the  queen,  and  the  ladies
in  like  manner  went  accompanied  by  those
English  knights  who  served  them,  and  ex-
pected that  day  to  merit  some  favour  by
their  exploits,  which  in  such  cases  he  often
doubts  who  greatly  desires,    lliey  came  as


403

gaiîj  and  gallantly  bedizened  as  befitted  a
time  of  such  joyance.  Having  reached  the
lists^  all  these  princes  seated  themselves  in
the  places  which  had  been  prepared  for  them.
And  though  by  reason  of  the  sorrow  which
had  so  long  time  prevailed  at  the  comt  of
England,  there  were  not  many  ladies  in  the
palace,  the  empress  Agriola  brought  some
with  her  aa  orthy  to  be  served  and  perilous
to  be  beheld,  that  her  appearance  filled  the
seats  with  a  sight  much  to  be  seen  and  not
less  to  be  desired.  Thus  being  all  seated_,
the  Enghsh  knights,  and  the  strangers  who
were  on  the  same  side,  entered  in  such  num-
bers as  well  nigh  to  fill  the  whole  space
whcrt-in  the  tourney  was  to  be  held.  It  was
not  long  before  on  the  other  side  of  the
yard  entered  those  valorous  youths,  the
knights  of  the  emperor  Palmerin's  house-
hold, gay  and  gallant,  in  new  arms  both
rich  and  splendid,  garnished  with  cheerful
colours  and  inventions  of  their  fancy,  so  as
to  stir  with  delight  the  spirits  of  all  \Aho  be-
held them.  They  came  with  a  standard  be-
fore them,  and  the  brave  prince  Graciano
for  their  captain  j  to  whom  they  gave  that


404

lionour,  as  well  because  he  was  full  worthy
of  it,  as  because  Palmerin,  at  the  king's  re-
quest, did  not  enter  the  lists  that  day,  that
the  others  might  display  themselves  to  more
advantage;  it  seeming  an  unequal  thing,  that
he  whose  feats  were  so  different  from  those
of  other  men,  should  enter  with  them.  The
trumpets  were  sounded  as  the  signal  for  en-
countering ;  and  such  was  the  uproar  at  the
lance-breaking,  that  it  seemed  as  if  all  Lon-
don were  falling  in  ruins  ;  and  many  were
the  overthrows,  because  there  were  famous
knights  on  both  sides.

Graciano  ran  against  Estrope  de  Beltram,
an  English  knight  of  great  strength,  and
very  well  esteemed  ;  but  Fortune  turned
her  back  towards  him  that  da}*,  so  that  he
could  not  withstand  the  knightly  puissance
of  the  French  prince.  Platir  encountered
with  Normando  the  Proud,  and  made  him
Iiumbler  than  he  had  ever  been  before,  giv-
ing him  such  a  welcome,  that  they  were
glad  to  carry  him  forth  of  the  field.  In
like  manner  Carlonte,  son  to  the  duke  of
Boqiiingani;   sped    at  the  hands  of  prince


405

Beioldo,  and  the  English  knights  were
urged  to  the  repulse,  Goarim  being  the  only
notable  one  of  the  other  side  who  fell,  his
horse  falling  with  him.  The  tilt  being  thus
over,  they  flashed  out  their  swords,  and  the
tourney  began  so  fiercely,  that  such  a  one
had  never  before  been  seen  in  that  court,
though  the  most  memorable  in  the  world
had  been  seen  there.  On  both  sides  were
singular  men  and  worthy  to  be  regarded.
Bcroldo  breaking  thorough  the  ranks,  using
such  singular  behaviour  in  all  his  attempts
as  was  greath'  liked  of  the  regardants,  came
to  Claribalte  of  Hungaria,  who  making  way
to  meet  him  with  the  like  will,  they  settled
themselves  stoutly  against  each  other,  they
grappled  and  (their  horses  moving  on  in  the
press)  came  to  the  ground  one  clinging  to
the  other  ;  presently  they  rose  and  began  so
brave  a  battle,  that  man}'  left  ofl"  beholding
the  tourney  to  look  only  upon  them.  King
Recindos,  albeit  the  sharp  strokes  his  son
received  urged  him  to  some  pain,  was  yet
the  most  contented  man  in  the  world  at
seeing  his  excellent  skill  and  strength.  The
whole  weight  of  the  tourney  soon  lay  here.


406

Esrrope  de  Beltram,  being  himself  not  a  lit-
tle enraged  at  his  overthrow,  came  to  the
assistance  of  Claribalte,  accompanied  with
sir  Pridos,  Archerin,  Lamberto,  Rocandor,
Alcarrofo,  Rucialdo,  and  Aitaris,  who  were
also  present,  Frocardoso,  Abertaz  the  Strong,
Lamostam,  and  Brutanante  ;  against  whom,
to  maintain  the  part  of  prince  Beroldo,  came
Graciano,  Frisol,  Lujmanes  of  Burgundy,
Onistaldo,  Dramiante-,  Tenebror,  Don  Ro-
suel,  and  Belisarte,  all  these  behaving  them-
selves very  gallantly  at  arms;  yet  at  this
brunt  they  were  too  weak  to  resist  the  hot
assaults  of  the  English,  which  was  still  main-
tained with  fresh  supply  of  noble  minds.
At  this  time  Claribahe,  not  being  able
longer  to  stand  up  against  the  blows  of  Be-
roldo, fell  to  the  ground  senseless.  This
however  did  not  avail,  for  they  of  Beroldo's
side  lost  the  field  ;  but  then  prince  Platir,
Floraman,  Francian,  Germam  of  Orleance,
Vernao,  Polinardo,  Pompides,  and  Tenebror,
though  now  somewhat  weary  with  their  long
endeavours,  came  up,  and  with  their  help
brought  such  fresh  spirit  and  strength  to
their   companions,  that   they    presently  re-


407

covered  the  ground  tlie}^  had  lost.  The
kings  and  chiefs  who  were  looking  on  spake
of  nothing  but  the  great  feats  of  the  knights
of  the  emperor.  Don  Duardos  and  Prima-
leon  thought  they  surpassed  any  thing  which
they  had  ever  witnessed  :  and  certes^  Arne-
dos,  king  of  France,  v,as  not  a  little  satisfied
to  behold  the  prowess  of  his  sons,  especially
of  Graciano,  who  distinguished  himseif
above  the  rest.  The  giant  Dramuziando,
V.  ho  was  by  the  emperor  Trineo,  said,  he  did
not  think  there  had  been  any  men  in  the
world  equal  to  so  much.  But  to  return  to
the  tourney,  the  muhitnde  of  the  English
and  strange  knights  was  so  great  that  nei-
ther strength  nor  valour  availed  those  of
the  emperor,  but  that  they  began  again  to
lose  the  field,  much  against  the  wishes  of
Primaleon  and  of  the  emperor  Trineo,  as
also  of  Recindos  and  Arnedos,  all  of  whom
had  their  sons  there.

But  behold  on  a  sudden  to  aid  the  Grecian
princes,  there  entered  three  strange  knights
in  arms  of  tawny  and  yellow,  and  bravely
.mounted  ;  the  first  of  them  bearing  in  his


40  s

shield  on  a  sable  field,  the  God  Saturnus,
compassed  about  with  stars  ;  the  second  had
for  his  device  in  a  field  sable  also,  the  pic-
ture of  the  House  of  Sadness  ;  the  third  had
covered  his  device  with  black  leather  that
it  might  not  be  seen.

Those  three,  seeing  how  the  English  knights
prevailed  by  reason  of  their  numbers,  couch-
ed their  spears,  and  ran  among  the  thickest
of  them,  overthrowing  many  before  they
brake  their  staves;  then  laying  hand  to
sword  bestirred  themselves  so  bravely,  that
in  short  time  they  recovered  for  the  knights
of  the  emperor  all  that  they  had  lost,  and
compelled  the  other  side  to  give  ground.
Grent  was  the  wonder  at  this  change,  and
still  greater  at  the  excellent  feats  of  arms  of
thi  se  three  ;  and  though  all  were  lauded
with  extreme  praise,  he  with  the  covered
shield  surpassed  so  greatly  that  it  was  held
for  a  miracle,  all  desiring  to  know  who  he
might  be.  Platir,  Graciano,  and  Don  Ro-
suel,  Beroldo,  Floraman,  and  Belisarte,
with  their  comrades,  seeing  such  good  help-
ers, laboured  what  they  could  to  keep  ua


409

with  them,  so  that  by  fine  force  they  drove
their  antagonists  out  of  the  field  just  as  the
sun  v.as  set.     This  however  was  not  done
so    cheaply,    but   that    Vernao,    Tremoran,
and  Tenebror,  were  fain  to  be  carried  out  of
the  field,  tliey  were  so  sore  wounded.     The
king  seeing   that  the  English  hud  lost  the
dav,  ordered  the   trumpets   to   sound    and
finish  it.     Prince  Graciano    then    collected
his  party,  who  left  the  tilt-yard,  as  contented
and  proud  as  the  price  and  pleasure  of  vic-
tory   might    well  make  them.       And  thus,
stained  as  they  vrere  "sVith  the  blood  of  their
victory,  with  their  three  unknown   compa-
nions they  went  to  the  scafíblding,  to  accom-
company  the  king  and  queen  and  court,  all
ascending  with  sound  of    hautboys,  trum-
pets, and  drums,  and  other  instruments  suit-
able to  the  pleasure  of  the  day.     Thus  were
they  accompanied  to  the  palace,  where  thev
alighted,  holding  talk  of  the  feats    of  the
day,  esteeming  ia  much  the  worth  of  those
who  had  wrought  them,  some  indeed  hav-
ing far  exceeded  what  was  looked  for  ;  but
it  is  the  quality  of  goodness,  where  it  exists
to  manifest  itself.

2    K


410


CHAPTER  47.


When  the  triumph  was  ended,  and  the  ein
pcror  with  king  Fadrique  returned  into  the
palace,  the  tables  were  ready  prepared,  when
immediately  they  sat  down  to  take  their  re-
past. The  king  that  day  ate  in  the  hall,  and
with  lilm,  to  do  them  honour,  the  emperor
Trineo,  kings  Arnedos  and  Kecindos,  and
the  soldan  Belagriz.  At  another  table  were
Don  Duardos,  Frimaleon,  Vernao,  Beroldo,
and  rioraman  j  at  a  third  the  knight  of
Fortune,  prince  Graciano,  Dramuziando,
.Platir,  Mayortes,  and  all  the  knights  of
jhe  emperor's  household,  being  served  in
such  honourable  and  comely  order,  as  the
princes  were  greatly  in  love  with  the  court
of  England.     The  juncketts  were  so  numer-


411

oils  that  they  made  the  supper  last  through
the  greater  part  of  the  night.  After  supper
there  was  a  ball  royal  in  the  apartment  of
Flerida,  where  the  empress  and  the  queen
had  that  night  supt  ;  most  of  the  knights
who  had  been  in  the  tourney  went  to  the
(Jancing  ;  which  done,,  a  sumptuous  banquet
should  presently  be  served  on  the  tables.

The  dancing  and  the  banquet*  finishedj  and
they  sitting  pleasantly  jesting  one  with  an-
other, there  entered  the  hall  the  three
knights  wdio  bad  behaved  themselves  so
brave!}'  in  the  tournament.  They  came  in
the  same  arms  which  they  had  worn  in  the
lists,  so  well  attired  and  with  such  comely
demeanor,  that  was  none  there  whom  their
feats  and  appearance  did  not  stir  to  envy.
Every  one  gave  way  to  them  that  they
might  approach  the  king  ;  and  now  when
they  were  just  at  the  foot  of  the  estrado,
whereon  he  and  the  other  princes  were,  such


*  This  is  a  trait  of  English  manners,  for  which  the  original
furnishes  no  authority.  It  is  preserved  as  an  instance  of  the
right  use  of  the  -Kbid'hujiquet.

'i  N  2


412

a  mist  on  a  sudden  arose  in  the  hall  as  lliat
the  lights  were  dim  and  ready  to  go  out,
the  torches  scarcely  burned,  one  person
could  not  see  another,  and  the  Uidios  being
so  dismayed  caught  hold  every  one  of  who
was  nearest  her.

To  put  them  out  of  this  fear,  the  mist  de-
parted, and  the  hall  was  as  clear  as  it  was
before,  when  straightway  they  beheld  in  the
midst,  a  lion  and  a  tyger  enduring  a  great
iight  together,  and  to  set  them  at  univy  there
entered  a  fair  damsel,  witli  a  golden  rod  in
her  hand,  wherewith  she  touched  them  both,
and  they  humbled  themselves  at  her  feet.
This  done,  she  departed,  and  they  arose
again  in  the  iorm  of  two  fierce  and  un-
tamed bulls,  which  caused  such  an  astonish-
ment to  inosi  of  the  beholders,  that  they
prepared  to  fly  forth  of  the  hall  ;  all  except
some  few  famous  knights,  who  not  only  had
no  show  of  fe;ir  themselves,  but  encouraged
the  ladies,  laughing  to  see  them  lose  their
colour  with  terror.  The  two  bulls  fought
vehemently  one  against  the  other,  and  met
together  with  such  a  shock  that    the  hall


413

seemed  falliniï  in  ruins,  and  with  the  vio-
lence of  that  shock  they  fell  to  the  ground,
breathing  from  their  mouths  an  horrihle
and  ugly  black  smoke,  with  the  ^Yhidl  the
air  was  left  as  dark  as  it  was  before.

The  hall  avoided  of  all  these  accidents,  and
in  the  same  estate  it  was  at  first,  they
might  behold  the  three  knights  with  their
heads  unarmed,  so  that  he  who  had  worn
Iiis  shield  covered,  was  now  seen  to  bear
thereon  his  usual  device,  which  was  the
Savage  in  a  white  field,  leading  two  hons  in
a  leash.  He  presently  went  to  the  king,
who  knowing  him  would  have  taken  him
in  his  arms,  and  kneehng  down  kissed  his
hand,  with  these  words  :  My  gracious  so-
vereign, I  .earnestly  entreat  at  your  hands,
this  knight  may  receive  the  courteous  en-
tertainment which  he  deserves,  for  this  is
the  sage  Daliarte,  your  most  aifectionate
servant,  to  whom  your  grief  hath  been  al-
way  indebted  for  his  resentment  thereof,
and  his  wish  to  serve  you.

King  Fadrique,  who   had  heard   report   of
C   X  3


414

the  sage  Daliarte^  stood  in  a  doubt  how  it
should  be  hcj  because  it  seemed  imposiible
that  his  youthful  years  should  have  attained
so  great  cunning  and  learning,  as  was
every  where  famed  of  him  ;  then  taking
Iiim  in  his  arms,  he  embraced  him  with
these  salutations:  Certainly,  Daliarte,  though
I  owed  you  for  nothing  more  than  for  bring-
ing me  him  of  the  Desert  (of  whom  1  had
no  hope)  in  so  sound  and  good  disposition
of  health,  that  never  couid  be  paid.

Sir,  iinswered  Daliarte,  the  reason  I  have  to
manifest  the  loyalty  of  my  service  is  so
great,  that  it  ahvay  nr;ikes  me  bound  to  you,
so  that  your  highness  is  m  less  obhgation
than  you  Aveen  ;  and  because  the  greatest
service  which  I  can  at  any  time  render  yoi^
is  as  yet  concealed,  seat  yourself  and  hear  me,
that  my  words  may  heighten  these  rejoic-
ings with  greater  reason  than  what  there  is
at  present  for  them.  The  king,  though  he
had  no  suspicion  what  it  could  be,  for  time
had  put  it  now  so  out  of  remembrance,
yet  supposing  some  glad  tidings  toward,
took  his  seat,  and  called  him  of  the   Desert


415

to  him,  -who  was  on  his  knees,  talking  with
Flerida  and  Don  Duardos  ;  when  being
every  one  quietly  placed  to  their  own  con-
tent, Daliarte  looking  all  round,  turned  to
Flerida  and  began  as  t'olloweth  ;

It  is  plain,  lady,  that  the  sight  of  Don  Du-
ardos  hath  put  the  remembrance  of  all  other
things  clean  out  of  mind  with  you,  and
among  them  that  of  your  children,  who  are
so  much  to  be  remembered.  This  ought
not  to  be  so,  for  you  are  the  person  to  whom
their  feats  should  give  the  most  content-
ment. And  Fortune,  v.  ho  at  the  hour  of
their  birth,  placed  them  in  such  extreme
danger,  that  their  high  blood  was  about  to
be  given  as  food  to  two  fierce  hons  by  the
Savage  who  took  them  from  you,  hath  now
placed  them  in  such  height  of  fame  in
arms,  that  not  only  do  they  exceed  all  those
of  their  own  time,  but  in  times  past  there
hath  been  none  to  leave  behind  him  so  ex-
cellent a  fame,  neither  can  I  find  that  any
for  long  years  to  oome,  shall  nearly  attain
to  it.  Whoso  therefore  hath  lost  such  sons,
sliould  not  live   so  little  in  thought  of  so


416

great  a  loss,  as  that  pleasure  should  destroy
the  recollection.  Now  then,  let  not  be  tor-
gotten  the  words  sir  Pridos  rehearsed  unto
you,  at  such  time  as  you  had  lost  both  hus-
band and  children,  which  was  reported  to
him  by  a  damsel  of  Arj^onida  :  for  lo,  at
this  instant  her  promise  is  accomplished;
your  two  lost  sons  are  here  with  you,  and
arc  such  as  will  suthciently  discharge  the
sorrow  that  then  you  siilTcrcd.  Here  you
behold  that  Palmerin  of  England  who  has
cost  you  so  many  tears,  and  to  whom  you
gave  that  name,  in  honour  of  the  emperor
your  iather,  who  afterwards  gave  him  the
same,  as  if  by  divine  inspiration.  And
Plorian  of  the  Desert  is  no  other  than  this
knight  of  the  Savage  Man,  whom  you  have
brought  up  as  a  mother,  though  as  a  sun
you  had  forgotten  him,

Flerida  gazed  upon  her  husband  in  such  agi-
tation as  pleasure  as  well  as  pain  occasions
when  it  comes  suddenly  ;  Don  Duardos
likewise  fixed  his  eyes  upon  her,  and  Pal-
merin upon  him  of  the  Desert;  and  knowing
each  other  now^  they  embraced.    The  king.


417

^i-hose  a^e  could  not  bear  so  great  joy,  fell
back  upon  his  chair,  and  calling  Daliarte,
said  to  him,  O  Daliarte,  I  would  not  have
wished  this  to  come  so  suddenly,  for  my
weakness  is  not  equal  to  joy  so  great  and  so
uiilooked  for.  1  beseech  you,  tell  me  how
you  know  this:  for  though  I  ahvay  suspected
it,  yet  I  cannot  believe  it,  because  of  the
delight  it  gives  me.  Daliarte  answered,  I
will  show  it  you  as  clearly  as  it  ought  to  be
shown  in  order  to  be  believed.

Then  drew  he  forth  a  little  book,  whereon
having  read  a  while,  the  Savage  Man  and
his  wife  suddenly  entered  the  hall,  in  such
dismay  as  persons  brought  so  strangely  to
such  a  place.  Palmerin,  who  knew  them,
having  so  lately  seen  them,  ran  to  embrace
them,  as  Florian  did  to  the  wife,  and  Selviam"
also,  with  his  knee  to  the  ground,  having
learned  more  civility  in  court  than  his  nature
would  have  taught  him;  but  she  with  tears
in  her  eyes  knew  not  which  to  embrace  first.
Flerida,  though  at  that  hour  the  remem-
brance of  the  time  when  she  lost  her  sons
had   well  nigh   overpowered  her,   yet  well


4-18

remembered  that  the  Savage  was  he  who  had
bereft  her  ot"  them.  Pahnerin,  when  he  had
made  the  Savage  Man  recover  from  his
amazement,  led  him  to  the  king,  who  mak-
ing him  sit  be.-ide  him,  asked  him  every
particular  concerning  their  breeding  up  ;
and  being  publicly  informed  of  all,  even  as
it  had  been,  he  held  Palmerin  to  his  heart,
and  lifting  up  his  eyes  to  heaven,  he  uttered
his  joy  in  this  manner.  O  heavenly  Father,
this  is  the  last  good  hap  that  I  ever  desired
to  see,  Avherefore  now,  if  it  be  th}'  pleasure,
take  me  out  of  this  world,  before  Fortune
determine  any  more  mischance  unto  me.
This  done,  he  took  his  two  grandsons  and
brought  them  to  Flerida,  before  whom  they
humbled  themselves  on  their  knees,  and
kissed  her  hand  a  great  many  times,  and  she
casting  her  arms  about  their  necks,  in  tears
remembered  the  great  danger  she  saw  them
both  in,  when  they  endured  the  bloody  com-
bat, at  such  time  as  she  set  them  at  unity.
Tlien  Don  Duardos  their  noble  father  re-
ceived them  in  his  arms  with  such  greetinijs
on  either  part,  as  joy  did  urge  them  to  ma-
nifest.    Presently   by    his    command    they


419

made  their  reverence  to  the  emperor  Tri-
neoj  and  in  like  manner,  to  the  kings  Recin-
dos  and  Arnedos,  as  persons  to  whom  they
were  now  newly  known.  But  Palmerin,
.when  he  came  to  accost  Primaleon,  did  it
with  more  obedience  than  he  had  mani-
fested to  the  othersj  remembering  that  he
was  the  lather  of  his  lady  and  mistress  Po-
linarda  ;  all  who  beheld  thinking  that  he
did  this  to  him  as  being  son  to  the  emperor
who  had  bred  him  up.

The  Savage  Man  and  his  wife  were  very
graciously  entertained  ;  who  seeing  the
two  princ-es  in  dignity  beyond  their  ex-
pectations, Vvhen  they  were  in  their  cave,
did  greatly  rejoice  that  Fortune  had  so
favourably  preserved  their  noble  lives.
Palmerin  commanded  Seiviam  to  conduct
his  father  and  mother  to  his  own  chamber.
The  kingj  it  being  now  late,  thought  fit
to  retire,  ordering  that  lodging  should  be
given  to  Daliarte  and  the  ether  knight  who
came  in  his  company,  first  asking  who  he
was.  If  it  please  your  grace,  answered
Daliarte,  to-morrow  you  shall  be   resolved


420


to  the  uttermost.  Thus  with  a  geiieral  glad-
ness every  one  went  to  take  their  rest,  wait-
ing for  the  morrow  to  return  with  more
reason  to  their  feasts,  which  are  then  well
ordered,  where  men  take  pleasure  and  God
receives  no  oifence.


4í;i


CHAPTER  48.


In  the  morning  the  king  went  to  the  cham-
ber  of  his  two  grandsons,  and  from  thence,
accompanied  by  Primaleon  and  \  ernao,  tliey
went  to  the  chamber  of  tlie  emperer  Trineo,
whom  they  found  aheady  stirring  ;  then  alto-
gether proceeded  to  the  lodging  of  Arnedos
and  Recindos,  who  were  coming  forth  to
meet  them.  So  going  to  the  high  church,
where  mass  had  been  appointed,,  they  heard
it  with  all  solemnity  of  royal  ceremonies,
with  anthems  and  voices  conformable  to  the
state  of  the  persons  present.  When  they  re-
turned unto  the  palace,  such  was  the  assem-
bly of  the  people  to  see  the  two  princes,  that
they  could  hardly  ascend  the  stairs  to  the
great  hall;  the  people  were  gathered  into  such
2  o


4á2

a  press.  So  being  seated  at  the  tables,  which
they  found  ready  laid,  they  ate  in  the  same
order  as  of  yesterday.  All  the  princes  en-
deavouring themselves  to  entertain  the  sage
Daliarte  honourably,  as  one  of  great  worth
and  to  whom  much  was  due.  The  time  of
eating  being  over,  during  which  they  had
questioned  of  him,  how  Florian  was  gua-
rantized  of  his  wounds  which  he  had  re-
ceived at  the  castle  of  Dramuziando,  they
-went  all  to  the  chamber  of  the  empress
Agriola,  vvitli  whom  the  queen  and  the
princess  Flerida  had  dined  :  and  the  king
desiring  silence,  when  they  were  all  placed,
began  in  this  order  to  DaUarte  :

Now,  my  friend,  let  me  remember  you  of  a
promise  made  yesternight,  as  also  to  tell  me
of  whence  you  are  ;  for  I  cannot  but  believe
that  a  man  of  such  great  knowledge  and  ex-
treme   valour,   things  which  are  so  seldom

•conjoined,  must  be  of  a  singular  generation.

•Something    of    this,    Daliarte    answered,  •  I

-should  willingly  not  have  disclosed,  but
.since  it  is  your  highness's  bidding  I  can  do

"no  other.     This- knight,  whose   name   vou


423

are  desirous  to  know,  is  called  Bkndidon.  *
As  concerning  his  birth  and  parentage,  be-
cause Florian  his  friend  can  at  large  give
ycu  to  understand  it  more  in  private,  1  will
pass  no  further  to  discover  what  he  is.
Touching  myself,  I  know  not  what  I  should
say,  least  it  might  disserve  my  lord  Don  Du-
ardos  ;  suffice  it  to  confess  that  Argonida
brought  forth  both  Pompides  and  me.

Don  Duardos,  who  had  thrown  himself  upon
Flerida's  lao,  not  wishing  that  these  things
should  be  considered  as  secrets,  seeing  what
had  past,  rose  up  and  said  to  the  king,  Sn-,
you  may  regard   Daliarte  and  Pompides  as
your    grandchildren,    for    such    they    are.
And,  Flerida,  let  it  not  seem  as  disliked  of
you,  for  the  fruit  of  the  fault  hath  atoned
for  it,  and  in  truth  there  Mas  little  fault  in
this  case.     Then  he  related  all   that  passed
with  Argonida,  in  what  manner  he  went  to
her  islaiid,  and  of  the  crafty  devices  she  used
with  him,  that  she  might  become  the  m.o-
ther  of  these  sons;  from  all  which  the  king
derived  new   contentment.       Touching   sir
Blandidon,  said  Don  Duardos,  I  know  not
2  o  2


424

as  yét  who  he  is,  but  Fiorian  of  the  Desert
knoweth  :  we  will  do  him  honour  according
to  what  he  seems  to  be.  Certes,  replied
Fiorian,  that  ma\^  be  done  him  I'ightly  every
where,  for  all  his  qualities  are  of  great  de-
sert. F'lerida  forgave  her  lord  Don  Duar-
dos  this  offence,  smiling  at  the  subtle  inven-
tions Argonida  used,  and  rejoicing  in  the
fault  which  had  produced  such  fruit  ;  and
when  Daliarte  and  Pompides  came  and  sub-
mitted themselves  to  her,  thinking  to  kiss
her  hand,  she  welcomed  them  as  heartily
as  if  they  had  been  her  own  children,  and
so  continued  alway  after  to  regard  them
with  the  love  of  a  mother.  Then  they  de-
parted to  their  chambers.

Palmerin  of  England  did  great  honour  to
Daliarte,  holding  it  for  high  good  fortune
that  he  was  so  nearly  allied  to  him  in  kindred.
Don  Duardos  was  secretly  informed  who
Blandidon  was,  and  treated  him  for  a  while
like  his  son,  not  to  give  him  discontent,
though  after  a  time  he  was  constrained  for
his  own  advantage  to  tell  him  the  truth  of
what  had  past.     The  triumphs  and  sumptu-


425

ous  feasts  continued  daily  abundantly,  and
every  night  there  was  dancing  and  rare  de-
vices put  in  execution.  So  that  the  Grecian
knights  high!}"  honoured  the  ladies  of  Eng-
land, whose  brave  jesture  of  courtly  enter-
tainment, was  not  only  esteemed  of  them,
but  as  much  commended,  at  their  return,
in  the  court  of  Constantinople.*

After  a  lon^;  continuance  of  this  exceedin;?
joy,  Arnedos  and  Recindos  concluded  to
part  to  their  kingdoms,  that  their  own  peo-
ple might  share  in  such  rejoicings  ;  so  they
took  leave  of  the  king,  and  Primaleon,  and
Don  Duardos.  The  emperor  Trineo  did  the
same,  though  he  v>'ould  not  depart  till  he
had  seen  the  castle  of  Dramuziando,  where-
in so  long  time  they  had  been  kept  prisoners.
Arnedos  and  Recindos  were  persuaded  to
bear, him  company  also,  so  that  on  the  mor-


*  These  frequent  commendations  of  English  feasts,  English
ladies, and  English  pageants,  are  all  old  Anthony's  own,who,
living  in  the  golden  days  of  good  Queen  Bess,  had  seen  the
conduits  run  with  wine,  and  heard  angels  deliver  orations
upon  the  ci:y  gates.

2o  3


426

row  the  king,  the  queen,  the  empress  Agi  iola,
and  rierida,  ',vith  the  other  company  of
kings  and  princes,  left  London  and  took
their  way  to  see  the  castle  so  much  spoken
of,  and  held  in  so  much  fear  throughout  the
world  in  those  days,  though  now  there  is
no  memory  thereof  remaining.  But  this  is
little  to  be  wondered  at,  for  oftentimes  we
see  that  things  of  admiration,  as  soon  as  they
have  passed  by,  are  forgotten.


427


CHAPTER  49.


All  the  young  knights  provided  them  of  new
and  rich  armour,  more  to  appear  well  before
the  ladies  than  for  any  need  they  expected
of  them.  At  their  departure  forth  of  Lon-
don, the  king  by  sound  of  trumpet  and
herald  caused  them  to  be  proclaimed^  that
none  should  follow  them,  except  the  neces-
sary attendants.  That  nioht  they  lod2:ed  in
the  forest,  ^vhere  such  provision  of  tents  and
pavilions  had  been  sent,  that  when  they  were
arrived  there  they  found  every  thing  to
their  own  contentment.  They  came  early-
enough  to  have  some  sport  in  hunting,  \Yhicli
gave  httle  pleasure  to  Flerida,  because  she
lemembered  how  dearly  that  forest  had  cost
her.     When  tliis  was  over  thev  called  for  ihe


428

Savage  Man,  who  appeared  other  than  what
lie  was,  being  drest  in  certain  garments  of
Palmerin,  to  which  he  gave  httle  grace  ;
and  there  did  he  declare  how  in  that  place
he  took  the  two  princes  from  her,  and
nonrished  them  in  his  cave  which  was  near
adjoining.  On  this  report  the  knights  were
desirous  to  see  his  cave,  so  thev  walked  with
him  tliither  ;  where,  after  Primaleon,  May-
ortes,  the  Grand  Khan,  and  Belagriz,  soldan
of  Niquea,  were  entered,  they  began  every
one  to  be  greatly  amazed,  seeing  this  cave
to  contain  so  large  a  breadth  and  length,
that  it  appeared  like  a  labyrinth.  All  about
on  the  walls  was  hanged  tapestry,  not  of
gold,  silk,  caddis,  or  such  manner  of  stuff,
hut  the  skins  of  beasts,  which  the  Savage
and  his  two  lions  had  slain.  Greatly  were
they  surprised  at  the  artificial  manner  of
the  cave,  which  was  so  cunningly  made,
.and  divided  into  so  many  chambers,  that  it
made  them  to  judge,  that  in  times  past,  it
had  been  the  solitary  dwelling  of  some  no-
bleman, exiled  from  his  country  ;  but  therein
they  were  deceived.  For  it  was  the  work
of  that  great  enchantress,  the  infanta  Melia,


459

who  abode  in  tliat  place  a  great  uhile,  dur-
ing the  reign  of  the  king  Armato,  her  bro-
ther. Lrganda  and  she  Hved  both  at  one
time,  as  it  is  rehearsed  in  the  history  of  the
emperor  Esplandian,  son  to  the  valiant  and
most  magnificent  king  Amadis,  and  the
princess  Oriana^  his  wife,  queen  of  Great
Britain.  When  the  princes  and  knights  had
satisfied  their  minds  in  beholding  this  place,
thej'  returned  to  the  pavilions  to  their  ladies;
and  Primalcon  sitting  down  by  his  sister
Flerida,  rehearsed  to  her  tlie  manner  of  the
cave,  where  the  two  princes  were  nourished.

This  night  they  reposed  themselves  in  the
forest,  as  honourably  served  as  if  they  had
been  in  the  English  court,  and  in  the  morn-
ing they  prepared  themselves  towards  the
castle.  Half  way  upon  the  road  they  dined,
and  before  the  hour  of  vespers  they  reached
that  pleasant  valley,  proceeding  along  the
stream  which  ran  through  the  middle  of  it;
a  thing  so  delightful  for  eyes  to  behold  that
it  appeared  more  like  picture  than  reality;
though  on  the  other  hand.  Nature,  wiio  is
so  excellent  in  her  works,  had  then  wrought


430

so  marvellously  that  it  could  not  be  believed
the  art  of  man,  how  subtle  soever,  could  have
devised  so  singular  a  forest  scene  as  she  had
then  made.  They  had  not  proceeded  far
down  the  valley,  before  they  saw  a  great
company  of  hunters  coming  towards  them
with  horn  and  hilloa,  and  before  them  w  ild
boars,  harts,  bucks,  and  all  [sue);  noble  game
Hying  full  speed  even  between  the  legs  of  the
palfreys  whereon  the  ladies  rode  ;  and  their
fear  and  alarm  was  such,  thinking  they
should  be  thrown,  that  they  laid  hold  on
Vi  hosoever  was  nearest  them  ;  and  then  the
liunters  disappeared,  and  all  the  game  swam
across  the  river,  whereat  some  w^ere  stricken
with  amazement,  but  not  so  they  who  judged
it  to  be  the  work  of  Daliarte.  Besides  this,
he  frequented  them  with  other  such  plea-
sant pastime  all  the  way  as  they  rode.  At-
last  they  arrived  where  they  had  sight  of  the
castle  of  Dramuziando;  the  stir  which  this
made  in  the  heart  of  many  was  such  as  to
put  all  other  things  out  of  remembrance;
and  Flcrida  knowing  this  to  be  the  place
wherein  Don  Duardos  had  so  long  been
held  prisoner^  could  not  so  far  dissemble  her


431

sorrow  but  that  tears  discovered  it.  The
emperor  Trineo  and  king  Fadrique  fell  into
great  commendation  of  the  sumptuous
building  of  the  castle,  than  which  they  had
not  often  seen  a  fairer  ;  which  moved  them
to  entreat  Dramuziando^  who  was  the  foun-
•  der  of  such  a  singular  piece  of  workmanship  ?
Sirs,  he  replied,  mine  aunt  Eutropa  built  it
from  the  ground.  Trust  me,  said  the  em-
peror, a  fortress  of  such  strength  and  beauty
ought  not  to  be  the  work  of  a  woman.

So  riding  on,  Dramuzlando  cried  out  that
he  saw  something  upon  the  bridge,  and  look-
ing to  see  what  it  might  be,  they  perceived
in  the  middle  of  the  bridge,  a  seemly  knight
ready  appointed  to  the  joust,  of  such  good

.  appearance  on  horseback,  that  one  who
should  have  appeared  better  could  not  be
found.  Not  knowing  who  he  was  they
looked  about  to  see  if  any  of  their  company
had  ridden  forward,  but  finding  all  were
together,  they  could  not  devise  who  he
might  be  who  undertook  such  an  ente^-
prize,  as  to  keep  the  bridge  against  so  many.

•The  knight  was. mounted  upon  a  large  bus-


432

•  tard-colourecl  hors€^  well  spotted,  his  armom*
qimrtercd  black  and  white,  with  flowers  of
silver.  He  bare  in  his  shield  in  a  field  azure
the  countenance  of  a  woman,  drawn  to  the
life,  being  the  picture  of  her  whom  he  loved  ;
so  excellently  fair,  that  Altea,  for  whom  Flo-
laman  accomplished  such  chivalrous  deeds
at  Constantinople,  might  not  seem  to  offer
comparison  to  this  beautiful  spectacle,  nei-
ther the  fair  princess  Polinarda  had  in  aught
the  advantage.  On  the  border  of  the  robe
she  wore  was  written  in  letters  of  ííold  ]Níira-
guarda.

Presently  a  squire  advanced  from  the  bridge
towards  thcni,  who,  after  he  had  done  his
duty  to  them  all,  began  to  salute  them  with
these  protestations  :  Fair  lords  and  ladies,
the  noble  knight,  my  master,  whom  you  be-
hold on  the  bridge,  by  me  giveth  you  to  un-
derstand the  cause  of  his  travels  unto  this
place.  He  is  of  a  far  country,  from  whence
he  had  adventured  himself  at  the  command
©f  his  lady,  whose  humble  servant  he  re^-
maineth  at  this  hour,  to  try  his  knighthood
at  this  castle,  which  hath  been  blazed  abroad


433

to  be  most  unfortunate.  But  being  liere
arrived,  he  finds  the  enchantment  fully  finish-
ed, and  the  strength  of  the  giant  Dramu-
ziando,  with  all  his  retinue,  conquered  by  the
valour  and  haughty  prowess  of  Pahnerin  of
England,  who  hath  delivered  the  princes  that
were  kept  captive;  which  news  are  most  wel-
come unto  him,  in  that  he  desired  nothing
more.  Yet  for  that  he  is  loth  to  return  to
his  lady,  being  at  the  place  where  knighthood
hath  been  tried,  and  he  to  pass  back  again
not  approved  of  any, — he  craveth  to  enter  the
joust  with  such  as  are  disposed;  deferring  tlie
combat  of  the  sword,  because  his  desire  is
to  be  at  the  service  of  all,  but  to  offend.
none.

This  challens:e  increased  such  courao;e  in  the
knights,  that  they  entered  into  strife,  who
should  first  run  with  the  stranoer  :  which  the
king  perceiving,  returned  the  esquire  with
this  answer  :  INly  friend,  tell  thy  lord  his  en-
terprize  is  great,  and  the  intention  which
brought  him  here  worthy  to  be  lauded  ;  and
if  he  contain  such  courage  in  proof,  as  both
his  message  and  himself  giveth  in  shovr,  liis
VOL.  I.  2  p


434

iudv  ouíílit  to  esteem  his  services  in  no  little;
but  in  truth  women  are  never  satisfied  by
reason,  being  governed  by  accident  or  appe-
tite. The  squire  receiving  the  king's  plea-
sure, returned  to  his  lord,  to  whom  he  had
no  sooner  made  it  known,  but  Tenebror
shewed  himself  beibre  the  bridge,  inviting
the  strange  knight  to  the  joust,  who  stayed
not  to  accomplish  his  desire,  but  encountered
him  witii  such  a  pleasant  charge,  that  Tene-
bror was  forced  to  leave  his  saddle,  little  to
liis  own  contentment,  and  as  little  to  that  of
those  who  beheld  him,  holding  the  force  of
his  antagonist  to  be  very  great.

This  chance  somewhat  displeased  Luymancs
of  Jjurgundy,  who  thinking  to  revenge  tlic
repulse  of  Tenebror,  was  sent  himself  to
keep  him  company.  Belcar  being  desirous
to  shew  his  prowess  among  the  young  knights^
couched  his  spear  against  the  strange  knight,
who  sent  both  man  and  horse  to  the  ground  ■
then  t;»king  another  lance  from  many  which
^^ere  phiced  in  readiness  against  the  castle,  he
ran  at  Don  lîosuel,  who  cried  out  to  him  to
deleiid  himself;    and  though    the  kniglit   of


435

the  Bridae  was  fain  to  lav  hold  on  his  horse's
neck,  Don  Rosucl  was  made  partaker  of  the
same  mishap  as  his  companions.

In  hke  manner,  Trcmoran^  Goarini,  Friso],
Graciano,  Blandidon,  and  Francian  were  serv-
ed, which  moved  the  king  Polendos  unto  such
choler,  that  he  would  have  ventured  against
the  strange  knight,  had  not  Don  Duardos  per-
suaded him  to  the  contrary.  All  these  were
overthrown  in  so  short  a  time  ihat  some  be-
gan to  think  it  was  one  of  Daliarte's  works;
but  herein  they  deceived  themselves,  for  it
was  only  the  noble  force  of  the  knight,  v;hich
was  continually  animated  by  beholding  the
fair  face  of  the  lady,  so  bravely  proportioned
in  his  shield.  Floraman  being  greatly  bent
against  the  kniglit,  and  believing  that  his
victory  proceeded  from  the  beauty  of  his
lady,  would  once  more  put  his  fortune  in
hazard,  thinking  his  feature  of  his  fair  Altea,
to  be  as  sovereign  in  authority  as  the  strange
Miraguarda  ;  whereupon  he  entered  the
bridge,  saying  thus  to  himself:  If,  lady,  I
had  at  any  time  forgotten  you,  you  might
have  some  reason  for  not  remembering  me;
2  P  2


4S5

but  why  should  you  not  favour  one  in  this
enterprize  who  alway  serves  you  without
hope?  let  this  satisfaction  lecompence  past  ill
success.  Then  adding  other  words,  so  low
that  only  himself  and  love  heard  them,  he  put
heels  to  horse,  and  they  encountered  one
another  courageously,  passing  the  first  course
with  the  break  of  the  staff;  but  at  the
second  time,  Floraman  and  his  steed  were
thrown  to  the  ground  very  violently;  when
making  recourse  to  his  former  secret  speeches,
he  said,  Í  perceive  now,  Altea,  that  my  mis-
fortune comes  because  I  am  not  worthy  to
serve  you,  since  in  all  things  which  I  greatly
desire  my  fortune  is  so  ill.  Howbeit  I  alway
do  that  with  you  which  I  ought,  you  with
me  that  which  vou  will  :  be  it  so  !  when  I
became  yours  I  determined  to  be  contented
with  good  or  ill,  as  it  might  chance.

The  emperor  Trineo  and  all  the  princes,  were
very  sad  to  behold  the  sorrow  of  Floraman,
seeing  that  it  sprang  from  so  old  a  grief,  which
ought  to  have  been  forgotten.  The  knight
of  the  Bridge  meantime  was  so  satisfied,  that


437

he  tboughr  all  that  company  Viitle  for  liiin  to
prove  himself  with.  Presently,  prince  Bc-
roklo,  Onistaldo,  and  Pompides  came  up  to
him,  and  albeit  they  were  all  notable  knights,
he  of  the  Bridge  overthrew  them,  though  in
truth,  with  less  advantage  over  them  than
the  others.  Ttie  knight  of  the  Savage,
thinking  it  shame  that  one  man  should
overthrow  so  many  and  he  present,  laced  on
his  helmet,  angry  to  hear  the  ladies  of  the
empress  praise  so  highly  the  knight  of  the
Bridge,  and  advanced  himself  against  him.
Three  times  they  met,  yet  neither  prevailing
against  the  other  ;  when  the  strange  knigiit
looking  on  his  shield,  and  perceiving  the
fair  face  of  his  lady  to  be  somewhat  rased
with  the  spear,  repented  that  he  had  precluded
himself  from  the  sword-combat,  and  said
within  himself,  Of  a  truths  either  that  knight
is  the  best  in  the  world,  or  1  am  of  no  worth,
since  having  for  my  protection  the  counte-
nance of  her  WÎ10  destroys  me,  I  am  yet
unable  to  conquer  him  who  olTenUs  her  image.
Then  turning  again  to  encounter  each  other,
at  this  fourth  attempt  they  met  so  furiously,
2  p  3


438

that  the  horses  not  being  able  to  sustain  it,
they  all  fell  together.  Now,  because  the
night  approached  so  fast  on,  Palmerin  could
not  enter  the  joust,  which  troubled  him,
thinking  t'aat  in  not  adventuring  he  sinned
against  his  lady  ;  but  Daliarte,  to  put  him
from  that  opinion,  came  to  him  with  these
words.  Good  Sir,  let  it  not  seem  oH'tnisive
to  you,  because  you  liave  not  jousted  with
this  knight,  ior  if  your  valour  should  return
him  any  disadvantage,  it  would  grieve  you,
for  the  displeasnre  which  your  lady  Poli-
narda  would  thereby  receive.  You  know  so
much  of  every  thing,  Sir  Daliarte,  said  Pal-
merin, that  it  is  not  much  for  you  to  un-
derstand my  thoughts.  Will  you  tell  me
who  this  knight  is?  If  there  be  necessity
to  conceal  his  name,  the  secret  is  as  safe  with
me  as  Avith  you.  Daliarte  replied,  1  well
know  that  nothing  need  he  concealed  from
yoQ.  His  name  is  Florendos,  who  putteth
his  noble  deeds  in  proof  for  the  honour  of
her  whose  image  you  may  perceive  figured
on  his  shield,  even  as  you  hazard  all  yo^ir
actions,  to  purchase  the  favour  of  her  who
is  your  lady  and  his  sister.     His  name  is  kept


439

secret,  such  being  his  intention.  Ah  Sir
Daliarte^  quoth  Palmerin,  it  is  bootless  to
think  to  keep  secret  anv  thing;  from  vou.

Fiorian  of  the  Desert  rose  dissatisfied  with
himself,  and  the  knight  of  the  Bridge  equally
so  ;  wiio  remounting  as  well  as  he  could,
took  his  way  down  the  valley,  not  chusing
to  be  knou  n,  and  careless  of  the  praise  which
every  one  would  have  given  him,  thinking
that  men  ou2;ht  to  be  more  desirous  of  beiny;
good,  than  of  seeming  so.


440


CHAPTER  50.


The  strange  knight  bchig  thus  spectly  in'liis
departure,  the  emperor  wiih  the  other
prinees,  ceased  not  to  commend  his  re-
doubted enterprise,  greatly  desiring  to  know
what  he  was,  which  made  them  importunate
to  the  sage  Daharte;  but  they  laboured  in
vain,  for  he  would  not  in  this  matter  satisf}'
their  desire.  But  to  Primaleon  he  said,  He
is  of  great  worth,  and  one  who  desires  to
content  you  more  than  any  other,  and  to
imitate  your  exploits.  The  love  of  a  woman,
whose  name  he  beareth  in  his  shield,  causeth
him  to  absent  himself  from  the  company  of
these  princes,  with  whom  he  deservedly  en-
tertains great  friendship.

Then  Don  Duardos  desired  him  to  shew  the


441

name  of  the  damsel  to  Avliom  he  had  vowed
such  earnest  affection,  whose  will  Daliartc
loth  to  gainsay,  began  in  this  order  to  an-
swer :  Her  name  is  Miraguarda,  and  her  ap-
pearance such,  tiiat  he  who  sees  her  sees
what  he  never  saw  before,  and  had  need
take  good  heed  lest  he  fall  into  the  danger
which  may  arise.  She  is  a  native  of  Spain,
daughter  to  count  Arlao,  a  person  of  great
estimation,  and  she  herself  beautiful  to  such
an  extreme,  that  no  one  has  ever  seen  her
once  who  would  not  venture  his  life  for  a
second  sight.  The  county  himself,  said  king
Recindos,  I  well  know  to  be  as  you  describe
him;  of  liis  daughter  I  know  nothing  ;  for
indeed  when  I  left  the  kingdom  of  Spain,
she  was  so  little  that  none  did  make  account
of  her  beauty.  Then  alighting  from  their
horses,  and  taking  their  ladies  each  une  by
the  hand,  thcv  entered  the  castle,  so  greatly
deliglilcd  with  the  sumptuous  building,  and
brave  conveyance  of  the  commociious  places,
tlie  galleries  and  chambers  made  over  such
little  fine  brooks  and  rivers,  and  the  tall  pop-
lars rising  from  the  river  and  shadowing  the
dwellings,  that  they  imagined  all  their  com-


442

raendations  not  sufficient  for  this  place  ;  and
when  they  saw  in  how  free  a  prison  Dramu-
ziando  held  his  captives,  ihey  greatly  praised
his  courtesy,  and  his  noble  confidence.  That
night  they  supt  there  on  such  abundance  of
things  provided  by  Drajnuziando,  as  if  it  had
been  in  the  days  of  his  prosperity.

Early  on  the  next  morning  they  departed,
because  Flerida  could  not  bear  to  remain  in
a  place  which  had  occasioned  her  such  years
of  sorrow.  But  before  they  left  the  castle
Palmerin  delivered  it  again  to  Dramuziando,
who  accepted  it,  thinking  to  serve  him  in
greater  things,  as  afterwards  he  did,  and
called  it  the  Extreme  of  Strength,  a  name
which  it  well  deserved  for  its  own  sake,  and
in  memory  of  what  had  been  there  exploited.
Departing  thence,  Daliarie  conducted  them
the  way  to  his  habitation,  frequenting  them
still  with  such  singular  devices,  that  the  la-
dies b}*  their  weak  nature  were  somewhat  dis-
mayed, but  the  princes  themselves  marvel-
lously delighted.  When  they  were  arrived
at  the  Dark  Valley,  from  whence  Daliarte
took  his  appellation^  these  fantastic  appear


443

anccs  became  so  numerous,  that  they  knew
not  whether  to  receive  pleasure  or  fear  from
them  ;  for  if  some  were  such  as  to  stir  laugh-
ter, the}»^  were  presentl}'  changed  to  things
terrible,  which  took  away  all  delight,  though
the  fear  was  for  the  ladies  only,  the  knights
rejoicing  in  the  sights  of  pleasure,  and  not
being  dismayed  by  the  other.  Besides  these
spectacles,  the  manner  of  the  Valley  itself
was  such  as  would  have  sufficed  to  make
them  hold  in  high  estimation  the  wisdom  of
Daliarte.  At  length  they  arrived  at  his  ha-
bitation, which  was  in  the  bottom  of  the
Valley,  so  singularly  edified,  that  if  I  should
stay  to  recite  their  opinions  hereon,  I  should
wear}'  your  minds  v;ith  a  tedious  discourse;
and  were  I  to  write  tlie  manner  of  the  piace,
it  would  be  to  injure  by  words,  what  by
words  never  could  be  compassed.  There
they  staid  for  some  days,  having  such  royal
service,  that  they  supposed  in  their  own
courts  it  was  impossible  to  be  more  princely
served.  At  length  Arnedos  and  Recindos,
desirous  to  see  their  own  kingdoms,  took
their  leave  of  the  emperor  and  all  the  com-
pany,   the    one    taking   the   way    towards


444

France,  and  the  other  towards  Spain,  having
no  body  with  them,  but  cacii  one  an  esqnire
attending  on  him  :  as  for  their  sons,  they  left
them  still  with  the  other  princes  ;  lor  that
their  years  were  more  fit  to  endure  travel
than  as  yet  to  incline  themselves  to  the  ease
ol"  the  world.

Then  returned  the  emperor  and  king  Fadri-
que,  with  the  rest  of  their  train,  to  the  Eng-
lish court,  wherein  a  while  after,  the  emperor
and  Agrioki  took  their  leave  likewise,  leav-
ing their  sons  in  like  manner,  though  against
the  will  of  the  empress;  when  was  such  grief
on  either  side  for  their  departure,  as  because
your  judgments  is  sufficient  to  conceive,  1
cease  to  speak.  The  soldan  Belagriz  and
Mayories,  having  kissed  the  hands  of  king
Fadriijue,  came  and  embraced  the  prince
Don  Duardos,  for  whose  sake  ihey  had  left
their  countries,  to  be  partners  in  his  impri-
sonment ;  when  the  prince  accompanying
them  part  of  the  way,  began  in  this  order  to
the  soldan  Belagriz:!  trust,  Sir,  you  remem-
ber when  I  disenchanted  king  'J'arnacs  of
Lacedenionia,  what  passed  uiiJer  colour  of


445

111}-  name,  between  you  and  liis  ijisler  Pau-
dricia,  vvliicli  at  that  time  so  greatly  dis-
pleased me;  that  displeasure  ought  however
now  to  be  forgotten,  because  of  the  fruit  of
the  offence.  Know  then  that  Blandidoii  is
your  son  and  hers,  and  I  have  not  yet  told
him  the  truth,  reserving  it  for  fitter  time.
Now  if  you  are  willing  to  perceive  the  error
of  your  own  failli,  and  follow  the  true  one,
your  people  will  do  as  you  would  have  them,
and  you  may  wed  Paudricia,  who  now  leads
the  life  which  you  have  heard,  and  thus  en-
joy her  and  a  son  so  worthy  to  be  esteemed.

Belagriz  paused  hereon  a  while,  debating
in  his  mind  on  these  things  ;  for  when
things  are  of  importance,  much  time  should
be  expended  in  considering  them,  and  little
in  executing.  At  lengih,  fixing  his  eyes
upon  Don  Duardo?,  he  answered.  Credit  me,
Sir,  I  was  never  more  confused  at  any  thing
\^hicll  Fortune  hath  sent  me,  than  at  this
which  you  liave  disclosed.  I  make  such
estimation  of  Blandidon,  that  to  have  such
a  son,  I  think  I  shaîl  do  that,  which  else  I
never  thought  to  have  done  ;  but  at  present
2  o


446

I  can  only  bid  you  heartily  farewel,  vowing
to  send  yon  wot  d  of  my  determination  so
shortly  as  possibly  I  m;i\'.  Thus  Belaíçriz
departed  without  taking  tarther  resolution,
though  afterwards  he  came  to  the  rio-ht  one.

After  he  and  Ma^'ortes  were  gone,  many
others  followed,  such  as  Polendos,  Belcar,
and  Vernao,  whom  the  love  of  his  Basiha.
called  home  to  Constantinojjle.  Shortly  af-
ter, Primaleon  left  the  English  court,  tra-
velling alone  by  himself  without  any  com-
pany, because  he  meant  to  try  the  adven-
tures that  fortune  might  present  unto  him,
not  sparing  his  person,  but  would  jeopard
himself  in  the  places  of  most  peril  and  dan-
ger. Knowing  well,  that  the  life  and  loyalty
of  the  courageous  ought  to  be  employed  in
their  defence,  whom  inisadventure  kept  in
restraint,  or  the  terror  of  the  time  in  any
sorrowful  servitude.


447


CHAPTER  51.


Piimaleon  having  left  the  English  couif;,
made  iitiie  stay  in  any  place  till  he  arrived
in  the  kingdom  of  Lacedemonia^  where,  not
forffeitinir  his  last  conference  with  the  sor-
rowliil  lady  Paudricia,  as  touching  the  man-
ner of  her  solitary  kind  of  life,  he  conclud-
ed to  visit  her  again^  to  see  if  any  resolution
could  be  kept  by  women,  who  are  by  nature
so  mutable  that  no  constancy  is  to  be  ex-
pected in  them.

Long  rode  Primaleon,  without  any  adventure
worthy  the  rehearsal,  tilLat  last  being  come
to  tae  Sorrowful  V'uiiey,  where  no  Knight  en-
tered, LiUt  ^^as  presently  convinced  by  his
ov\n  mmd  how  fitly  it  was  named,  he  espied

(1    /-»    o

-  vj  «^


448

two  horses  coming  from  the  castle  of  Paii-
chiciii  ;  one  of  them  lie  knew  to  belong  to
the  kiiiglit  that  maintained  the  joust  before
the  castle  of  Dramuziando,  which  made  him
somewhat  amazed  to  see  him  wander  without
his  master.  At  last,  casting  his  eye  about,
he  espied  the  knight  sitting  under  those
thick  and  sombrous  trees  which  overhung
that  dark  and  doleful  river;  he  was  attired  in
black  armour,  with  yellow  spots  all  over  it,
as  melanchol}'  as  his  own  mind,  from  whence
the  invention  had  been  copied  ;  and  for  this
cause,  as  well  as  by  reason  of  the  sorrowful
moofl  which  lie  was  alway  seen  to  endure,
they  called  him  in  that  land  the  Tristful
Kniííht.  Primaleon  did  not  at  first  re-
cognize  him,  for  his  arms  were  not  the  same
as  those  in  which  he  had  jousted  at  the
bridge  ;  but  drawing  nearer  he  knew  him  by
seeing  in  his  hand  the  shield  with  the  por-
trait of  his  lady,  whereto  he  used  many
amorous  complaints,  as  though  it  had  been
she  herself  from  Vvhom  ihe  image  had  been
taken.  He  was  so  far  ravished  with  behold-
ing his  ladv's  counterfeit,  that  he  perceived
not  the  coming  of  Primaleon,  but  thinking


449

no  body  to  be  near,  continued  his  discoiu'scs
alter  tiiis  manner  :

What  shall  he  do,  lady,  who  having  once
seen  you  and  thereby  lost  himself,  now  sees
you  not,  that  he  may  hope  for  any  good  ?
I  seek  help  irom  this  im;ige  of  your  beauty,
■which  hath  It  not  to  Iíc^low,  and  if  it  had
would  witliliold  it,  becauic  you  will  have  it
so.  Í  pour  forth  my  complaints  to  it,  liv-
ing by  your  name,  as  the  camelion  doth  by
the  air,  and  rt-joicing  in  your  shadow,  when
Cod  knows,  I  am  too  far  from  the  sub-
stance !  Oh  Florendos,  son  and  grandson  to
the  greatest  princes  in  the  ^vorld,  they  so
prosperous  in  their  affairs,  and  thou  so  un-
fortunate in  thine!  apart  from  the  conver-
sation of  thy  friends,  and  lost  in  contemp-
lating thoughts  which  have  no  end,  of  her
who  has  no  thought  of  thee!  Miraguarda  is
your  name,  lady  ;  it  signityeth,  behold  and
beware:  but  he  who  arave  thee  that  name  was
either  born  with  a  free  heart,  or  had  a  weak
judgment  ;  for  I  know  not  who  that  had  seen
you  could  wish  to  beware  the  sight  again,  or
if  he  had  the  wish^  could  have  the  power.
2o3


450

Continuing  these  and  many  suchlike  speeches,
Primaleon  knew  that  it  was  his  son  Floren-
tlos,  whose  grievous  passions  caused  him  to
call  to  memory  the  Hke  sorrows  which  him-
self had  endured,  when  he  spent  his  travails
for  the  princess  Gridonia;  wherefore  draw-
ing near  unto  him,  he  would  not  as  yet  take
any  knowledge  of  him,  but  saluted  him  in
these  terms  :  Sir  Knight,  would  you  not  im-
part some  of  your  griefs  to  him,  who  sorrow-
eth  to  see  you  overcharged  v/ith  such  heavi-
ness ?  Truly,  Sir,  answered  the  Tristful
Knight,  I  receive  such  contentation  in  my
troubled  thoughts,  and  have  used  them  so
long  to  my  good  liking,  that  I  would  be  loth
any  should  be  privy  to  m}'  passions  but  only
myself,  to  whom  they  are  alvvay  welcome.
But  what  are  you  that  make  yourself  so
hardy,  as  to  disturb  me  from  my  contented
exercise  ?  Certainly,  if  you  dare  expect  a
while  I  will  requite  you  for  this  discourtesy.

So  calling  his  squire  to  arm  him,  Primaleon
made  him  no  answer,  but  mounted  present-
ly on  horseback,  being  disposed  to  make
trial  of  his  son's  strength,  that  he  might  bear


451

testimony  to  it.  When  the  Tristful  knight
was  ready  provided,  and  had  bethought  him-
self of  his  ungentle  words,  he  came  unto
Priiiialeon  with  these  speeches  :  Sir  knight,
pardon  mc,  1  pray  you,  if  I  have  forgotten
myself  lov.ards  you";  I  beseech  you  lay  aside
any  anger  which  you  may  have  conceived  at
my  hasty  words,  even  as  I  repent  that  in
which  I  utiered  them.  But  Primaleon,  as
his  intention  was  otherwise,  made  answer,
Don  Cavaher,  I  am  not  one  whom  these  ex-
wises  can  divert  from  his  purpose.  A\  itli
your  leave  I  must  see  wliat  there  is  in  you,
though  1  should  find  it  to  my  cost.  At  these
words  they  couched  their  spears,  which  were
delivered  on  either  side  with  such  force,  that
the  shafts  brake  and  horses  and  horsemen
hurtling  togetlier,  Primaleon  was  sent  to  the
ground,  the  Tristful  knight  bearing  him
company,  because  the  girts  of  his  saddle
were  broken  ;  but  he  carried  the  saddle  with
him  between  his  legs,  and  came  down  upon
his  feet,  drawing  out  his  sword  with  such
swiftness  that  Primaleon  admired  it,  though
drawing  his  own  also,  he  was  now  mastered
by  anger,  using  no  pity  unto  his  son,  but


452

hacking  his  armour  as  eagerly  as  had  he  been
his  greatest  enemy  in  the  world.  By  this
you  may  perceive,  that  in  affliirs  of  honour
between  excellent  meri;,  the  opinion  thereof
is  of  more  force  than  friendship  or  affinity,
being  so  extreme,  that  it  siretcheth  beyond
reason,  or  the  limits  of  nature;  for  fathers
think  little  to  slay  their  sons,  nor  sons  to  de-
stroy their  parents,  as  may  be  seen  by  many
instances  of  wliich  ancient  histories  arc
full*.

The  Tristful  knight,  seeing   himself  in  so


*  A  like  unnatural  combat  occurs  in  Esplandian,  which  I
think  Tressan  somewhere  half  conjectures  to  bear  reference
to  Philip  II.  and  the  prince  Don  Carlos,  not  remembering
that  the  book  was  written  before  Don  Carlos  was  born.
Both  incidents  are  monstrous  ;  but  if  the  first  had  been  con-
sidered so  in  the  sixteenth  century,  it  would  not  have  been
imitated.  Old  warriors  were  perhaps  as  jealous  of  their
sons'  reputation  in  those  days,  as  ladies  are  sometimes  said
to  be  in  ours  of  their  daughters'  beauty.  The  love  of  glory
^s  in  its  essen  e  like  the  love  of  power,  to  gratify  which  in
all  ages  the  most  atrocious  crimes  have  been  committed.  I
should  observe  too,  in  justice  to  the  author  of  Palmerin,  that
some  atonement  is  made  at  the  end  of  the  battle  for  its  cont-
mencement.


453

great  danger,  and  not  knowing  that  he  with
whom  he  strove  was  the  father  who  hegat
liinj,  Jaid  on,  on  his  part,  with  as  httle  re-
morse. Long  was  the  fight,  and  very  dan-
gerous on  either  part,  their  armour  spoiled,
theirbodies  sore  wounded,  and  their  strengths
so  much  altered,  that  one  would  have  sup-
posed death  to  be  the  next  remedy.

Then  W'ithdrawing  themselves  to  pause  a
little,  they  cast  their  eyes  upon  the  House  of
Sadness,  the  windows  being  covered  with
black,  where  Paudricia  and  lier  damsels
stood  according  to  their  custom,  to  behold
the  combat.  Primaleon  felt  many  times  in-
clined to  leave  olf  the  combat,  but  his
haughty  courage  would  not  suffer  him.  So
turning  again  to  battle,  Don  Cavalier,  said
he,  I  will  try  if  the  portrait  of  your  lady  will
stand  you  in  any  stead.  If  I  stood  in  need  of
her  aid  against  you,  replied  the  Tristful
knight,  and  she  should  grant  it  me,  fewer
blows  than  I  have  dispensed  would  have
quelled  your  pride;  it  is  because  I  do  not
ask  her  succour  in  such  trifling  matters  that
vou  have  resisted  thus  lomz;.     These  scornful


454

specc'nes  made  their  buttle  ilerccr  ;  but  .ifter
u  while  Priinalcon,  seeing  the  blood  of  his
son,  began  to  feel  compassion,  and  he  said
to  him,  Knight,  if  you  think  good,  we  may
rest  awhile,  there  will  be  time  enough  left
to  deeide  whose  is  to  be  the  vietory.  Sir,
said  the  Tristful  knight,  at  first  you  might
have  prevented  all  this  mishap,  but  as  your
pride  was  then  of  more  weight  than  my  ex-
cusai, Í  will  see  the  end  of  it,  let  the  cost
fall  to  whom  it  may.  Nay,  quoth  Prima-
leon,  Í  will  not  have  it  so,  for  on  the  one
hand  I  adventure  my  own  life,  and  on  the
other  yours,  which  I  prize  dearer.  During
tlic  time  of  tiiis  talk,  Paudricia  came  forth
of  her  castle,  accompanied  witli  her  dam-
sels, being  desirous  to  pacify  the  dangerous
strife.

Tlie  Tristful  knight  not  understanding  his
enemy's  words,  laid  aside  liis  anger,  expect-
ing their  explanation.  Priinaleon  seeing  the
courtesy  of  Paudricia,  saluted  ner,  saying.
Now,  Lady,  3'ou  should  be  less  sorrowful  than
you  were  the  day  on  winch  I  left  you,  wiien
you  took  up  your  sojourn  here.     Sn*^  she  re-


455

piled,  I  know  not  \Yho  you  arc,  but  ihecom-
passion  I  felt  at  beliolding  your  cruel  com
bat  made  me  come  out.  Now,  since  I  find
you  at  accord,  1  beseech  you  tell  me  your
name,  that  I  may  know  ^^hetller  to  give  or-
ders for  curing  you  Avitbin  tiiere,  or  iiere
without.  Lady,  replied  Primaleon,  1  have
so  earnestly  desired  to  do  you  service,  that
I  have  not  spared  the  travnil  of  my  person
from  a  far  countr}',  to  bring  you  such  tid-
ings as  I  hope  shall  agree  with  your  good
nature  :  and  because  I  would  deny  you  no-
thin  f-,  know  that  I  am  Primaleon,  son  to  the
emperor  Palmerin.

When  the  Tristful  knight  heard  these  words
he  was  overcome  with  such  extreme  sorrow,,
because  he  had  entered  combat  with  his  fa-
ther, that  he  had  much  ado  to  sustain  him-
self: which  the  prince  seeing,  came  to  bun
with  these  words.  Knight,  he  who  hsth
such  surpassing  strength  in  battle,  ought  not
in  other  things  to  show  so  little.  I  knew
you  well  when  Í  combated  with  you  ;  I  now
know  you  better,  having  tried  what  there  is
in  you.     The  Tristful  knight  had  no  time  to


456

do  more  than  kiss  his  father's  hands,  for
Paudricia  led  Primaleon  in,  being  fulljoyful
to  see  liiui  in  her  habitation,  and  her  latlies
led  in  his  son.  Two  beds  were  then  prepar-
ed for  them  in  one  chamber,  and  their
wounds  attended  with  very  diligent  and
loving  respect.


457


CHAPTER   52.


The  Tristful  knight,  and  his  father  Prima-
leon,  made  their  abode  for  the  space  of  cer-
tain days  in  the  castle  of  Paudricia,  where
they  were  so  carefully  visited,  and  their
feeble  estates  so  lovingly  tendered,  that  in
short  time  they  recovered  their  perfect
health.  In  which  time  Primaleon  had  cer-
tified her  of  the  prosperous  success  of  Don
Duardos,  whom  she  verily  supposed  to  be
dead  long  before,  so  that  she  conceived  such
great  delight  in  this  report,  as  at  the  request
of  the  prince,  she  left  her  House  of  Sadness,
and  returned  to  her  former  mansion,  named
the  Garden  of  Damsels.  Primaleon  bavin 2:
borne  her  company  longer  than^willingly  he
would,  and  declared  to  her  the  names  of  the
2    R


4Jâ

knights  that  were  prisoners  \vilh  Don  Diiar-
clos,as  also  the  manner  of  ilieir  happy  deliver-
anec,  accompanied  with  the  Tristful  knight,
he  took  his  leave  of  her,  she  heing  loth  they
should  depart  so  soon,  hut  persuaded  hy
their  earnest  alVairs,  gave  them  the  courtesy,
and  so  they  left  her.

They  two  thus  riding  together,  the  Tristful
knight  desired  his  father,  that  he  might
leave  his  company,  hecause  the  affection  to
his  lady  directed  his  travtl  into  Spain  ;  who
denied  not  his  son's  request,  because  himself
was  minded  to  ride  alone,  to  the  end  he
might  make  the  better  proof  of  his  valour.
So  advising  him  first  to  that  temperance  of
mind  which  in  all  his  dealings  it  behoved  him
especially  to  preserve,  when  they  came
where  the  road  divided  itself  into  two
branches,  he  gave  him  his  blessing,  and  tak-
ing one  way  himself,  the  Tristful  knight  took
the  other,  riding  towards  her  for  whose
sweet  sake  he  lived  in  great  affliction  and
anguish  of  mind  ;  where  at  this  time  we  will
leave  him,  and  Return  to  the  prince  Prima-
leoHj  who  not  encountering  any  adventure.


459

by  this  time  is  come  to  Constantinople;,
whereas  often  he  wished  himself,  hecause
he  had  heard  of  the  soldan's  army,  which
was  of  such  force,  that  it  caused  the  whole
empire  to  stand  in  great  fear.  Primaleon
being  entered  into  the  city,  kept  close  his
beaver,  because  he  would  not  be  known  to
any:  but  intended  to  come  suddenly  upon
his  friends,  to  give  them  the  greater  joy.
Being  come  to  the  palace,  and  having  de-
livered his  horse  to  his  squire,  he  went  up
into  the  2;reat  hall,  where  the  emoeror  had
just  finished  meat,  in  the  same  armour,  of
G;reen  and  "old,  that  he  used  auainst  the  Trist-
fui  knightj  which  was  very  much  defaced  with
the  blows  he  had  received,  causing  great
astonishment  to  all  that  w^ere  present,  who
gave  him  Avay  to  conic  before  the  emperor.

He  came  on  with  so  commanding  a  step,
that  by  that  alone  he  would  have  been  known
in  that  house,  if  length  of  time  had  not  pre-
vented it.  Then  kneeling  down,  not  having
yet  taken  off  his  helmet,  he  besought  the
emperor  to  be  pleased  to  hear  him  before
the  empress  and  his  daughter-in-luw,  that  he

n    f>    n

^     X\.     ^


46o

might  give  them  tidings  of  the  court  of
England.  The  emperor  made  answer,  You
come  then  from  such  a  place  that  we  will  do
whatever  you  desire,  for  the  sake  of  hearing
you.  So  rising  up,  accompanied  hy  some  of
his  attendants,  he  conducted  him  to  the  em-
press's cliamber,  where  Gridonia  and  Ba-
silia  were  present  ;  when  the  emperor,  little
thinking  who  the  messenger  was  whom  he
had  led  thither,  said  to  them.  Ladies,  this
knight  cometh  from  the  court  of  England,
and  would  not  declare  his  tidings  to  me  sin-
gly, that,  if  they  are  as  joyful  as  I  hope,  I
might  not  enjoy  them  without  you.  God
grant,  replied  the  empress,  that  they  may
prove  so,  for  the  tarriance  of  my  son  m.'ikes
me  fear  otherwise.  With  that  the  empe-
ror sate  down  hy  the  ladies  ;  Primaleon  look-
ed round  at  one  and  then  at  another,  behold-
ing them  earnestly,  because  he  perceived
them  grown  into  great  alteration,  especially
the  emperor  his  father,  who  was  greatly  aged
since  he  saw  him  last,  and  Gridonia,  whose
beauty  was  much  impaired  with  the  conti-
nual mourning  she  used  for  the  absence  of
her  lord  ]  nor  was  it  strange  that  this  should


46  i

appear,  since  Polinarda  was  by  her,  beside
v.hom  none  could  appeai  beautiful.  Prima-
leon  stood  gazing  on  them  awhile  in  silence,,
they  the  while  wondering  that  he  did  not
speak;  at  length  kneeling  down  before  the
emperor  he  said.  Sir,  if  1  have  been  tardy
in  telling  you  who  I  am,  impute  it  not  tome
for  a  fault,  ft^r  the  change  which  I  see  here
hath  occasioned  it.  The  news  which  you
\vish  to  hear  from  the  court  of  England,  if
it  respects  your  son  Primaieon,  here  yon
have  him  to  speak  for  himself.  Then  taking
oif  his  helmet,  what  with  the  weight  of  arms
aiid  the  Igibour  of  the  road,  lie  appeared
with  a  rosy  colour  in  his  counteuaace,  so
comely  a  man,  that  in  him  they  found  no
alteration  since  the  day  wheii  he  had  lelt
them.

The  emperor  was  suddenly  rapt  with  such
an  inua;,i  joy,  that  tor  a  time  he  remained,
as  it  were  in  a  traace  ;  the  empress  and  Gri-
donia  took  him  to. ether  in  ttieir  arms,  em-
bracing him  so  cioseiy  thai  he  could  not  dis-
engage himself,  and  each  shtdtiing  as  many
tears  for  that  sudden  joy,  as  sorrow^  could
2  11  3


462

have  occasioned.  Basilia  also  came  to  him^
to  uhom  he  said  as  he  embraced  her,  Lady
sister,  prince  \  ernao  uill  soon  be  with  you,
for  the  remembrance  of  you  will  not  lei  him
rest  till  he  is  here.  Then  turning  round,  he
perceived  that  Polinarda  held  him  by  the
lappets  of  his  mail,  being  on  her  knees,  reach-
ing out  for  his  hand  that  she  might  kiss  it.
He  took  her  in  his  arms,  and  said  to  Grido-
nia,  I  did  think  there  had  been  any  thing  here
wiiich  could  have  given  me  so  much  cause
for  care,  for  the  remembrance  of  you  was
enough.  Being  your  daughter  and  the  grand-
child of  the  empress  my  lady,  I  do  not  mar-
vel that  from  such  excellent  ones,  a  thing
so  excellent  should  proceed.

Then  was  he  unarmed,  when  the  emperor
could  not  satisfy  himself,  till  he  had  heard
every  thing  concerning  thejoyful  news  lately
chanced  in  England  :  l)ut  when  he  under-
stood, how  Palmerin  was  son  to  Don  J)uar-
dos  and  his  daughter  Flerida,  the  contenta-
tion  which  he  then  received  was  so  great,
that  he  could  not  master  his  exceeding  joy,
discovering  it  in  ways  unusual  to  a  man  of


463

such  self  command.  The  joy  in  truth  was
general,  because  Palmerin  had  been  bred  up
in  that  court,  every  one  expressing  iheir
share  therein  except  Polinarda,  who,  though
she  above  all  others  esteemed  these  liappy
tidings,  concealed  her  joy  from  any  one,  Dra-
maciana  excepted,  from  whom  slie  kept
nothing  secret.  Great  feasts  were  held  in
the  court  of  the  people,  for  kniuhts  there
were  but  few.  Two  days  after  the  return  of
Primaleon,  Vernao  arrived,  wiien  Basilia's
happiness  was  completed,  and  the  fear  in
w'hich  till  now  she  had  lived,  put  out  of  mind  ;
for  in  whatever  is  earnestly  desired,  every
delay  makes  a  thousand  things  to  be  feared
which  the  heart  imagines.  After  him  every
day  other  knights  arrived  at  the  court,  whose
company  was  not  so  long  desired,  as  now
they  were  joyfully  and  heartily  embraced.
In  the  midst  of  this  great  triumphing  and
solace,  a  messenger  sent  from  the  soldan
Belagriz  presented  himself  before  the  em-
peror, who  disclosed  his  message  in  this
manner.

The  soldan  Belagriz,  my  lord  and  master.


454

kisseth  the  hand  of  your  excellency,  giving
you  to  iiiiderstand,  that  so  soon  as  he  \\as
arrived  at  his  court,  he  was  advertised  how
the  soldan  of  Babylon,  having  with  him  a
great  and  puissant  army,  prepared  himself
to  over-run  your  country  and  empire,  and
to  make  a  general  spoil  of  your  people  and
dominions,  j'our  estate  being  weakened
through  the  loss  of  tiiose  knights,  who  had
left  your  court  to  seek  the  adventure  of
Great  Britain.  But  when  he  was  taking
ship,  and  his  army  at  pomt  to  hoist  their
sails,  word  was  brought  him,  how  certain
lords  in  his  realm  had  levied  a  number  of
his  own  subjects,  to  enter  arms  against  him,
for  that  they  were  able  no  longer  to  suffer
his  oppressing  tyranny.  Upon  this  occasion,
perforce,  he  stayed  hi>  army  to  bring  them
in  obeisance,  which  thing  hé  could  not  do,
without  the  loss  of  more  than  a  hundred
thousand  lives  on  both  sides,  whereby  not
only  hath  his  armament  broken  up,  but  he
himself  is  so  weakened  and  in  such  fear,  that
laying  aside  all  thoughts  of  conquering  the
dominions  of  another,  he  would  rejoice  to
be  secure  in  his  own.     Of  this  the  soldan  my


455

master  adviseth  you,  being  grieved  himself
that  it  should  be  so,  for  the  desire  he  hath
that  your  majesty  should  make  proof  of  his
true  friendship.

Certes,  said  the  emperor,  I  alvvay  knew  the
soldan  Bclagriz  to  be  my  great  friend.  The
news  wliioli  lie  hath  sent  me  Í  rejoice  in,  not
for  any  fear  of  these  people,  but  lor  the  good
will  wliicli  he  thus  manifesteth.  Do  you  rest
here  to  da}';  to-morrow,  or  when  you  will,
you  may  depart,  but  for  so  long  a  journey
some  repose  is  needful.  Now  rehearse,  how
fareth  thy  lord  since  his  coming  home.  My
lord,  answereth  the  messenger,  ever  since
his  arrival,  hath  delighted  to  discourse  of
the  strange  adventures,  which  not  long  ago
are  brought  to  end  in  Great  Britain  :  which
how  rare  they  be,  I  need  not  to  rehearse.
You  say  true,  quoih  lhe  emperor,  and  certes,
the  imprisonment  of  Don  Duardos  will  cause
the  castle  of  Dramuziando  to  remain  in  per-
petual and  renowned  memory.  Thus  con-
cluding their  talk,  the  emperor  went  to  the
empress's  chamber,  where  he  rehearsed  the
message  from  the  soldan  Belagriz  :  and  oa


466

the  morrow  the  messenger  departed,  bearing
with  hiui  the  emperor's  letters  to  his  lord,
isow  was  the  co^irt  and  citizens  replenished
wiih  as  great  joy,  as  before  they  were  lilled
with  heaviness,  «hen  they  stood  in  fear  of
the  army  of  the  soldan  of  Babylon.


END   OF  VOL.  !.


Print, >l  b;i  ir  PopU,
22,  Old  BMMeU  Court,  Strar.i


P*i^UING  SECT.   AUQ


}^


i  -i


«

•d

o

o

C--

TO

«0

•H

o

O

-í

C3

o

^

u^

U

jË-


H

bCÍM

PI    O



PALMERIN OF ENGLAND
VOLUME II

■.''  -.J:  ■  h'.'iX:-,


I


^**   ïi>-/^


^?


■  :»    -


^■lí'-'^-:


■""^vivfcy  f /»  4^iví*  íiíi  >»J^ji»\^wiw


>■»  /'lite.   >


^>  :s


D       >         '  — '*

.;  ->   '  >  y»

>   J  ^  Ifc»

,5>-  :>  >  y]y>

■f  >•>  'D

BV    >>      <•

>    ;>  .Í  J  V.  •      •

,^.  ^^    ./  -I  •

>  .*     >  '  *  >

,ji    >^.     .  .J  ■

"^_

?  "  i: .

»

^.'^  ■>  >^

>•  Hfc   >  >  ■■

■^».  "^  :». -^

5f'^>


^»  •

.'3»  .

>^    13k

■>

:>j,JSk

■    -J^

ri^

.i^-

>   --'T»  y

>   >  .

'/    JS^

>>>-

'    ..:3>..u

OJ-

Ai1IP»-»>.-   '

>    5  :


^■i


lâalmerm  of  Cngianîs,

L^    FOUll    VOLUMES.


CORRECTED    BV


ROBERT  SOUTIIEY,

FROM    THE    ORIGINAL    PORTUGUEZE.


ÎÊalmerin  of  €nglaní>.


VOT.     TI.


LONDON:

rUINTHD  FOR  LONGMAN,  HUUST,REES,  AMD  ORWï,
PATERNOSTKR   ROW.

1807.


594988

t0"  ic  ^4


fV  Pople,  Priuter,
Í2  Old  Boswell  Court,  Strand.


CHAPTER  50.


Because  the  author  hath  all  this  while  given
no  account  of  Floienclos,  son  to  Prinialeon,
who  at  this  present  ternutii  himself  the
Tristful  Knight,  he  now  gives  the  reason  of
this  pretermission,  which  is  this.

At  such  time  as  he  departed  from  Constan-
tinople, together  with  divers  knights,  every
one  taking  his  own  way,  his  course  wa.>
wide  of  all  the  others.  He  left  the  court,
intending  to  make  for  Great  Britain  ;  and

VOL.    II.  B


travelling  tliilhcnvard  came  to  a  haven  of
the  c'.r.,  where  embarking  himself  in  a  mer-
chant of  England,  time  and  occasion  so
served  that  they  took  their  departure.
Having  endured  so  long  on  tlie  seas,  that
they  knew  themselves  to  be  within  ken  of
England,  on  a  sudden  a  contrary  wind  came
upon  them,  which  in  short  time  made  them
lose  sight  of  land.  By  this  the  night  came
on  with  such  utter  darkness,  and  the  wind
freshened  to  audi  force,  that  the  pilot  lo.>»t
all  knowledge  of  where  he  was,  and  the  ma-
riners had  no  other  sense  left  them  than  to
think  of  death,  having  no  hope  to  escape  ;
the  uproar  and  fear  in  the  ship  being  so
great  that  no  one  had  strength  for  any  tiling
more  than  to  lament  his  own  unhappiness.
riorendos  hearing  from  his  cabin  these  la-
mentations, and  knowing  destruction  to  be
so  nigh,  went  out  upon  deck,  and  more  by
threats  than  by  persuasion,  made  the  mari-
ners full  to  work,  which  they  had  before
abandoned,  thinking  it  of  no  avail.  Then
they  preserved  the  ship  till  day-break,  the
\ight  whereof  brought  them  some  little  con-


solation,  though  the  wind  abated  nothing
of  its  violence,  but  seemed  instead  to  double
its  force  and  quantity.  Eight  days  with
their  nights  they  endured  this  tempest,  driv-
ing all  that  time  under  bare  poles,  without
ever  seeing  land  or  knowing  whitlier  they
were  driven.  At  length,  as  if  the  weather
were  weary  of  persecuting  them,  the  wind
fell,  and  they  found  themselves  upon  the
coast  of  Spain,  and  even  so  far  advanced
along  it  that  they  were  well  nigh  at  the
land's  end  of  warlike  Lusitânia,  a  province
inhabited  at  that  time  by  many  and  right
brave  knights,  and  where,  by  virtue  of  the
planet  which  governs  it,  full  famous  ones
have  alway  flourished,  though  now  indeed
those  of  the  most  renown  were  gone  in
search  of  Kccindos  their  natural  lord  and
king  :  of  whom  nothing  was  known,  he
being  in  the  castle  of  Uramuziando,  as  ye
have  heard.  The  sailors  and  pilot  knowing
the  coast,  determined  to  laud  at  the  city  of
Altarocha,  that  is  to  say,  the  High  Kock,
which  was  afterwards  called  X^isbon;  a  name
which  they  say  is  derived  from  the  founder^
thereof.

B  $


Florendos  seeing  himself  so  far  from  the
place  Avhither  he  directed  his  course,  and
Avould  have  so  gladly  attained,  could  not
conceal  the  vexation  he  endured  ;  but  soon
laying  aside  that,  inasmuch  as  it  afforded  no
remedy,  he  took  his  arms,  and  ordering  his
horse  and  that  of  Armclo,  his  squire,  to  be
disembarked,  landed,  not  choosing  to  enter
the  city;  for  in  those  days  adventures  were
more  certain  in  forests  than  in  towns.  So
he  bco;an  to  travel  through  the  kingdom  of
Portugal,  passing  through  many  perilous  ad-
ventures so  greatly  to  his  own  honour,  that
in  all  that  land  the  whole  talk  was  of  his  re-
nown. And  thus  wandering  on  from  one
part  to  another,  one  day,  being  at  the  hour
of  vespers  and  in  the  month  of  April,  and  he
little  thinking  what  might  befal  him,  found
himself  beside  theTagus,  who  with  his  calm
and  stately  stream  waters  the  chief  places  of
warlike  Lusitânia  till  he  enters  the  sea.  In
those  days  it  was  bordered  with  woods, which
in  many  places  hid  the  river  from  sight.
He  riding  upward  along  its  banks,  had  not
proceeded  far  before  he  perceived,  upon  a
little  islet  which  the  river  formed,  a  rock-


castle,  so  well  situate,  and  of  such  warlike
appearance,  that  it  was  vvortliy  to  be  seen,
and  more  so  to  be  feared,  by  one  who  knew
its  perils.  About  a  stone's  throw  ofY  before
he  reached  it  he  saw  three  fair  damsels  dis-
porting under  the  trees,  enjoying  the  shade
thereof,  which  in  truth  was  greatly  to  be  en-
joyed, the  day  bcin;;  full  hot  j  and  they  so
engaged  in  their  jnirlh  that  they  did  not
perceive  him  till  he  was  so  near  that  it  was
loo  late  for  them  to  i\y.  Florendos  looked
at  them  all,  and  in  her  who  seemed  to  him
to  be  the  chief  among  them,  according  to
ilie  respect  which  the  others  paid  her,  he
saw  a  greater  difference  of  beauty  than  he
had  ever  believed  it  possible  there  could  be
in  one  woman  from  all  others.  Shall  we  say^
that  Florendos  was  enamoured  at  this  fair
spectacle  ?  he  cmild  as  well  eschew  it  as  the
bird  last  caught  in  the  fowler's  snare,  so  that
from  that  instant  he  changed  his  mirth  into
moans,  his  talk  int»  tears,  aind  the  whole
course  of  liis  affection  into  a  lover's  com-
plexion. This  sudden  affection  was  much
more  increased,  inasmuch  as  he  perceived
in  her  an  honourable  security,  grace,  anci
»  3^


easiness;  things  which  compel  mm  to  admi-
ration. And  seeing  that  they  retired  into
tiic  castle,  he  had  not  present  sense  enough
to  speak  to  them,  for  his  astonishment  at
Avhat  he  had  seen  hewildered  him.  But
M'hen  he  saw  that  they  were  gone  in  and  he
"Was  left  alone,  lie  hegan  lor  the  lirst  time  to
teel  those  amorous  accidents,  to  which  his
heart  was  now  made  subject.  And  going
lîp  to  the  castle  gate  he  found  it  closed,  hut
over  it,  it  being  of  stone  work,  there  was  a
shield  of  marble  set  in  the  wall  and  on  that
shield  the  portraiture  of  the  lady  whom  he
had  seen,  which  he  judged  to  be  handled  in
such  perfection,  tliat  it  wanted  nothing  hut
life  in  resemblance  of  the  person.  Upon  the
Jap  of  the  picture  was  written  in  white  letter
jVIira<;t:arda,  which  Florendos  judged
to  be  her  name,  and  that  in  its  signification
of  Behold  and  Beware,  it  spoke  truth,  the
sight  of  that  lady  being  equally  to  be  desired
and  dreaded.  Yet  were  not  those  letters
placed  there  to  that  intent,  but  only  to  ad-
vertise such  knights,  as  took  occasion  to  tra-
vel that  way,  to  be  careful  to  themselves  lor
feur  of  the  giant  Almourol,  lord  of  that  cas-


tie,  from  wliom  nfterwards  it  took  its  namp,
who  had  placed  it  there  to  show  that  the
shield  was  to  be  looked  at,  and  he  was  to
defend  it.  He,  to  show  that  his  intention
was  true,  sallied  ont  while  FJorendos  was
readini^  the  inscription,  armed  in  plate-mail
of  green,  no  less  fair  than  strong,  and
mounted  on  asturd\'  black  courser,  as  huge
and  strong  as  was  needful  to  bear  such  a
weight.

Knight,  said  he  to  riorendos,  surc/y  these
letters,  if  you  had  rightly  understood  them,
might  have  taught  you  that  your  tarriance
here  would  be  excused.  If  the  other  doubts
in  which  they  have  placed  mc,  replied  the
knight,  were  not  greater  than  the  fear  which
thy  words  occasion,  Í  should  be  in  less
trouble  than  they  have  caused  me.  And  so
from  words  they  kindled  into  such  anger^
that  a  tierce  battle  ensued,  well  fought  and
perilous  ;  in  wliich  the  giant  Almourol  gave
proof  of  his  great  strength  ;  but  Florcndos
seeing  that  Miraguarda,  with  her  damsels
Lademia  and  Ardemia,  beheld  him  from  the
battlements,  enforced  himself  to  the  utmost,


9

and  brought  the  g'umt  into  such  a  plight^
that  he  could  not  by  any  means  have
escaped  from  his  hands,  if  she  had  not  de-
scended, and  said  to  him,  Knight,  1  beseech
you,  if  any  thing  in  the  world  can  make  you
give  over  this  battle,  do  it  for  my  sake,  and
forbear  to  slay  this  giant,  who  is  a  person  to
whom  I  am  greatly  indebted,  and  is  the  chief
guard  I  have  in  the  fortress.  Lady,  replied
Florendos,  these  words  and  she  who  speaks
them  have  such  power  over  me,  that  I  know
not  for  whom  1  would  do  more  than  for
them.  The  giant  may  do  what  he  will  with
himself,  and  you  what  it  please  you  to  com-
mand with  me;  for  I  am  in  such  state  that  I
know  not  if  I  could  do  otherwise.

Miraguarda  giving  him  thanks  for  his  cour-
tesy, returned  into  the  castle  again,  accom-
panied with  the  giant;  Florendos  still  re-
maining without,  feeling  the  wound  he  re-
ceived by  her  beauty  more  than  the  hurts
he  had  gained  through  the  giant,  of  which
his  squire  healed  him.  After  his  recovery
he  continued  there  long  time,  keeping  the
shield  of  Mixaguardïi,  entering  the  combat


9

in  its  defence  with  all  the  knights  that  made
their  journey  that  way,  which  indeed  were
many,  through  the  singular  report  of  her
beauty^  yet  Fortune  preferring  Florendos,
caused  him  still  to  remain  the  conqueror.
In  all  this  time  it  was  never  necessary  for
the  giant  to  come  out,  for  he  kept  the  field
for  him.  And  if  at  any  time  he  was  at  lei-
sure he  passed  it  in  melancholy  contempla-
tions under  the  trees,  recounting  his  own
sorrows,  sometimes  to  himself,  at  other
times  to  the  picture  which  hung  over  the
gateway,  ready  for  his  complaints,  and  giv-
ing no  reply.  And  though  Miraguarda  saw
all  this,  she  was  of  so  free  a  nature  that  she
accepted  his  services  because  it  pleased  her,
and  dissembled  what  she  saw,  meaning  to
deny  him  the  guerdon.  But  when  fame
had  blown  abroad  the  adventure  of  Great
Britain,  how  the  knights  were  continually
lost  in  the  castle  of  the  giant  Dramuziando  ;
Miraguarda  had  now  such  confidence  in  his
valour,  that  she  sent  liim  thither,  believing
that  the  enterprize  would  be  atchievcd  by
him,  and  tlie  glory  of  so  signal  a  victory  be
hers,  because  he  would  have  undertaken  it


10

at  her  command.  Florendos,  contented  that
his  lady  commanded  liim  in  any  thing,  ar-
rived in  England  at  such  time  as  the  adven-
ture was  finished,  and  the  princes  were  pre-
paring themselves  to  come  to  the  castle,
where  on  the  bridge  he  attended  their  com-
in2;,  and  behaved  himself  aG;ainst  them  as  vou
have  heard  before.  But  returning  to  Mira-
guarda,  you  have  before  heard  whosedanghier
she  was, and  how  surpassing  in  form  and  fea-
ture Nature  had  made  her  ;  but  you  have
not  been  resolved  wherefore  she  dwelt  in  this
castle,  which  was  for  tiiis  reason.

At  such  time  as  king  Reclndos  was  prisoner
in  the  enchanted  castle,  and  that  many
princes  of  Spain  had  betaken  themselves  to
his  search,  the  queen  remained  in  such
grievous  sorrows,  that  nothing  could  move
or  procure  her  to  any  pleasure.  Whereupon
the  count  Arlao  presented  his  daughter
ISliraguarda  to  the  queen,  to  the  end  that
she  might  receive  some  pleasure  by  her
company  ;  but  the  noble  gentlemen  de-
lighted with  this  rare  piece  of  beauty,  en-
terprized  jousts  and  triumphs,  only  to  win


n

her  to  whom  they  were  so  affectioned.  So
til  at  the  expences  of  them  were  so  great,
to  do  her  pleasure  who  httle  regarded  it,
that  many  of  them  were  brought  into  great
necessit}^,  only  by  the  riotous  charges  her
beauty  set  them  at.

The  queen  was  displeased  to  see  greater  fes-
tivities than  those  of  any  former  time,  when
the  king  her  husband  was  absent^  and  she
herself  in  such  sorrow  ;  and  moreover  such
rivalry  for  this  fair  lady,  that  factions  were
daily  arising,  in  which  certain  chief  persons
and  good  knights  persisted,  so  that  unless
some  remedy  were  appointed  Spain  would
be  brought  to  great  danger.  And  the  count,
who  was  a  discrete  personage  and  a  wise,
sent  for  the  giant  Almourol,  a  person  of
more  credit  in  court  than  was  to  be  expect-
ed for  a  giant,  and  besought  hiui  to  take
M'ith  him  certain  knights  and  goutlcuonien
to  attend  upon  her,  and  keep  her  till  such
time  as  he  should  aj)j)olnt  bcr  nianiage,
which  at  that  instant  he  could  not  dispatch,
for  certain  reasons  which  prevented  it.  And
so  he  ticnt  her  to  the  cusilc  of  the  giant  Al-


12

nionrol,  where  she  remained  till  the  discords
occasioned  by  her  beauty  were  forgotten,
and  she  came  away  in  the  manner  whicli
hereafter  you  shall  hear.  Wherefore  it  may
be  believed,  that  oftentime  great  evils  are
but  the  beginnincf  of  grcBter  good.


13


CHAPTER    5ï


So  long  remained  Palmerin  in  the  conrt  of
the  king  of  England,  his  grandfather,  that
some  without  reason  began  to  marvel  at  his
tarriance,  in  which  he  had  little  fault  :  for
the  earnest  entreaty  of  his  mother  urged  him
to  stay  longer  than  gladly  he  would  ;  Flerida
tiesiring  with  those  i'cw  days  of  his  company
to  make  amends  for  the  sorrow  of  tiiose  in
^\l^ich  she  had  not  sccu  him.  At  last,  when
it  seemed  wrong  longer  to  delay  him^  and
she  could  do  no  other,  she  gave  him  and
I'lorian  also  leave  to  depart.

Palmerin,  having  taken  leave  of  Don  Duar-
dos  and  Flerida,  went  to  the  king,  who  was
by  no  means  willing  that  he  should  go,  tliink-

VQL.  II,  <


u

'ing,  by  reason  of  his  great  age,  that  he  should
never  sec  liini  again  ;  but  he  promising  to
return  as  soon   as  lie  couid,   went  his  way,
leaving  behind  him  greater    regret  in  that
court  than   had  ever  been  felt   for  the  de-
parture   of     others.        This    however    vviu
doubled    when    shortly    afterward    Tlorian
departed  also,  no  one  but  being  sad  for  the
loss  of   the    company    of  two  such  singular
princes.     And  ihougli    the   going  of    Pal-
rncrin  was  a  great  trouble  to  the  king  and  to
rierlda^  still  greater  was  that  of  Florian  of
the  Desert:  foras  he  from  his  childhood  had
been  brought  up  among  them,  the  love  of
him  was  greater,  though  the  exploits  of  Pal-
cieria  were  esteemed  above  his.

Palmcrin  journeyed  he  knew  not  where;  he
durst  not  take  his  way  to  Constantinople,
fearing  to  displease  his  lady  Polinarda;  but
remembering  how  near  they  were  in  aftinity,
he  had  good  hope  she  would  make  more
estimation  of  his  service.  Contenting  him-
self with  this  thought,  he  rode  on  till  at
knith,  beinii;  far  from  London,  he  arrived  in
a  large  and  uainhabitcd  valltn-,  in  the  mid-t


15

whereof  stood   a  single  tree,  so  large  and
goodly,  that  with   its   ample  branches  and
graceful  boughs  it  occupied    great  part  of
tlie  Held.     At  the  foot  of  the  tree  a  kuight
lay  sleeping,,  armed  in  black  arms,  and  upon
his  shield    which   was   then   his    pillow,  a
white  unicorn  spotted  with  black  in  a  field
sable.     Palinerin  sctins;  him  without  horse
or  squire,   thus  alone,  and    lying  with   his
breast  to  the  earth,  had  compassion  on  him,
thinking  that  he  would  not  be  thus  without
some  great  disaster,  and  that  he  must  need»
be  a  man  of  worth,  according  to  the  good-
ness of  his  armour.     So  he  moved  him  with
liii  lance,  saying.  Sir  knight,  rest  should  be
taken  with  less  security  in  a  place  like  this.
The  knight  feeling  himself  touched,  suddenly
awaked,  and  settiug  hand  to  his  sword,  start-
ed up  :  when,  ;is  he  was  without  his  helmet,
Palmcrin   knew  him   to  be  the  prince  Gra-
ciauo  ;  and  being  amazed  at  finding  him  in
this  manner  in  such  a   solitary  and    unfre-
quented  place  of  passage,  said  to  him.  Sir
Graciano,  you  should  receive  with   less  an-
ger him  who  so  greatly  desires  to  serve  you.
Then  taking  off  his  helmet  that  he   might
c  'Z


16

be  known,  Cjiaciano  could  not  conceal  liis
joy  for  so  hiippy  a  meeting  in  time  of"  sucli
need.  Now  I  know^  sir  Palmcrin,  said  he,
that  the  mislbrtunes  of  all  others  are  to  be
remedied  bv  von.  But  to  detain  vou  bv
relating  what  Inxs  past  might  l)c  a  great  evil.
Go  your  way,  and  you  may  help  Platir  and
FJoraman,  who  are  in  great  danger  of  being
lost  ;  I  will  mount  beliind  Selviam,  and  if
"we  cannot  get  there  together  we  will  meet
>vithin  ten  days  at  the  hermitage  of  the  left-
ijaad  pillar  which  is  ten  leagues  off.

Palmerin  agreeing  to  this  appointment,  and
not  tarrying  to  hear  more,  set  spurs  to  his
borse,  and  rode  as  fast  as  possible  down  the
valley.  He  had  not  rode  long  but  that  he
came  to  a  place  Avhere  two  paths  served  two
several  ways;  and  not  knowing  which  way  he
were  best  to  take,  he  espied  a  damsel  come
riding  towards  him,  her  hair  loose,  and  she
using  such  speed  as  the  fear  she  was  in  occa-
sioned. Palmerin,  desirous  to  know  from
what  she  fled,  caught  the  reins  of  her  palfrey
and  stopt  her.  U  hereat  she  cried.  Let  me
go,  sir,  you  do   n)e  more  hurt   by  deUning


17

mr,  than   good  by  wiáliing  to  know  what
aiiVaysme,  as  it  would  prolitme  little  to  tell
you.     I  know  not  that,  quoth  Palmerin,  but
before  I  let  you  go,  I  will  know  what  you
are  flying  from.    The  damsel,  who  Avould  fain
Bot  have  been  letted  on  her  way,  seeing  no
remedy,  replied.  Since  it  is  of  no  avail  to
beseech  you  to  let  me  go^  turn  with  me,  and
I  will  show  you  what  you  desire  to  know.
So  riding  on  with  her,  ere  long  he  espied  a
goodly  castle,  and  heard  a  great  clashing  and
bruit  of  weapons,  to  whose  noise  the  damsel
brought  him,  and  showed  him   where,  in  a
little  field  at  the   foot  of  that  castle,    ten
Jinights    had    settled    themselves    in    fight
against   two,  who  defended  them  with  so
great    policy,   and  charged    their   enemies
with  such  courage  of  mind,  that  every  blow
they  gave  did  its  business.     By  the  gate  of
the  castle  stood   certain  men,  holding  two
fair  damsels,  with  whom  they  would   have
entered  into  the  castle,  but  that  these  two
knights  bestirred  themselves  so  watchfully
that  it  was  not  possible  for  them  to  open  the
gate.

c  3


18

Pulincria  stood  looking  on  a  mIiíIp,  well
pleased  to  behold  their  prowess,  «lad  puiising
>vithiii  liiinselF  their  courage,  as  it  deserved
to  be  lauded.  'I'lie  knights  who  were  striv-
insi  lo  take  these  twain  were  now  so  wearv
and  discomfited,  and  .  brought  into  such
weakness,  that  five  of  them  lay  on  the
ground,  unable  to  rise  and  assist  their  com-
rades ;  but  the  two  had  not  escaped  so
lightly  but  that  their  blood  bedied  the  grass
of  the  fii'ld  ;  and  the  horse  of  one  was  slain,
bat  he  fought  on  loot  so  manfully,  that
\vherever  his  sword  fell  armour  was  of  little
iivail  against  it.  At  this  time  there  issued
out  from  the  castle  by  a  postern,  a  knight  of
huge  stature,  in  green  arms,  and  upon  a  roan
horse.  Ten  brigands  were  with  him,  and  he
shaking  a  lance  with  such  might  that  he  had
well  nigh  broken  it,  advanced  himself  to  lhe
remainder  of  those  that  were  left  alive  of
the  ten  knights,  and  endnred  still  the  com-
bat with  the  other  twain,  saying.  Retire  you
varlets  and  cowards,  and  let  me  break  the
bones  of  these  caitills,  who  have  procured
me  to  such  high  displeasure.


19

When  Palmcrin  saw  this,  linowing  that  tlie
two  knights  were  now  in  feehle  state  and
ill  able  to  cope  with  one  of  .such  huge  sta-
ture, he  advanced  to  meet  him,  saying,  ShoAV
your  strength  to  me,  and  leave  these  who  arc
too  weak  to  make  resistance.  So  running  at
him  they  met  with  such  puissance,  that  being
unable  to  resist  the  encounter,  they  were
sent  together  violently  to  the  earth,  each  to
his  own  great  amazement.  Then  falling  to
the  combat  of  the  sword,  such  a  cruel  battle
began  as  neither  of  them  liad  for  long  time
found  liimsclf  engaged  in.  Meantime  the
ten  bi^igands  went  to  the  aid  of  the  knights
who  were  combating  with  the  other  two,
thinking  their  master  needed  no  succour;
and  by  reason  of  the  wounds  they  had  aU
readv  received,  and  their  weakness  after  so
long  fight,  would  now  soon  have  taken  them
if  at  this  time  (iraciano  had  not  come  up
behind  Selviam,  and  so  did  his  devoir  among
them,  encouraging  the  other  twain  by  his
seasonable  help,  that  in  sliort  time  none  was
left  to  abide  their  blows.  Palnierin  the  while
did  his  battle  with  Dannaco  the  lord  of  the
castle,  and  seeing  that  all  his  strength  was
called  for,  put  it  forth,  iill  ;ii  la<t  with  a  blow


20

upon  the  head,  which  reached  the  brain,  he
laid  him  at  his  feet.  Then  taking  off  his
helmet  to  see  in  what  plight  he  was,  he
found  that  his  soul  had  left  his  body,  to  go
and  dwell  in  a  worse  place,  which  was  hell,
the  right  reward  for  liis  deeds.  His  people
seeing  their  lord  slain  ran  into  the  castle,
and  betook  themselves  to  dark  cellars  and
vaults,  in  fear  of  losing  iheir  lives.

Palmerin  seeing  the  field  was  theirs,  wint  to
the  ladies,  who  were  pale  of  colour,  by  rea-
son of  the  great  fear  they  had  stood  in,  and
were  greatly  amazed  to  see  that  terrible  Dar-
maco  slain  who  had  put  them  in  such  great
danger.  He  seeing  how  fair  they  were,  said
to  them,  I  know  not  yet,  ladies,  what  offence
they  have  done  you  here,  but  this  I  know,
that  you  are  not  those  to  whom  any  offence
should  have  been  offered.  At  this  Platir  and
Floraman  came  up  with  their  helmets  off  to
embrace  him,  and  gave  him  hearty  thanks
for  his  timely  succour.  Nay,  answered
Palmerin,  give  your  thanks  to  sir  Graciano,
for  1  could  ill  have  divined  the  peril  in  which
you  stood.  Then  they  went  into  the  castle,
where  tliey  found  no  body  but  two  oid  wo-


21

men,  who  sat  Avringinii;  their  hands  for  the
death  of  Darmaeo  ;  and  seeing  them  coming
in  that  liad  slain  him  and  all  his  companions,
dissembled  the  grief  and  mortal  hatred  which
lemained  in  their  hearts, and  submitted  them-
selves, fearing  least  they  should  taste  of  the
same  cup,  only  requesting  that  their  lives
migiit  he  saved  ;  which  Palmerin  did  j)re-
seiitlv  grant  them,  his  nature  not  being  to
deny  any  thing  to  women.  The  damsels
were  lodged  bv  themselves,  and  Platir  and
I'loranjan  cured  of  their  wounds  by  Flora-
man's  squire,  who  was  right  cunning  in  these
matters.  Palmerin  wished  presently  to  know
who  the  lord  of  this  castle  was, and  what  had
been  his  manner  of  life.  Upon  which  one
of  the  old  wonren,  who  was  his  mother,  told
him  ho  was  called  Darmaco,  son  to  the  giant
Lurcon,  uhoni  Primaleon  slew  in  Constan-
tinople, at  such  time  as  he  cnterprized  to
revenge  the  death  of  Piiiquin  dc  Duazos.*


*  Primaleon,  P.  l.  C.  17.  '1  he  death  of  Piriquin  is  related
i;i  the  13th  chapter  of  the  same  Romance;  and  the  whole
incidents  of  the  book,  as  far  as  i'rinialcon  is  concerned,  fol-
low from  it.


But  being  the  son  of  a  lady  who  was  not  of
the  race  of  the  giants,  he  was  less  than  a
giant,  albeit  yet  so  mighty  and  so  devilish
in  his  deeds,  that  it  might  be  known  from
wUat  stock  he  was  sprung.


2^


CHAPTER  5^


The  knights  remaining  in  the  castle  till  their
wounds  were  healed,  Palmerin  determined
to  depart  from  thence  ;  but  first  he  desired
the  ladies  to  tell  him  how  it  happened,  that
they  became  so  oppressed  by  this  cruel  Dar-
Tuaco  ?  The  eldest  of  the  ladies  satisfied  his
request  in  this  manner  :  Sir  knight,  wc  are
the  daughters  of  a  lady,  who-  inhabits  not
far  from  tliis  place  in  her  castle,  where  we
hvcd  in  sucli  quiet  content  of  life,  and  so
well  guarded,  as  we  supposed,  from  any  cn-
aulng  danger,  that  we  feared  no  mishap.
But  as  none  can  avoid  what  the  destinies
have  ordained,  so  we  have  felt  part  of  the
rigour  of  this  cruel  tyrant.  For  he  being
iM)(hcted   to  such  a  cruel   nature,  that   the


tuiblo  he  rowavtled  with  bloody  murder,,
jiiir  Jadies  and  thimsels  he  defaced  of"  their
lionour,  and  used  all  alike  in  his  villainous
tiiry  ;  he  sent  tea  knights  to  the  eastic  of
our  mother,  who  finding  us  anda  kinswoman
in  our  company  altogether  un[)rovided  of
refuge  at  this  time,  insomuch  as  our  wonted
safety  gave  us  small  cause  of  doubt,  without
respect  to  lier  tears  or  our  complaints,
brought  Us  away  by  extreme  violence.

By  the  way  as  they  brouglit  us  wc  met  this
knight,  meaning  Graciauo,  whom  they  dis-
mounted, taking  hhn  unawares,  and  took  his
horse  because  it  was  a  goodly  one,  and  left
liim  on  fool  to  go  whither  he  pleased,  think-
ing scorn  to  accept  the  combat,  which  he
often  otfered  unto  them.  Leaving  him  there
alone,  they  brought  us  with  them  to  the
castle,  when  these  other  two  knights  swiftly
pursuing  after  us,  stood  our  defence  ;  of
what  followed,  and  of  how  well  you  stood
our  friend,  the  happy  eftect  remaineth  as  a
substantial  witness.  ^A  hen  Palmerin  ijcaril
this,  he  said  to  Graciano,  laughing  at  his
mishap,  Meihinks,  sir,  these  knights  v>oujd


25

not  tio  battle  with  you,  because  they  held
you  at  bo  httle.  He  then  learnt  from  him,
that  alter  he  had  thus  lost  his  horse  he  went
on  foot  to  the  tree  Avhcre  Pulmerin  had  found
him,  and  where  Plalir  and  Floraman  had  ap-
pointed to  meet,  who  were  already  there  ;  to
them  he  declared  the  mishap  of  the  ladies,
whcreuj)on  they  rid  hastily  after  them,  and
continued  the  combat,  as  you  have  already
heard.  The  damsel  whom  Palmerin  had
met  was  their  kinswoman,  who  had  escaped
when  rioraman  and  Platir  came  up  to  their
«uccour,  and  wa.-;  flying  as  fast  as  she  could
TO  her  aunt's  castle.  These  things  heing
known,  Palmerin  gave  the  castle  to  both  the
ladies,  in  recompenee  for  the  wrong  which
they  had  received  there  ;  and  taking  his
farewel  gently  of  them  all,  he  mounted  on
horseback  and  went  his  way.

The  ladies  were  very  careful  to  help  the
princes,  who  at  length  wcrebrougiit  to  their
former  strength;  where  they  j)assi.d  away
the  time  pkasantly  witii  the  ladies,  recount-
ing the  strang(!  adventures  which  they  had
happily    passed.      But    these  damsels,  while

VOL.    II.  D


J26

they  healed  one  wound  made  another,  so
that  there  soon  grew  up  great  love  between
them  and  Graciano  and  Platu":  for  Floraman
would  not  oflend  against  h  is  love  to  Altea  ;
and  the  damsels  remembering  the  good  office
which  they  had  received  at  the  hands  of
these  knights,  and  seeing  how  fair  they
were,  and  of  what  fair  speech,  requited  them
to  their  wish,  till  the  death  of  Darmaco  com-
ing to  the  ear  of  these  ladies'  mother,  caused
her  to  come  thither  to  see  her  daughters  ;
who  when  she  was  there  arrived,  gave  great
thanks  to  the  princes  for  their  employed
pams,  and  gratified  them  with  such  honour
as  she  could  devise  expedient  for  the  time
and  place.  Then  they  determined  to  de-
part, the  ladies  giving  them  leave,  albeit
loath.  Before  their  departure  the  knights
besought  them  to  use  courtesy  to  tlic  an-
cient mother  of  Darmaco,  because  she  was
not  culpable  in  his  mischievous  practices.
At  their  request  the  ladies,  willing  to  show
that  hberality  is  a  virtue  of  great  commen-
dation, and  perad venture  using  that  over-
geneiosity  which  dishonest  love  sometimes
briuo^s  with  it,  and  which  neither  regards


27

vhat  it  gives,  nor  \vhat  it  may  hereafter
want,  2;ave  her  the  castle  of  her  son  for  her
life,  even  as  they  had  themselves  received  it
of  Palmerin.

So  the  princes  going  into  the  armoury  of
Darmaco^  provided  themselves  each  one  of
a  notable  armour  ;  and  from  his  stable  like-
wise took  three  of  his  fairest  steeds,  which
might  better  serve  their  necessity  than  ro
abide  there,  and  put  to  no  exercise.  Then
leaving  the  ladies,  they  took  their  way  to-
wards the  city  of  Constantinople,


D  'J


28


CIÍJPTER  ò:l


When  rahneriíi  was  departed  from  llic  ras-
tlc  of  Darmaco,  lie  rode  wiihout  any  ad  ven-
ture for  tlic  space  of  three  days  together.
On  the  fourth,  when  it  was  nigh  sun-set,  he
heard  upon  the  right  the  sound  of  waters,
and  turning  that  way  came  to  the  sea  side,
which  by  reason  of  distcmperature  made  a
great  raging  ;  the  wind  Ulted  and  la^ihed  its
waves  against  the  rocks,  and  drove  them
into  the  caverns  which  they  had  lioUowcd
out  in  length  of  time,  with  a  roaring  which
was  heard  far  off;  but  within  the  caverns
was  such  that  it  seemed  to  shake  them  like
an  earthquake,  lie  went  along  the  shore
watching  these  works  of  Nature,  and  turn-
ing his   eves  on  all  sides,  that  their  occupa-


29

tion  might  drive  other  pensive  matters  forth
of  his  mind,  espied  presently  between  two
rocks,  which  made  a  quiet  Uttle  bay,  a  liirge
boat  fastened  by  a  rope  on  shore,  and  in  it
two  oars  laid  in  their  places  without  auy
person  to  ply  them,  whereat  he  marvelled
greatly  :  then  bidding  Selviam  take  his
horse,  for  he  would  get  into  the  boat,  not
being  able  to  conceive  why  it  should  be
there  without  hands.  Selviam  besought  him
to  change  his  mind  from  so  fond  an  enter-r
prize,  urging,  that  in  an  adventure  of  no
better  countenance,  it  was  but  mere  folly
to  liazard  his  person  ;  but  when  he  saw  his
words  might  attain  no  persuasion  from  his,
attempt,  he  suffered  him  to  use  his  will;  for
Avhcre  will  is  mistress  reason  is  set  at  little:
and  takinff  his  horse,  Palmerin  entered  th«
boat.  He  was  scarcely  in  before  Selviam
called  to  him  to  come  out  again  because
he  was  unarmed;  but  turning  his  eyes  toward
the  shore  he  perceived  that  he  was  already
a  stone's  throw  oil',  and  laying  hands  on  the
oars  to  row  back,  all  his  strength  was  not  so
great  but  that  the  spell  was  stronger  which
bore  him  away  ;  the  wind  was  off  shortr,  and,
D  3


30

it  rrcsliencd^  and  soon  carried  the  boat  to  a
distance.  Pulmerin  left  the  oars,  thinking
that  all  this  was  not  without  some  cause;
and  it  was  not  long  before  he  lost  sight  of
land.


Selviam  remained  in  such  heaviness  for  the
loss  of  his  master,  that  he  thought  to  stay  in
that  place  till  he  had  heard  some  tidings  of
him,  either-good  or  bad;  but  seeing  that  in
three  days  the  boat  did  not  return,  nor  any
other  bark  appear  in  which  he  miglit  go  iu
search  of  liim,  he  departed,  seeing  no  re-
mcd}^,  towards  London,  to  carry  the  news  to
the  king.  .  So  as  he  rode  sadly  from  thence,
leading  his  master's  horse,  he  espied  two
knights,  theone  in  white  armour  beset  with
pelicans  of  silver,  the  other  in  arms  of  red
and  carnation  colour.  Selviam  presently
knew  them  to  be  Francian  and  Ouistaldo,
whereat  he  f(;lt  some  poor  contentment,
thinking  that  when  they  knew  what  had  be-
fallen Palmerin  they  would  think  little  of  the
labour  of  seeking  him  :  for  this  is  one  of  the
good  things  of  friendship,  to  esteem  great
dangers  lightly,  in  cases  where  it  is  to  be


31

manifested.  Francian,  who  knew  liiin^  scc^
ing  him  come  upon  one  horse,  leaihng  an-
other hy  the  bridle,  feared  some  disaster  ;
but  when  he  and  Onistaldo  heard  what  had
chaneed,  their  fear  abated,  and  they  con»
ehided  that  Selviam  should  not  u;o  straiirht
to  London,  beeause  Flerida  and  the  king
would  eoneeive  great  grief  if  they  should
know  of  this  ehance.  So  appointing  with  him
a  plaee  where  he  should  await  them,  they
departed  from  him,  meaning  to  searcli/the
teas  until  they  might  hear  of  his  master.  •

'Hien  Selviam,  not  knowing  what  he  were
best  to  du,  dc.-tcrnii nud  to  go  to  the  giant
Draniuziando,  who.  entertained  him  with
kind  and  loving  courtesy,  besought  him  by
IK)  means  to  quit  the  castle  till  he  heard
news:  of  Palmerin  :  and  clasping  his  armour
on  his  back,  resolved  within  liimself  to  go
all  the  world  over  in  quest  of  him.  lint
Selviam,  who  could  not  bear  to  remain  idle,
determined  to  go  with  the  giant,  and  not
leave  him  as  long  as  he  continiu'd  in  thut
cat(  rpri/e,  seeing  the  afl'ection  of  the  giant
to  be  so  great  to  his  master's  welfuie,  a-  him-


as

seU  oould  wish.    Thus  leave  we  them  to  the
good  fortune  of  their  travail.

Return  we  now  to  Palmerin,  who,  travelling
over  that  sea  as  yc  have  heard,  went  on  all
day  and  night,  and  on  the  following  morn-
ing at  daj'-break  found  himself  at  the   foot
of  a  high  and  rugged  rock,  which  in  process
of  time  the  sea  had  wrought  into  an  island.
It  was  to   appearance    uninhabited,  for   he
could    see   nothing  but   high   trees.     There
landing  from  the  boat  in  a  port  between  two
hills,  he  began  to  ascend  by  a  narrow  path
in  the  rock,  so  steep  that  he  who  might  slip
^ould  have  far  to  fall.     This  was  so  painful
a  path,  that  before  he  had  reached  the  half
way  up,  he  was  fain   to  rest  three   or  four
times.  At  last  he  found  himself  in  a  fair  green
■meadow,  in  the  midst  whereof  was  placed
a  marble  stone  of  the  height  of  a  man,  with
an   inscription  upon  it:  Go  no  further.
When   he  had   read   this,   the   stone  being
placed  there,  as  he  supposed,  to  cause  all
passengers  to  be  afraid  they  knew  not  of
what,  his  mind  was  greatly  moved  to  see
the  end  of  this  adventure  ;  and  looking  back


53

îtc  saw  the  sea  far  below  hiin  at  the  foot  of
the  rock,  and  niarvelled  at  the  greatness
and  height  of  the  rock,  and  still  more  at
the  manner  of  its  composition:  for  it  was
all  round  so  .smooih  and  straight,  that  it
rather  seemed  to  be  a  work  of  excellent
masonry, .made  by  rule  and  measure,  than  a
«hing  of  nature;  and  though  the  isle  was
iidi  lour  leagues  in  circuit,  yet  in  the  whole
of  it  there  wiis  no  other  port  or  place  where
it  would  be  possible  cither  to  embark  or
land,  save  only  that  v\here  the  boat  had  put
in  with  him.

And  now  finiling  himself  sufficiently  re-
freshed to  proceed,  he  continued  to  ascend
by  a  broader  way,  ^vhich  led  from  that  mea-
dow to  the  summit -of  the  island,  so  fairly
ovi.'rbowered,  that  the  pleas^ire  of  beholding
llut  boughh  above  hiiu  made  the  way  less
painfuL  lie  had  not  travelled  long  before
he  tound  himself  on  the  top,  where  he  still
saw  nothing  more  than  trees  ofso"niany
various  sorts,  that  tliere  were  no  names  lor
Bueh  numberless  varieties-;  thegrountl  Avithal
so  sjnooth   and  level,  thai  it  seeujed   to  him


54

thf*  goodliest  tiling  in  the  ivovirt.  llip  only
fault  he  could  perceive  v/as,  that  the  sight
^vas  too  confined,  tlio?e  trees  being  so
thickly  set  that  the  eyes  could  not  enjoy  the
full  beauty  of  the  grove.  So  thinking  there
was  nothing  here  to  fear,  and  that  the  words
upon  the  marble  were  but  vanity,  he  went
on  till  at  last  he  was  benighted  ;  for  the
time  which  it  had  taken  him  to  climb  the
rock  was  so  great  that  it  had  fairly  finished
the  day,  and  now  it  became  so  dark  that  he
could  see  r.oihing.  Then  laying  him  down
on  the  grass  to  take  his  rest,  he  made  his
helmet  his  pillow,  and  so  determined  to
sleep  there  for  the  night.  But  such  were
the  motions  in  his  mind,  that  the  more  he
thought  to  take  quiet  rest,  the  farther  off  he
was  from  his  intent.  For  the  remembrance
of  his  lady  Polinarda  presented  itself  as  best
worthy  his  memor}",  because  he  had  been
so  long  absent  from  her,  yet  durst  not  en-
terprize  to  come  into  her  yiresence,  an4
the  loss  of  Selviam,  whose  counsel  always
served  as  an  especial  remedy  to  these
thoughts,  left  love  at  liberty  to  bring  to  mind
a  thousand  recollections.


35

Thus  spent  he  all  that  night  in  restless  fan-
cies, and  seeing  day  break  at  last,  laced  on
his  helmet,  that  if  any  danger  should  occur
he  might  be  better  prepared  for  it.  I'he
farther  he  advanced  into  the  isle,  the  fairer
it  seemed  ;  and  it  grieved  him  to  see  it  un-
inhabited :  for  as  for  the  words  he  had  read
upon  the  marble,  he  now  esteemed  them  to
be  tiat  mockagc,  because  he  could  perceive
nothing  that  deserved  such  a  sore  warning.
But  at  length,  among  the  thickest  of  those
trees  he  found  himself  in  a  great  field,  open
like  the  great  square  of  some  city,  encom-
passed on  all  ^lúcii  by  the  forest,  and  in  no
part  disproportioned.  In  the  middle  of  this
plain  was  a  fountain  raised  upon  a  font  of
stone  upon  a  marble  basement  ;  the  watjr
issued  from  the  mouths  ol  certain  animals
which  were  placed  on  the  font,  and  it  v.as
in  such  quanliry,  that  that  v\hich  ran  over
into  the  field  formed  a  little  river.  \A'haL
most  amazed  him  was,  that  this  place  v/as  on
the  summit  of  the  inouniain,  and  yet  the
water  rose  there  ;  a  thing  which  seemed  to
him  against  all  reason  and  ride  ol"  nature.
Al    the   foot    of  the  marble   busemeiu    two


56

íioíis  and  two  tygrrs  were  fastened,  fcarfu?
to  behold,  and  in  truth  of  fieiceneiss  which
might  well  be  feared.  Their  chains  ^vere  loni^
cnoMgh  to  lot  them  go  three  fathom  length
from  the  fountain,  made  of  metal  links  of
such  thickness  as  was  needed  for  their
strength,  fastened  at  one  end  unto  large
rings,  w  liich  were  rivctied  into  the  marble,
and  at  the  other  round  the  neck  of  the
beaste.  l^dnierin  well  knew,  that  whoever
vould  drink  at  tibat  fountain  must  needs
ask  leave  of  these  keepers,  who  would  give
it  to  none;  and  thinking  it  folly  to  mnke
the  attempt  and  provoke  the  hazard,  would
have  passed  ovi.  But  some  red  letters  upon
the  stone  of  the  font  stopt  him  :  it  was
written,  This  is  the  fountain  or  the
\visnED  WATER.  And  going  a  little  far-
ther, he  espied  another  inscription,  which
was  thus;    He  that  drinketh  of  this

FOUNTAIN  SHALL  BRING  TO  END  ANY
ENTERrilTSE    OF    STRENGTH.        But    ftirthcr

on  was  a  third  writing  which  said,  Pas»,
ANT)  DRINK  NOT.  This  madc  hiui  not  a
îittlc  astonished,  in  that  as  the  one  gave  him
rueoviragemcnt  to  approach    the   fountain.


37

so  the  other  stood  hi  the  way  to  hinder  his
determination.  This  last  advice  however
he  resolved  to  follow,  remembering  and
holding  h  certain,  that  needless  rashness  is
not  accounted  courage.


VOL.    II.


38


CHAPTER  54.


Palaierin  had  determined  to  depart  froui
thence,  and  not  approach  the  fountain,
because  the  boon  which  the  one  inscrip-
tion promised  he  held  as  nothing,  and  to
ailack  those  animals  was  rather  folly
than  valour.  So  passing  on  into  a  path
among  the  trees,  he  felt  such  shame  of
himself  as  compelled  him  to  return  :  And
covering  himself  with  his  shield  and  taking:
sword  in  hand,  he  advanced  towards  one  of
the  tygers  at  the  fountain,  who  received  him
with  terrible  fierceness,and  sprung  upon  him;
and  though  the  activity  and  readiness  of  the
knight  were  great,  yet  could  he  not  prevent
the  tyger  from  tearing  away  the  shield  with
his  claws,  breaking  off  all  the  straps  short:
hcwbcit  this  was  not  done  so  cheaply,  but


59

that  tlie  beast  took  one  of  his  legs  witli  him
with  ÍV  cut  ill  it  well  nigh  through  flesh  and
bone,  so  tliat  he  could  no  longer  move  at
will.

Presently  up  came  the  other  three  beasts,
all  at  once;  and  because  Palmerin  was  with-
out a  shield,  this  was  the  greatest  fear  and
the  most  doubtful  adventure  in  which  he
bail  ever  seen  himself  in  ail  his  life.  Nevei-
thcless,  as  in  brave  men  such  fear  doubles
tlieir  resolution,  that  which  he  felt  was  such,
that,  nothing  remembering  the  greatness  of
the  danger,  he  wailed  for  the  lion  who  was
nearest  him,  the  others  not  coming  up  so
soon  by  reason  of  their  chains,  and  gave  him
such  a  cut  over  the  paws  which  he  had  lifted
up  to  seize  him  with, that  he  cut  them  both
clean  off,  and  the  lion  fell  to  the  ground,
being  unable  to  rise  again.  Then  stooping
down  to  recover  his  shield  which  the  tyger
liad  abandoned,  the  other  lion  approached
so  near  unto  him,  that  catching  hold  upon
the  strings  of  his  helmet,  he  tore  it  from  his
iiead,  and  drew  him  after  it  so  violently  that
he  was  enforced  lo  fall  upon  his  knees;  "i\ln.a
K  <-*

■I-     V


40

the  othcv  tygcr  catching  him  as  he  fell,
crushed  him  with  his  puws  so  cruelly,  that
had  not  his  armour  heen  strong,  he  had  torn
him  in  pieces.  Not  only  however  did  the
goodness  of  his  armour  stand  Palmerin  in
good  stead,  hut  he  availed  himself  also  of
of  his  sword,  wherewith  he  made  a  thrust  in
such  point  of  time  and  place,  that  it  ran  the
tyger  through  the  heart,  and  he  fell  to  the
earth  clean  hereft  of  life.  By  this  time  the
lion  who  had  been  busied  with  the  helmet,
came  at  him  again.  Palmerin,  now  aware  of
him,  held  out  tiie  shield  that  he  might  seize
it,  and  tiîc  moment  he  hfid  fixed  his  claws  in
it,  delivered  him  a  stroke  under  it  which
brout^ht  lù-i  bov^els  out,  and  he  fell  dead.
Still  the  access  to  the  fountain  was  not
secure,  for  th^  first  tyger  with  the  wounded
leg  was  close  to  it,  raging  with  such  fury,
that  while  he  was  there  it  w  as  not  possible  to
reach  it.  Palmerin  seeing  this,  and  how
much  of  his  work  was  done,  went  towards
him  covered  with  his  shield;  and  though  the
tyger  could  but  ill  stand,  he  rose  to  seize
him,  laying  one  claw  upon  the  shield  and  the
other  upon  the  sword,  perceiving  that  it  was


4Í

from  tlial  his  burt  came.  Tlie  sliielil  he
plucked  away,  but  with  the  edge  of  the
sword  be  cut  hiinseh'  so  sore  that  he  could
do  no  further  hurt  with  that  claw  ;  and
Palmcrin  then  with  another  blow  lopping
the  leg  off,  he  stretched  himself  in  the  pains
ot"  death,  howling  with  so  loud  a  crj'^  that
it  sounded  over  the  whole  island.  The
kuight  remained  in  such  plight  that  he  wan
fain  to  sit  himself  down  and  rest,  thinking
that  verily  all  his  bones  had  been  broken  by
that  first  tyger.  After  he  had  rested  him  a
while,  he  went  to  the  fountain  to  quench  his
thirst,  and  he  read  the  letters  again,  and  could
not  gather  the  meaning  of  the  first  inseri p^
lion,  but  thought  the  advice  which  the  last
gave  was  the  safest  for  tho^ic  who  chose  to
follow  it.  So  having  read  them  again  he
drank,  and  the  water  seemed  no  better  than
that  of  other  fountains  ;  he  thought  the  whole
was  the  work  of  some  enchanter  desirous
of  novelties  ;  and  seeing  nothing  more  to  be
done,  went  on  in  the  path  which  he  had  be-
fore taken.

Presently-  he  came  before  a  goodly  and  wcU
Í  3


42

fovllíird  castle^  llian  uhicli  he  had  never
seen  fairer  or  stronger,  well  edified,  with
goodly  towers,  and  pleasantly  seated,  and
moated  round  about,  with  a  draw-bridge  at
the  entrance.  Round  about  it  stood  four
jasper  pillars,  and  upon  each  was  hanged  a
shield  ;  Palmcrin  went  up  to  the  first  to  see
its  colours,  no  longer  holding  the  things  of
this  island  to  be  illusions,  and  he  saw  upon  it
certain  letters  in  a  field  sable,  saying,    Let

NO    ONli,    TAKE    IM  E    DOWN,       CcrtCS,    qUOlh

PalnTerin,  1  will  try  the  end  of  these  threats;
and  taking  the  shield  from  the  pillar  placed
it  upon  his  shoulders,  for  his  own  was  lying
quite  demolished  at  the  foot  of  the  fountain.
While  he  fastened  it  to  his  arm  he  licard  a
voice  say,  DonCavalier,see  that  this  boldness
do  not  cost  you  dear  !  and  looking  that  way
he  espied  a  knight  coming  from  the  castle
over  the  draw-bridge,  armed  at  all  points^
and  so  large  and  strong  limbed,  that  he  was
much  to  1)6  feared.  He  drawing  nigh,  and
seeing  Palmerin  without  a  hehnet,  for  the
lion  had  bruised  it  in  such  sort  that  he  could
not  use  it,  cried  out  with  a  voice  of  more
threatening    than    courtesy^     he    that    will


43

bear  this  shield  ouglu  to  liave  more  arms
than  ordinary  to  defend  him,  and  not  come
Avithout  that  piece  of  Avhieh  he  lias  most
need.

AA  ith  these  words,  not  staying  to  hear  an
answer,  he  delivered  him  such  a  stroke  as
1)rought  a  quarter  of  the  shield  on  which  it
wa-i  received  to  the  giound.  Palmerin  being
in  such  danger,  and  seeing  him  so  near,  gi'^^p-
plcd  with  him,  and  because  his  heart  was
great,  and  from  thence  oftentimes  strength
comes  to  the  limbs,  he,  besides  that  he  was
strong  by  nature,  found  himself  at  that  hour
so  much  so,  that  he  overthrew  him,  and
taking  his  sword  from  him,  the  knight  yield-
ed to  his  mercy.  Palmerin  demanded  of
him  if  he  had  any  more  to  deal  withal,  to
which  he  answ  ered,  that  the  chiefest  danger
was  behind.  Whereupon  arming  his  head
with  the  helmet  of  tlie  vanquished  knight,
he  went  to  the  second  pillar,  being  now  re-
solved to  go  on  and  try  whatever  adventure
might  befal  him.  Here  upon  the  shield  in  a
field  azure,  he  read  as  thus  :  I  am  moke
PERILOUS.      Be   as  perilous    as   ihou  wilt.


44

cried  he,  I  shall  not  leave  thee  for  tiiat  !
so  leaving  the  fragment  of  the  first  shield,
he  took  down  the  second,  when  presently
came  forth  another  knight,  in  vermilion
arms,  over  the  same  bridge,  saying.  Ill  coun-
sel have  you  taken  in  meddlin<i  with  that
shield.  Ill  or  good,  replied  Palinerin,  here
am  I,  on  whom  you  may  take  vengeance
for  the  displeasure  done  you  in  so  doing.
Both  at  this  met  together  with  up-lifted
swords,  and  a  battle  began  between  them  of
such  hard  strife  and  well-delivered  strokes,
that  it  had  been  in  any  part  a  thing  lo  have
been  looked  at.  It  did  not  last  long,  for  he
of  the  Castle  not  being  able  to  endure  the
heavy  blows  of  Paknerin,  began  to  wax
weak,  so  that  his  own  strokes  were  now  of
little  effect,  and  all  his  care  was  to  defend
himself.  Pahnerin  perceiving  this,  and  tak-
ing his  sword  in  both  hands,  reached  him
such  a  sure  warrant  on  the  crest,  that  the
sword  pierced  into  his  head,  and  he  fell  to
the  earth  discharged  o.f  his  life.

Then  Palmerin,  seeing  that  this  combat  was
atchieved  also,  went  on  to  the  third  pillar>


45

where,  in  the  midst  of  the  shield  upon  a  field
vert  in  azure  letters  was  written  these  words  :
By  me  is  honour  gained.  This  also  he
took  as  he  had  done  the  others,  and  forth-
witli  another  knight  sallied  out,  in  arms  of
tile  same  colour  as  the  sliield,  as  furious  and
melancholick  as  one  who  had  great  confi-
dence in  himself;  and  without  using  any
words,  entered  a  more  dangerous  comhat
than  the  other  two  passed,  so  that  the  differ-
ence between  him  and  the  former  knights
of  the  castle  was  manifest.  Palmerin  seeing
that  each  new  enemy  was  mightier  than  the
last,  did  his  utmost  to  bring  this  battle  to  an
end,  fearing  the  other  which  was  yet  to  be
atchievcd,  according  to  the  order  of  the
shields  ;  but  this  knight  was  of  such  signal
prowess,  that  the  proof  of  it  made  Palmerin
more  alert  than  he  had  yet  been,  enforcing
him  to  make  use  of  all  his  strength  and  acti-
vity. So  not  to  delay  myself  in  enumerat-
ing blows,  the  battle  continued  some  time,
but  the  victory  remained  with  him  who  was
alway  wont  to  carry  il,  and  the  knight  I'cll  at
his  feet  with  an  arm  the  less,  of  which  wound
he  presently  died;  the  conqueror  being  so


46-

sound,  because  he  knew  well  how  to  defend
himself,  that  of  all  these  coinbalá  he  felt  no-
thing except  the  labour.

Anon  he  went  to  the  last  shield,  where  in  a
lield  argent  were  the;ic  letters  of  gold:  In
ME  J  s  THE  VICTORY,  lie  took  it  from  the
pillar,  designing  to  use  it,  for  his  other  w.ts
now  of  no  defence.  The  fourth  knight  tar-
ried not,  but  issued  out  of  the  castle  in  great
haste,  in  arms  of  grey  and  white  bordered
with  gold,  saying,  I  did  not  think  your  folly
would  have  gone  so  far,  but  since  you  are
not  contented  with  the  past,  wait  and  see
what  you  have  gained  by  it.  Palmerin,  not
accustomed  to  make  answer  in  place  where
knightly  strength  ought  to  shew  itself,  deli-
vered him  his  mind  in  a  blow  upon  the  hel-
met, so  well  laid  on,  that  he  made  him  vaile
his  head  upon  his  breast  ;  but  the  knight  of
the  castle  requited  him  with  another,  which
taking  his  shield  in  the  middle,  cut  it  clean
through  to  the  handles  ;  so  they  began  to
smite  each  other  with  mortal  strokes,  with-
out pity,  as  men  who  had  none  for  them-
selves ;  each  one  putting  forth  all  his  strength


47

and  skill,  seeing  that  both  were  needed.
Their  blows  were  so  fearful  and  so  well  laid
on,  that  for  the  most  part  they  made  way
through  the  arms  ;  their  shields  were  of
little  avails  little  indeed  being  left  to  shield
them.  lie  of  the  Castle  was  of  such
worth  in  arms,  that  no  weakness  was  seen
in  him,  nor  any  vantage  in  Palmerin,
though  that  day  was  one  of  those  in  wliich
be  proved  his  person  to  the  utmost.
Long  time  this  lasted,  till  the  knight,  nut
able  to  bear  up  against  the  blows  of  Pal-
merin, which  sccuicd  to  fall  thicker  and
faster,  foredone  with  heat  and  toil  and
wounds,  fell  down  as  dead  as  one  whom
life  had  utterly  deserted.  Palmerin  see-
ing this,  kneeled  down,  and  heartily  gave
thanks  to  God  for  this  great  victory.  Then
demanded  he  of  the  knight  whom  he  had
first  conquered,  if  that  there  were  any  thing
more  to  be  done  in  the  castle  :  to  which  he
answered,  Yes  ;  but  that  nothing  could  be
much  for  him  to  atchieve.


4S


CHAPTER    35.


These  battles  being  ended,  Palmcrin  v.eni
to  the  castle,  and  entering  without  let  or
hindrance  into  the  court  below,  beheld  the
manner  thereof,  which  was  as  marvellous  as
the  perils  w  hicli  he  had  past  through  were
fearíul.  Ail  about  tlie  court  were  oillars  of
jasper  stone,  ten  cubits  in  height,  whereon
all  the  chambers  and  towers  were  built,  the
court  paved  with  precious  stones  of  green
and  while,  in  chequers  equally  laid,  like  a
chess  board.  In  the  middle  were  spouts  of
water  playing  up  witli  such  iurce  that  they
ascended  as  liigh  as  the  top  of  the  build-
ings ;  the  whole  of  the  wood-work  was  of
so  new  and  subtle  an  invention,  that  the  art
®f  no  man   could    comprehend   either  the


49

beginning  or  end  thereof".  After  Palmcrin
had  surveyed  these  edifices  from  below,  he
ascended  by  a  great  staircase  into  a  hall  of
such  singular  \vorkmanshi[),  that  all  which
he  had  yet  seen  appeared  little  in  comparison
of  it.  At  the  entrance  was  a  giant,  so  great
and  terrible  that  he  had  never  yet  seen  other
like  hiin,  holding  in  his  hand  a  heavy  iron
luace,  which,  when  Palmerin  advanced  to
enter,  he  whirled  about  with  a  countenance
which  would  have  stricken  fear  into  any
other  knight.  But  he,  in  which  they  of  this
quality  caused  little  fear,  remembering  how
fortunately  he  had  begun  without,  deter-
mined to  end  as  valiantly  within.  And  so
settling  him  to  the  giant,  and  giving  him
one  stroke  with  the  sword,  he  found  him  to
])e  a  thing  artificial  and  fantastic,  which  fell
at  once  to  the  ground  without  life.  Then
he  entered  the  hall,  and  having  admired  the
work  thereof,  he  found  a  little  door  which
opened  into  a  varanda,  from  whence  there
was  no  passage  to  any  part,  except  to  an-
other edifice  opposite  ;  but  between  them
was  a  chasm  oi"  such  depth  that  it  was  a  fear-
ful tiling  to  behold.     At  the  bottom  thereof

VOL.  II.  V


50

ran  a  river  of  black  water,  so  dark  and  do-
lorous, that  it  seemed  to  be  tlie  very  same
wlueli  is  called  from  Charon*,  the  l)oatniaa
0Ï  hell.     From  this  varanda  to  the  one  op-
posite there  was  no  other  passage  than  by  a
beam  not   broader  than   the  hand;    ivhich
was  not  only  passing  thin,  but  appeared  so
worn   by  time  and  so  rotten,  that  it  couhi
not   sustain   the  slightest   weiglit.     Faiu  he
would  have  been  on  the  further  side,  to  see
what  farther  was  to  be   found  in  these  edi-
fices ;  but  seeing  no  other  way,  and  that  this
bridge  was  so  pfuilous,  he  was   thrown  into
the  greatest  confusion  in  the  world.     Nevier-
theless,  remembering  that  the  emperor  Pal-
merinf,   his  grandfather,    had  atchieved    a
like  adventure,    he  determined  to    try  the
passage;   wherefore  disarming  himself  kst
the   heaviness    of  his  armoui-   might  break


*  ûu£  poDXchi  a  propria  que  dizem  de  A^ueron,  Larqueirû  /î»
Inferna,  i.  c.  Acheron — a  curious  etymology.

-f  Palmcrin  de  Oliva,  C  15  4.  The  imitation  is  better  tíaa
-hc  ariginaí,  but  both  feebly  resemble  the  bridge  of  seuils,
witch  makes  a  part  of  so  many  mythologies.


51

tíic  plank,  with  a  gvood  courage  lie  began
to  venture  upon  it,  having  nothing  to  de-
fend him  withal  but  his  sword,  whatever
might  happen.  When  he  had  attained  the
luidstj  the  plank  began  to  bend  and  crack,
so  that  Palmerin  verily  supposed  be  must
fall,  and  held  himsclF  for  lost.  So  pausing  a
moment,  he  said  within  himself,  Lady,  if
in  great  dangers  I  look  for  your  succour,  in
what  greater  than  this  can  Fortune  ever
place  me  i  If  1  did  not  desire  life  for  the
sake  of  serving  you  therewith,  little  should
I  care  for  losing  it  here  ;  deliver  it  now
from  this  j»  ril,  and  afterwards  ordain  any
thing  in  which  I  may  lose  it  for  your  ser-
vice, and  then  shall  you  be  servetl  and  I
contented.

Then  proceeding  along  the  plank,  he  cared
as  little  for  its  motion  as  il"  he  had  been
walking  along  a  firm  and  broad  bridge;
but  belore  he  had  quite  gained  the  oppo-
site side,  out  from  those  buildings  came  a
woman,  to  appearance  of  great  age,  her  hair
loo.se  and  her  face  torn,  exclaiming,  A\'hat
avails  my  art   it'  it    is  so  often  to  be  bailied


52

b}^  (Mie  man  ?  and  laying  hold  on  Palmcrin
to  drag  him  after  her,  she  threw  herself
headlong  into  that  deep  river,  there  meet-
ing the  end  whieh  her  deeds  deserved.  But
he  kept  his  footing  so  well  that  he  stood,
remaining  astonished  at  what  he  had  seen,

Tiien  entering  those  buildings,  he  found  none
but  women  and  serving  men,  of  whom  he
asked  the  way  down  ;  they  showed  it  him,
and  then  he  sent  for  the  knight  with  whom
he  had  fought  the  first  battle,  who  came  to
him  by  another  way,  and  Palraerin  desired
him  to  shew  the  name  of  this  castle,  as
also  what  she  was  that  had  so  desperately
drowned  herself.  Sir,  answered  the  knight,
I  cannot  conceal  any  thing  from  you.  This
is  called  the  Perilous  Isle,  wdiereof  some  hold
opinion,  that  the  sage  Urganda  was  the  first
founder  and  lad}',  and  that  in  this  place  she
hid  herself,  and  that  after  her  death  this
castle  remained  enchanted,  so  that  no  per-
son could  attain  to  inhabit  here.  In  this
order  she  left  this  fair  palace,  and  the  foun-
tain which  you  saw.  And  this  we  may  the
easier  believe,  seeing  that  no  person,  neither


53

in  our  time  nor  before  iis^  ever  knew  tidings
of  this  isie_,  Leing  a  tiling  so  worthy  to  be
s-poken  of,  execi)t  the  dame  \vho  threw  her-
self into  the  river,,  and  who  was  named  Eu-
tropo,  aunt  to  the  great  Dramuziaiido,  of
whom  YOU  must  needs  have  heard,  She^
seeing  her  nephew  and  ail  his  guards  con-
qucred  by  one  only  knight,  and  Don  Duar-
dos  with  all  the  other  princes  set  frec^  went
with  all  speed  to  the  soldan  of  Babylon,  that
he  should  prepare  a  mighty  army,  where-
with he  might  ruinate  the  city  of  Constantin-
ople, and  the  whole  empire  of  Greece  ;  bufc
because  this  did  not  take  efl'ect,  knowing
this  place,  and  finding  her  other  plans  de-
feated, she  came  hither,  accompanied  with
the  three  knights  whom  you  have  slain,  \a  ho
were  all  of  her  generation,  and  with  me  also,
who  was  brought  here  more  by  deceit  than
my  own  will;  and  taking  up  her  abode  hcMc,
she  did  away  the  enchantment  which  con-
cealed the  island,  in  order  that  knighls
might  conic  hither,  ami  meaning  either  to
slay  them  presently,  or  to  keep  tluin  in  con-
tinual prison.  -  Yesterday  we  took  one,  and
another  the  ú:\y  before^  both  of  sue!»  great
?  3


54

wonh,  that  before  tliey  were  overcome  tlic}^
vaiuiiiisbcd  me  and  two  ot"  the  other  knights.
I  pray  you,  said  Pahnerin,  sliew  me  the
names  of  the  three  knights  that  were  shiin,
as  also-tlie  prison  where  the  other  two  are,
that  I  may  bestow  upon  them  their  former
liberiy.  To  wliich  demand  he  made  this
answer.  The  first  was  called  Medrusam  tlte
Fearful  ;  the  second,  Titubante  tlie  Black  ;
and  the  third  was  Forbolunte  the  Strong;
whom  you  may  have  seen  if  you  have  ever
been  in  the  emperor  Palmerin's  court  at
Constantinople.  I  knew  them  well,  re-
plied Palmerin,  and  knew  also  their  damna-
ble intention  against  those  who  deserved
none  such.  I'hcrefore  I  do  not  marvel  to
see  that  they  have  received  in  this  world  the
guerdon  of  their  deeds  ;  what  it  may  be  in
the  other  Í  know  not.

During  the  time  of  this  talk  they  were  come
to  the  place  where  the  two  prisoners  lay,
there  being  none  other  as  yet,  by  reason  of
the  small  abode  Eutropa  as  then  had  made
in  that  place;  wherein  if  she  had  remained
Jonger^  this  might  have  been  a  more  peril-


55

ou«;  adventure  than  the  castle  of  Dramuzi-
audo.  But  Drdiarto,  to  whom  all  her  drifts
and  practices  were  discovered,  willing  to
cut  short  the  misehiet's  that  this  enchan-
tress did  strive  to  commit^  sent  the  boat
for  Palmer  in.

Palmerin  seeing  the  prison.which  was  under-
ground, and  so  dark  and  fearful,  that  the
bare  sight  thereof  might  have  killed  a  man,
said  to  the  knÍ2;ht  who  went  with  him  carry-
ing  a  lighted  torch.  Certainly  this  could  not
have  been  the  work  of  I  rganda,  for  she  was
never  wont  to  use  cruelty  to  any  wander-
ing knights.  At  last  they  came  to  an  iron
gate  which  they  opened,  and  saw  whereas
the  two  knights  were,  attending  the  com-
ing of  some  todo  them  villainy,  as  they  sup-
posed, rather  than  to  set  them  at  liberty  ;
when  presently  the  prince  knew  them,  the
one  was  Belisarte,  the  other  Germam  of
Orleance,  who  had  great  irons  upon  their
Icg*^,  and  iron  chains  about  their  middle,
which  caused  him  presently  to  fall  into  tears,
and  he  bade  the  knight  to  take  oif  their
chains.     Kniijhts,  said  Iklisavte,  this  kind-


S6

«ess  is  to  lead  to  sometlilng  worse.  Nay,
•sir  Bclisaitc,  replied  Palmerin,  she  \vho  im-
prisoned you  in  this  place  would  not  have
consented  to  deliver  you  so  soon,  Then  he
put  off  his  helmet  ;  when  Germain  of  Or-
leaucc  knowing  him,  exclaimed.  Now  I  care
not  if  they  take  me  every  day,  still  there
would  be  you  left  whose  business  it  is  to
release  all,  as  Dramuziando  can  testify.  So
after  other  greetings,  they  came  presently
forth  of  the  noisome  prison  ;  and  the  knight
who  continued  to  serve  them  ordered  the
board  to  be  laid,  whereat  Palmerin  was  well
pleased,  for  he  had  eaten  nothing  that  day;
which  indeed  was  not  much,  for  in  time  of
need  anj'  thing  ma}'  be  endured.


57


CHAPTER  5G.


Lone;  time  these  knigli(5  spent  in  their
friendly  discourses,  till  it  drew  towards
night,  when  the  knight  of  the  castle  pro-
vided two  fiiir  beds,  one  for  Palmerin,  and
another  for  his  two  companions,  who  that
night  took  more  quietness  than  since  their
first  comino:  into  the  castle.  In  the  morn-
ing  they  surveyed  all  the  chambers  and  com-
modities in  this  goodly  edifice,  which  they
found  so  rare  and  excellently  ordered,  that
they  could  not  choose  but  commend  it,  as  it
did  highly  deserve,  albeit  those  things  which
would  have  been  most  worthy  of  admiration
were  somewhat  defaced  by  time.

Then  walked  they  from  thence  to  the  foun-


5S

lain,  yielding  no  less  laud  to  the  noLlc  con-
quest of  Palmcrin  than  the  dangerous  at-
tempt of"  such  an  exploit  did  worthily  merit.
From  thence  returning  unto  the  castle,
they  staid  there  for  the  space  of  lour  days,
and  on  the  fifth  going  forth  under  the
green  trees,  they  espied  two  knights  upon
the  road  ^Yhich  led  from  the  shore,  who
were  presently  known  by  their  shields;  for
they  were  Francian  and  Onistaldo,  endea-
vouring themselves  to  seek  Palmcrin.  At
such  time  as  Selviam  had  declared  lînto
them  the  loss  of  his  lord,  such  was  their
good  fortune,  that  coming  to  the  place
%vhere  Palraerin  entered  the  ship,  there
they  found  a  fishing  boat,  so  that  by  en-
treaty they  sailed  with  them,  having  such
fair  wind  and  tide,  that  at  length  they  dis-
covered the  Perilous  Isle.  This  place  made
the  fishermen  greatly  abashed,  because  they
had  never  seen  that  land  before.  And
reaching  the  haven  in  which  Palmerin  had
landed,  they  lef.:  the  boat  in  the  keeping  of
their  squire,  lest  the  fishermen  should  fly
away.  When  they  had  altained  the  top  of
the  rocks,  they  came  to  tiie  pillar  that  had


59

the  fearful  sentence  upon  it;  to  wliicli  using
little  regard,  because  the  affection  they  bare
unto  their  dear  friend  incited  them  forward,
they  caine  as  I  have  told  you,  both  into  the
sight  and  knowledge  of  the  prince  and  the
knights;  where  they  were  received  full
joyfully,  and  embraced  one  another  in  to-
ken of  their  mutual  and  inviolate  friend-
ship.

So  passing  the  fountain,  and  also  the  dead
bodies  ol"  Titubante,  Medrusam,  and  For-
bolante,  they  came  to  the  place  where  Eu-
tropa  drowned  herself,  all  the  way  extolling
the  worthy  prowess  of  him  that  had  the
power  to  atchieve  and  end  such  singular
exploits.  That  day  they  regaled  themselves
in  the  castle,  being  well  served  by  Satiafor,
for  so  the  knight  was  called  wliuni  Pahne-
rin  had  first  overcome.  On  the  next  they
resolved  to  depart.  Palmerin  left  the  castle
in  the  custody  of  Satiafor,  intending  to  give
that  isle  and  fortress  to  Daliarte,  if  he  would
accept  it.  So  friendly  departing  froHi  thence
they  came  to  the  sea  side,  where  they  em-
barked :   the  four  knights  in  the  one  boat.


í^O


,111(1   Palmcrin  íilone  in  the  other,  meaning
to  go  to  the  place  iVom  whence  they  came.
But  his  boat,  which  was  guided   by  the  will
of  Daliarte,  not  by  any  skill  of"  seamen,  prc-
i-ently  parted  comjjany  from  the  other,  strik-
ing out  into  the  main  sea,  so  that  in  short
space  of  time  he  had  lost  sight  of  land.     All
that  day  he  voyaged  on  not  knowing  whither,
and  when  night  began  to  close  in,  supt  upon
what  he  found  in  the  boat:  for  he  who  sent
it  had  not  neglected  to  store  it  with  what  was
needful.      Eight  days  he  went  tilting  over
tlie  wild  w  aves  of  the  sea,  being  by  that  time
far  removed  from  Great  Britain,  and  farther
still    from    Constantino})le,    where     it    was
then  his  intent  to  go.     So  that  the  recollec-
tion thereof  made  him  more  sorrowful  and
discontented  that  he  had   ever  felt  before.
Seeing,  however,  that  the  boat  now  made
for  land,  he  resented  some  pleasiwe,  whicli
was  the  greater  when  he  knew  it  to  be  war-
like Lusitânia,  a  country  in    which  he  had
often    wished  to  be,    that   he  might    see   if
tjie    beauty    of    Miraguaroa,  of   which  so
much    was    talked    and     taled    about    the
worldj    did    in    any    thing   er^ual  his    lady


61

Polinarda;  to  produce  whose  equal  vcn^,
he  thought,  beyond  the  power  of  Nature.
But  ill  this  he  erred,  for  in  such  cases  to
make  one  so  surpassing  is  the  wonder,  and
to  make  two  would  lessen  it;  it  would
therefore  have  been  greater  marvel  that
there  should  be  one  Polinarda  than  two.

As  soon  as  he  landed,  he  learnt  that  he
was  in  Portugal,  in  the  city  of  Porto,  then
as  noble  as  if  what  was  to  be  hereafter
was  already  expected.  There  he  heard
marvellous  commendations  of  the  Tristful
Knight,  even  such  as  moved  him  to  envy;
not  knowing  tliat  this  was  he  who  had
Jousted  upon  the  bridge  in  England  :  for
as  ye  have  heard,  Florendos,  when  he  de-
parted from  thence,  changed  his  arms  and
took  that  name,  because  he  was  at  that
time  disfavoured  by  his  lady.  lie,  after
leaving  his  father  Primaleon,  took  his  way
to  Spain,  and  arriving  there  when  feasts
with  tilts  and  tourneys  were  held  for  the  re-
turn of  king  Uecindos,  did  there  such  deedn
in  arms,  that  having  overthrown  the  greater
number  of  the  most  renowiu'd  knights  there

VOL.    11.  G


62


assembled,  he  left  the  court  with  such  in-
crease of  renown  as  those  feats  deserved.
So  having  reached  the  castle  of  Ahnourol,
Miraguarda,  so  soon  as  he  was  there  arrived,
would  needs  know  of  his  success  at  the  cas-
tle of  the  giant  Dramuziando,  albeit  she  had
been  admonished  thereof  before,  and  had
heard  of  what  he  had  done  upon  the  bridge,
well  knowing  by  the  signs  related  that  it
was  he.  But  after  he  had  informed  her
anew  of  all,  such  was  her  condition,  that
she  was  nothing  contented  with  the  won-
ders which  he  had  atchieved  in  £ngland,
but  whatsoever  he  had  done  she  made  no
account  of  it.  Being  however  desirous
to  see  if  his  deeds  mi<j;ht  be  a^^reeablc  to  the
reputation  he  hc.d  deserved,  she  command-
ed him  to  keep  a  pass,  near  unto  her  castle,
thinking  that  so  many  good  knights  would
endeavour  themselves  thither,  that  tliis  ad-
venture should  be  as  much  renowned,  as
the  castle  of  Dramuziando  had  been.

The  Tristful  Knight,  in  obedience,  placed  a
shield  there  upon  the  trunk  of  a  tree,  in
which  Miraguarda  was  painted  upon  a  field


G3

>K.\Ác,  SO  to  the  life,  and  of  such  excellent
beauty,  that  more  knights  yielded  unto,  it
tlian  to  the  strength  ot  him  \vho  guarded
it.  Underneath  that  perilous  face  was  her
name  written  in  white  letters.  The  bruit
thereof  spreading  far  and  wide,  it  aUured
so  many  knights  thither,  with  the  hope  tq
bear  away  the  shield,  that  in  its  defence  he
conquered  more  than  two  hundred,  from
whom  he  took  their  shields,  and  in  remem-
brance of  his  victory,  hanged  them  up  ori
either  side  the  shield  of  his  lad}',  inscribing
upon  the  rim  of  each  the  name  of  him  fron^
wiiom  he  had  won  it.  Miraguarda  alway
beheld  these  battles  from  the  top  of  her
tower,  for  they  were  fought  at  the  foot  of
it  ;  and  so  confident  was  she  of  her  own
beauty,  and  the  high  deservings  of  her  per-
son, that  whether  or  no  she  resented  any
contentment  in  his  victories,  she  manifest-
ed none,  lest  by  making  shew  of  praise  for
this  so  haughty  an  enterprize,  she  should
any  ways  content  him.

Here   to  his  noble   victories    we   will  leave
him,  and  return  to  Palmerin,  now  in  Porto,
G  2


64

r\ho  hath  hud  made  him  an  excellent  fair
armour,  because  his  own  was  no  longer  ser-
viceable, of  black  and  white,  in  the  manner
of  foliage,  after  a  new  invention;  and  in  a
white  field  upon  his  shield  a  figure  of  Dead
Hope,  seeming  dead  indeed  by  tlic  colour  of
her  cheeks  and  the  looseness  of  lier  limbs,
with  letters  upon  the  hem  of  her  garment,
stating  her  name  to  those  who  might  not
else  have  divined  it:  and  because  of  this
device  he  was  named  of  every  one  the  De-
spairing Knight.  In  this  manner  he  rid  to-
ward the  castle  of  Almourol,  desirous  to  try
his  force  in  this  adventure  esteemed  of  so
great  fame.


CHAPTER  57.


Some  adventures,  too  trifling  to  be  mention-
ed for  hiiii  who  atchicvcd  them,  were  finished
b}'  Palmerin,  in  the  time  he  travelled  towards
the  castle  of  Almourol.  One  day  at  length,
at  the  hour  of  tierce,  he  found  himself  beside;
the  Tagus,  where  calm  and  quiet  waters  ap-
peared to  him  as  sorrowful  and  soothing  as
in  truth  they  were  for  one  whose  affection  was
busied  with  remembrance.  So  looking  up
and  down  the  stream,  and  beholding  afar  oiV
the  rocks  which  on  both  sides  border  it,  he
perceived  the  castle  of  Almourol  seated  beside
it,so  well  situated,  and  of  such  warlike  iippcar-
ance,  that  whosoever  beheld  it  would  needs
conceive  that  he  who  edified  it  first,  did  so  for
purposes  of  great  intent.  As  he  drew  nigh  he
G  3


66

espied  two  knights  in  combat,  wliich  being
desirous  to  see,  he  set  spurs  to  his  horse,  to
be  there  before  they  made  an  end;  but
before  he  could  come  thither,  the  Trist-
ful Knight  had  vanquished  his  adversary,
and  placed  his  shield  among  the  others,  on
Avhich  his  name  was  now  inscribed,  which
was  Carmelante.  Palmerin  beholding  so
many  shields  about  this  tree,  esteemed  the
valour  of  the  Tristful  Knight  of  great
reputation,  especially  when  he  perceived
those  of  Frisol,  Estrelante,  and  Tcncbror,
who  were  of  í^reat  renown.

But  when  he  saw^  the  picture  of  ^Nliraguarda,
he  was  so  struck  by  that  first  sight,  that  not
knowing  what  to  think,  inasmuch  as  his
judgment  was  confounded,  he  remained  a
while  in  confusion.  At  length,  still  fixing
liis  eyes  upon  the  picture,  he  said  to  it,
Certes,  lad\',  I  see  at  this  present  the  thing
I  never  thought  to  see,  and  cannot  now
marvel  that  your  knight  should  have  per-
formed such  wonders,  seeing  for  what  u
wonder  he  hath  combated.  I  do  not  hold  it
much  that   he  has   hitherto   conquered  allj


67

seeing  reason  was  so  manlfestijr  on  his  side;
but  I  would  now  sec  what  he  will  do  with
ine,  who  have  still  greater  on  mine.

The  Tristful  knight  hearing  these  words,
and  perceiving  the  offence  which  was  of-
fered by  them  to  the  picture  of  the  shield,
laced  on  his  helmet,  and  going  toward
iiim,  said  with  a  loud  voice.  If  the  chastise-
ment of  these  words  were  not  as  nigh  at
liand  as  it  is  well  merited,  I  might  well
complain  of  Fortune.  Make  ready,  that
1  may  see  if  your  deeds  are  equal  to  your
words.  AVith  that  both  took  their  career,
and  as  each  gave  this  attaint  in  the  name
of  her  whom  he  served,  it  was  given  with
such  good  will  that  their  lances  fled  in
pieces,  and  they  both  lost  their  stirrups  and
were  like  to  fall  ;  then,  each  afur  this  proof
icaring  the  strength  of  his  enemy,  they
drew  their  swords,  and  began  to  light  with
such  force  and  fury  as  the  reason  for  the
which  they  fought  supplied.

The  giant  Almourol,  abashed  at  this  noble
combat,    the    like  whereof  he  had   never


6$

before  beheld,  called  Miraguarda  to  come
and  see  it  ;  and  it  was  not  long  before  the
cloth  of  silk  fringed  with  gold  was  spread
along  the  window,  whereon  she  leaned,
her  damsels  standing  by  her  to  behold
this  knightly  chivalry.  "When  she  present-
ed herself  in  the  window,  the  two  cham-
pions had  retired  themselves  to  take  a  little
pause  ;  and  the  Tristful  Knight  fixing  bis
eyes  upon  her  said  to  himself.  Lady,  what
man  is  he,  albeit  oppressed  with  never  so
much  debility,  that  would  not  in  such  a
quarrel  accomplish  any  thing  ?  Then  mak-
ing toward  his  enemy,  who  was  addressing
other  words  the  while  of  no  less  confidence
to  Polinarda,  they  alighted  from  their  horses
that  they  might  strike  each  other  more
at  will  ;  for  the  beasts  were  foredone  with
toil.  This  second  battle  was  so  fierce  and
cruel,  that  none  like  unto  it  had  ever  been
seen  in  that  place  ;  that  of  the  Tristful
Knight  with  Almourol,  though  full  hardy,
being  nothing  in  comparison.  He  who
remembered  that  this  combat  was  for  his
lady's  beauty,  and  beheld  her  there  present
and  looking  on,  held  it  for  a  e^reat  disho-


G9

nour  that  with  such  help  in  view,  and  in  so
longtime,  he  could  not  vannuish  this  knight,
having  before  foiled  so  many.     The  other,
u  lio  had  on  his  side  the  reason  of  Polinarda's
beauty,  thought  the  like  shame  of  himself;
and  these  remembrances  were  the  cause  of
greater  mischief.     \  ery  forcible    were    the
assaults  they  gave  one  another,  their  armour
cut  and  cruelly  mangled,  their  blood  clfused
on  the   ground    where    they    fought,    their
shields    broken  in   a  hundred   pieces,   that
only  the  handles  \vere  left,  their  swords  so
blunted  by  the  blows  they  had  given,  that
none    wliich    they  now   delivered  were   of
much  eflect  ;  for  pure  weariness  they  were
fain  to  take  breath  again,  as  unable  to  en-
dure such  penltrable  and  grievous  travail.

Palmerin,standing leaning  upon  his  sword,bc-
holding  his  armour  reduced  into  such  estate,
and  remembering  the  cause  of  the  combat,
with  a  sad  conceit  began  to  say,  Lady,
either  I  am  not  sufficient  to  do  you  service,
or  you  will  not  liave  me  serve  you,  that  you
may  not  hold  me  to  be  yours  ;  but  that  you
cannot  prevent  me  from  being,  though  you


70

can  cio  ever}'  thing  with  me.     Pavour  me
in  this  battle,  which  is  waged  in  your  name  ;
and  let  not  this  knight  bear  awav  from  me
the  honour,  lest  the   lady  whom  he  serves
should    remain  with  it  above  you,  a  thing
ao,ainst  retison.      The  Tristfid  Kniuht  also
debating   with   himself  on    the   end  of  the
combat,  whicli    he  began  somewhat  to  fear,
because  in  all  his  lifetime  he  had  never  seen
himself  in  such  danger,  lifting  up  his  eyet
t  -  the  place  where  Miraguarda  stood,  began
to  sny,  Lady,  I  have  seen  Polinarda,  grand-
daughter  to  the  emperor  Palmcrin,  whose
beauty  was  esteemed  the  most  rare  and  perfect
on  the  earth,  and  I,  till  I  had  seen  you,  was
i.)  the  same  error  respecting  it  as  others;  but
having  seen  you  I  perceived  that  all  were
deceived,  and  that  where  the  truth  of  your
beauty    should     be    manifested,    all    other
would    appear  a  lie.       This  being  a    thing
to  clear,  let  not  the  contrary  be  suspected;
favour  me  now  and  kill  me  afterwards,  but
let  not  him  be  conquered  by  another,  who
is  already  subdued  by  you.

Then  feeling  themselves  somewhat  refreshed,


71

they  charged  one  another  again  as  vahantly  as
if  the  battle  were  but  now  beiiun,  receiving
their  blows  with  redoubled  force,  battering
helmets,  and  scaling  mail,  and  strewing  the
field  with  broke:i  armour,  as  it  already  was
with  splintered  shields.  The  cruelty  with
which  they  contended  did  hurt  enough,
though  by  reason  of  the  skill  with  which
ihey  knew  how  to  ward  themselves,  they
were  less  wounded  than  might  from  such
blows  have  been  expected.  At  thnes  they
grappled,  striving  each  to  overthrow  the
other.  Neither  vantage  nor  weakness  was
to  be  perceived  in  either.  Mn-aguaril;i
jugdcd  this  combat  for  the  best  that  ever
she  had  seen,  and  though  her  inclination
was  too  free  to  feel  ans^  compassion  for  ihe
I'ristful  Knight,  yet  for  her  own  gratifica-
tion she  wished  the  victory  to  fall  to  him.
Day  was  well  nigh  s[)ent,  and  darkness  now
came  on,  so  that  the}'  could  not  see  each
other,  each  feeling  suihcient  sorrow  that  ho
could  not  pursue  the  battle  to  an  end,  as  both
so  greatly  desired.  And  though  no  vantage
was    manifested    ni    either,    yet    was     the


i  M


Tristful    Kiíight    worse    hanrlled,    and    his
armour  in  worse  pHglit.       Almourol  inter-
posed, and  separated  them  when  the  dark-
ness  put  a   stop    to    the    farther  comhat.
Pahnerin    thinking  he    should    not  receive
good  welcome  there,  went  to  a  town  ahout
a  half-league  distant,\vhere  he  remained  while
his  wounds  were  healed,  determining  when
he  had  gained  strength,  to  come  Jigain  to
the    castle,  where    he    would    <-o    knightly
behave  himself,    that  he    would    bear  the
shield    of  Miraguarda  from   thence,  as  the
honour  of  his  prize,  to  Constantinople.

Amourol  lodged  the  Tristful  Knight  in  his
chamber,  for  till  then  he  alwuys  used  to
lodge  in  the  field  ;  but  Miraguarda,  who
could  not  dissemble  her  displeasure  that  ho
had  not  the  power  to  vanquish,  standing
upon  the  trial  of  her  beauty,  sent  to  him
as  soon  as  he  was  recovered,  to  say,  that  he
should  straightway  absent  himself  from  that
place,  and  not  wear  armour  for  the  space
of  twelve  months,  because  he  had  not
•vanquished  his  enemy  in  so  just  a  cause.


73.

This  greeting  was  so  displeasant  to  the  Trist-
ful Knight,  that  he  bec-ume  as  scrrovvful
and  discontented  as  suited  his  pensiv'e  uaoic,
verily  supposing,  that  Fortune  had  cieter-
inined  his  utter  detriment.


VOL.    II.


74


CHAPTER  58.


When  the  Tristful  Knight  had  received
this  sharp  message  of  Miraguarda,  heing
loath  in  any  thing  to  disobey  her,  he  called
his  esquire  Anneilo,  to  whom  he  bare  such
great  love  and  afîection,  as  though  he  had
been  one  to  whom  he  was  bound  by  greater
ties;  and  going  among  the  trees,  the  tears
trickling  down  his  cheeks,  he  began  to  him
this  heavy  discourse  :  O  Armcllo,  see  here
the  guerdon  that  Fortune,  in  rccompence  of
my  travails  hath  ordained  for  me,  which  how
patiently  I  sufFer,  thyself  and  these  solitary
woods  remain  my  witness,  that  I  am  neither
moved  at  this  mishap,  nor  storm  against  her
iiukindness.  Yet  had  I  alway  this  opinion
with  me,  that  my  trusty  travail  deserved  a


75

better  reward,  and  that  but  only  respecting
my  faith,  1  did  worthily  merit  some  moiety
of  friendship.  And  what  of  that  ?  Thy  joy,
thy  mirth,  thy  hapjiiness,  and  all  thy  com-
fort in  the  world,  is  changed  to  the  hard  lot
of  all  misfortune,  only  be  thou  patient  :  one
liope  I  have,  which  will  he  my  chiefest  re-
medy in  this  extreme  aftlietion  ;  that  death
will  speedily  cut  off  tlie  miseries  wherewith
I  am  so  cruelly  assaulted.

While  he  uttered  these  complaints  which
came  from  his  very  soul,  the  tears  ran  down
his  cheeks  so  plenteously  that  Armello,
movtd  to  coinpassion,  began  to  console  him
with  such  true  words  of  comfort,  as  the  true
love  which  he  ever  bore  toward  him,  sup-
plied. J3ut  he,  when  that  first  passion  had
subsided,  bade  him  depart  for  Constantin-
ople, and  take  with  him  his  horse  and  arms,
being  all  which  he  could  iiow^  give  him,  and
he  charged  him  to  tell  no  one  of  his  mishap,
but  to  aHirm  that  he  was  dead  ;  for  he  soon
trusted  to  make  his  words  true.

Armello   hearing   the  words  of  his  master,
H  2


76

could  not  for  some  time  reply  for  exceeding
grief;  bur  at.  length  obtaining  speech,  he
saifl.  Trust  me,  sir,  I  know  no  place  that  can
content  me  more,  or  l)e  any  thing  like  my
desire,  than  to  bear  you  company.  As  for
the  news  you  bid  me  spread,  I  am  not  he  by
AN  horn  such  tidings  should  be  carried  to  the
court  of  Constantinople  ;  nor  am  I  one  who
should  forsake  you  in  such  sorrow.  In  my
mind  you  ought  not  so  greatly  to  resist  this,
for  it  cannot  be  but  iViat  she  who  had  com-
manded a  thing  so  unjust,  should  remedy  it.
Tlie  lady  Miraguarda,  when  she  sent  you
such  bidding,  gave  way  to  her  free  condi-
tioHj  considering  nothing  but  her  own  Avill  ;
but  when  ♦hrt  passion  is  over  past,  and  re-
pentance cometh,  she  will  recal  her  ungentle
words.

You  know  not  what  you  say,  replied  Flo-
rendos  ;  my  fault  is  not  so  light  but  that  it
deserves  a  heavier  punishment  than  this
Avhich  she  hath  given  me.  Where  is  that
knight  in  all  the  world,  except  me,  that  would
not  have  vanquished,  seeing  he  did  battle  for
her  beauty  ?  and  yet  I  am  of  so  little  worth


77

that  in  tills  battle  I  did  less  than  in  others  in
which  thou  hast  seen  me.  Howbeit,  if  what
I  bade  thee  do  does  not  seem  good,  do  what
thou  wilt  so  thou  leavest  me  alone  ;  this  evil
is  tor  me  only;  at  least  thou  shalt  have  no
greater  part  therein  than  in  the  fault  for
which  I  am  condemned.

.So  turning  away  from  iiim  he  wandered  up
the  Tagus,  his  eyes  bent  toward  the  ground,
and  thus  he  went  on  the  greater  part  of  the
day  ;  then  seating  himself  under  the  shadow
of  a  rock,  he  fell  asleep  for  pure  weariness  ;
but  that  sleep  did  not  bring  with  it  such  re-
pose as  to  leave  him  free  from  care  ;  con-
trariwise, dreaming  a  thousand  vain  sorrows,
he  suffered  as  much  trouble  as  though  he  had
been  waking.  When  he  awaked,  he  per-
ceived a  flock  of  sheep  by  him,  and  around
the  rock  under  which'  he  lay, who  were  pas-
sing tlie  sesta  under  the  shade  of  some  ash-
trces.  The  shepherd  who  kept  them,  seated
on  the  rock  above,  touched  a  flute  from  tijne
to  time,whereto  he  recorded  ditties,  and  mad-
rigals of  such  passionate  and  rare  conceits,
that  they  did  not  seem  to  proceed  from  a
Ji  3


78

man  of  such  low  degree  ;  at  other  time  he
ceased  to  play,  and  with  his  flock  around
him  talked  of  his  sorrows,  as  one  not  free
from  sorrow,  interrupting  his  words  with
such  heavy  sighs  as  made  those  who  heard
him  greatly  resent  his  pain.  The  Tristful
Knight  who  heard  all,  sate  thinking  upon
this  man's  grief,  not  therefore  feeling  his
own  the  less  ;  for  great  grief  is  not  diminished
hy  perceiving  that  of  others.  Acknowledg-
ing then  the  greatness  and  power  of  Love,
how  mighty  it  is  and  how  w  idely  it  extends,
it  came  into  his  mind  that  he  would  fain  be-
come that  shepherd's  companion,  and  if  he
■would,  consent  to  it,  pass  his  days  with  him  :
for  every  one  seeks  his  like,  the  sorrowful
would  consort  with  the  sorrowful,  the  mirth-
ful with  him  that  is  glad;  that  like  should
rejoice  with  like,  being  the  rule  of  reason
and  nature.  He  found  this  shepherd  so
much  a  friend  to  a  solitary  life,  that  he
would  have  rejected  his  oifered  company;
nevertheless,  when  he  understood  wherefore
it  was  offered,  he  was  content  that  they
should  be  solitary  together.


79

Armello  })erceiving  that  his  master  utterly
rejected  his  company,  went  to  the  castle  of
Ahnourol,  where  at  the  foot  of  the  tree,
directly  under  the  shield  of  Miraguarda,  he
placed  his  master's  shield  and  armour.  And
there  he  uttered  so  many  rueful  and  griev-
ous complaints,  that  they  would  have  moved
any  gentle  heart  to  compassion  ;  hut  she
was  nothing  moved,  such  was  her  free  con-
dition, neither  by  the  lamentation  he  made,
nor  by  the  feats  of  Florendos  which  he  re-
counted, nor  his  high  parentage,  which  now
in  his  sorrow  Armello  revealed.  But  now,
as  this  Tristful  Knight  and  his  squire  will
in  their  due  time  be  spoken  of,  the  history
leaves  them  to  return  to  Palmerin  ;  who  hav-
ing his  Wounds  well  cured,  and  provided  him
ot  a  new  armour,  because  his  other  was  de-
faced, returned  to  the  castle  of  Almourol,  in-
tending not  to  depart  from  thence  till  lie  had
conquered  the  knight  with  whom  lie  had
combated.  He  arrived  at  the  castle,  at  such
time  as  Armello  was  making  these  lamenta-
tions, whereby  he  understood  that  the  Trist-
ful Knight  was  Florendos,  which  moved  him
to  great  sorrow,  thinking  that  MiraguarUa's


80

anger  had  done  him  great  wrong,  and  that
if  he  should  perish  it  would  be  a  great  loss
to  the  world.  But  seeing  that  his  tarriance
there  could  nothing  avail  Florendos,  he  re-
solved to  depart  ;  first  however  regarding
the  face  of  Miraguarda,  which  seemed  to
him  so  fair,  that  if  his  inclinations  had  not
already  been  set  elsewhere,  he  could  not  have
determined  which  had  the  adv.intage,  she
or  Polinarda.  Howbeit,  thinking  that  ta
look  long  at  that  picture  was  ta  offend
against  his  love  to  his  lady,  he  turned  the
reins,  not  knowing  which  way  to  go,  till  at
last  he  resolved  not  to  depart  from  the  road
to  Constantinople^  whither  his  wishes  led
him.


CHAPTER  59.


Here  we  must  remember  the  giant  Dramu-
zianclo,  of  whom  it  is  wx-ll  now  to  make  men-
tion, as  well  by  reason  of  his  deeds,  which
are  deserving  thereof,  as  because  it  is  need-
ful for  the  order  of  this  history.  Me,  after  he
had  travelled  many  countries,  accompanied
Avith  Selviam,  in  search  of  l^dmerin,  arrived
at  the  castle  of  Ahnourol,  within  a  i\;\v  days
after  Palmerin  was  departed  from  ihence.
This  place  he  had  often  desired  to  see  for
the  things  which  he  had  heard  of  it;  and
now,  when  he  beheld  its  goodly  site- and  the
strength  tlu're(»f,  it  apj)eared  to  him  well
deserving  of  great  adventures.  So  going
round  about  it  to  behold  it,  he  came  to  the
place    where   the  buttles  were    wont  to    be


82

fought,  and  saw  tlie  tree  laden  wltli  the
ghiclds  of  the  vanquished  knights,  whose
names  being  subscribed  underneath  every
one,  made  him  to  have  knowledge  of  divers
that  had  been  there  foiled.  Underneath
them  all  he  espied  the  armour  and  shield  of
the  Tristful  Knis;ht,  which  made  him  ç^reatly
to  muse,  that  the  armour  of  the  concjueror
should  deserve  no  better  estimation,  than  to
be  placed  there  below  those  whom  he  had
vanquished.  Near  to  the  armour  was  Ar-
mello,  who  being  tired  with  making  lamen-
tation had  fallen  asleep.  Dramuziando,  de-
sirous to  hear  some  tidings  of  that  castle,
ordered  Selviam  to  wake  liim.  But  when
he  understood  of  the  adventures  of  the  for-
tress, and  the  departure  of  the  Tristful
Knight,  he  greatly  repined  that  he  had  not
found  him  there  to  do  battle  with  him  ;  and
he  would  have  placed  his  shield  highest
on  the  tree  if  the  squire  would  have  allow-
ed it.

Dramuziando,  who  had  not  yet  seen  the
other  with  the  picture  of  Miraguarda,  now
looking   higher   up,    than  in   attending  to


83

these  other  things  he  had  before  done,  was
so  utterly  confounded  at  what  he  there  be-
held, that  his  stout  heart  could  not  control
his  limbs,  which  trembled  so  that  the  spear
fell  from  his  hand.  But  as  weakness  could
lay  little  hold  there,  being  ashamed  of  hiiiv
self,  he  recovered  some  little^  and  looking  at
the  picture,  said.  Lady,  he  who  is  thus  af-
fected at  your  sight,  ought  not  to  look  upon
yon  long  least  the  danger  should  be  worse.
I  could  rejoice  to  serve  you  by  kee])ing  this
pass  as  others  have  done  ;  to  do  this  1  feel
strength  in  my  incliiiiiiion,  but  in  my  heart
a  thousand  fears  cowarding  me  more  than
ever  I  was  cowarded  belbre.  Howsoever,  if  I
can  feel  boldness  enough  to  look  at  you,  in
other  things  I  will  show  you  what  I  am
worth.  \\'hile  lie  was  speaking  the  gate  of
the  castle  opened,  and  Almourol  came  out,
upon  a  bright  chesnut  horse,  of  such
strength  and  size  as  were  needful  to  support
his  great  weight  ;  he  was  armed  in  white
armour  of  exceeding  strength,  made  less  for
adornment  than  for  use,  iuid  he  brandished
a  lance  with  such  force,  that  though  it  was
a  full  thick  one,  it  seemed  as  if  one  end  bent


84

to  touch  lhe  other.  This  Ahnourol  had  not
done  hattle  of  late,  for  Florendos  supphed
his  place  ;  but  seeing  Dramuziando  ap-
proach, and  perceiving  some  (iiscoutcnt  in
JVliraguarda,  that  he  should  arrive  when  the
Tristful  Ivnighi  was  lost,  and  his  slneld  not
be  added  to  the  other  spoils,  he  wished  to
show  her  that  where  he  was  present  none
other  was  wanted  to  perform  her  will.  With
this  intent  he  sallied  forth,  sajnng  to  Dra-
muziando,  Knight^  it  would  be  well,  if  as
you  have  set  3'our  eyes  upon  this  picture,
you  would  set  your  shield  also  among  those
wiiicli  accompany  it,  in  sign  of  defeat  :  it  will
be  better  to  yield  it  now  than  when  you  are
constrained  to  do  it  to  vour  cost.


Dramuziando  replied,  If  I  were  persuaded
that  the  mistress  of  this  picture  would  be
pleased  with  so  small  a  matter,  I  had  rather
accomplish  thy  desire  than  do  any  thing  that
might  return  the  contrary,  for  then  my  tra-
vail should  be  little,  my  loss  less,  and  my
heart  at  liberty,  where  now  it  remaineth
captive;  I  would  give  her  my  arms  and  not
myself,  that  which  cost  little  for  that  which


85

is  above  all  price,  hazarding  little  to  secure
what  is  worth  much.     But  yon  do  not  under-
stand what  you   say,   nor   is  it   reasonable
that  you  should  ;  for  a  thing  of  such  worth
it  is  not  fit  that  any  one  should  understand
except  he  be  worthy   to  enjoy  them.     Al-
inourol,  whose  wit  was  not  so  fine  as  his  heart
Mas  fierce,  thought  these  were  words  of  in-
sult and  disparagement  of  his  person  ;  aufl
lowered   his  lance   with  a   dark  and   angrv
countenance,  smoking  through    the  avciitail
of  his  helmet,  and   ran  at  him  with   all  the
fury  which  a  proud  and  haughty  heart  can
feel,  when  it  is  mastered  by   passion.     Dra-
muziando   received   him   as   bravely   as    he
came,  and  the  attaint  being  as  well  directed
as  it  was  weighty,  both  came  to  the  ground
over  the  horses'  lieels  ;  then    they  charged
one  another  fiercely  with   their  swords,  and
began  a  battle  not  less  worthy  of  being  be-
held  than  any  whieh  liad  yet  been  fought
there.     Miraguarda  standing  in  her  window
to  behold  it,  was  in  fear  for  her  giant,  think-
ing that  if  he  were  lost  she  siiould  be  in  want
of  a  guard.     Long  time  they  continued  ta^
iight,  dealing   such   mighty  blows  as  never

VOL.    II.  I


86

had  been  seen  before  :  for  bodi  being  gianis,
and  out   of  all  in(a>ure  strong,  c^ch    now
trusted  more  to  his  strcnglli  than  to  his  skill.
At  length  tliey  retired  a  \\hile  to  takr  a  little
pause,  when  Draniuziando  lifting  up  his  eyes
to  the  window,  and  beholding  Miraguarda,
was   suddenly  stricken    itito    such  e  maze,
that  the  remembrance  of  the  combat  wa«
clear  out  of  his  mind  ;  and  he  neither  íeareíi
his  enemy,  nor  was  himself  to  be  Reared  bj
him.     Almourol    perceived    his    confusion,
and  not  choosing  to  wait  till  he  had  recover-
ed himself,  for  he  stood  in  greater  dread  of
him  than  of  any  man  with  whom  he  had  eyer
entered    the   Held,  except  only    Florendos,
came  up  to  him,  and  awaked  him  out  of  hi?
study  with  such  a  sore  stroke  on  the  crest,
that  the  sword    cleft  it,  and  wounded   him.
upon  the    head.      But  as   pain   sometimes
rouses    the    sense,  so  now  did  this  arouse
Drarauziando,    who    returned    to  Almourol
with  so  great  fury,  that  he  enforced  him  to
fttart  this  way  and  that  way,  as  glad  to  avoid
the  blows  wherewith  he  was  charged,  till  at
last  he  fell  to  the  earth  ;  when  Dramuziando
setting  his  foot  upon  him,  uncksped  hii  hel-


87

lîicr,  anel  woultî  have  smitten  ofi'  his  head,
but  hearing  himsclt"  called  fiom  above,  he
looked  up  to  the  window,  and  a  damsel  said
to  him,  Sirknijjçht,  the  lady  ]\Iiraguarda  en-
Ireateth  that  you  would  satisfy  yoursell"  with
the  honour  of  your  victory,  and  not  deprive
the  giant  of  life  ;  in  which  forbearance  you
will  not  only  satisfy  what  you  owe  to  arms,
l>nt  oblige  her  also,  he  being  the  chief  guard
that  she  hath  in  this  castle.  Liidy,  Dramu-
ziando  replied,  I  give  her  his  life  since  she
requests  it,  and  mine  also  in  defence  of  her
shield,  if  she  will  permit  me,  while  this  man
is  not  in  a  state  to  keep  it.  It  may  be  that
some  one  will  come  and  conquer  me,  and
she  neither  have  compassion  to  help,  nor  he
to  spare  me;  and  then  I  shall  be  at  rest,  one
evil  putting  an  end  to  all  the  others  which  I
enflure.  Lademia,  as  the  damsel  was  called,
thanked  him  for  this  oflcr,  telling  him  that
her  lady  was  well  content  to  accept  him  as
the  keeper  of  the  pass.

Dramuziando  at  this  was  greatly  contented,
his  will  being  made  captive  and  his  liberty
gone;  and  this  disposition  in  him  arose  more
I  '1


88


from  llie  company  and  conversation  of  those
Avliom  he  had  held  so  long  time  prisoners  in
his  castle,  than  from  his  nature,  though  in-
deed it  might  be  called  nature,  since  custom,
in  length  of  time,  becomes  so.  So  he  re-
mained there,  keeping  the  pass  and  accom-
plishing haughty  deeds  of  chivalry.  But
Fortune  having  a  while  favoured  him,  at  last
forsook  him  ;  even  as  she  is  accustomed  to
falsify  her  promise  to  those  whom  she  per-
ceiveth  have  any  entrance  into  {)rosperity.


8P


CHAPTER  CO,


Draimizlando  had  not  been  so  hardly  handled
in  his  battle  with  Almourol  but  that  he  found
himscli"  the  next  morning  in  condition  to  go
through  another  such,  and  to  shew  Mira-
guarda  how  great  was  his  desire  to  serve  her.
The  sun  was  not  yet  fully  risen,  when  he
being  armed  at  all  points,  went  out  into  the
field,  and  taking  otf  his  helmet  sate  down  at
the  foot  of  the  tree  whereon  the  shield  was
hung,  liiil  whereas  love  where  it  is  great
maketh  fear  greater,  so  greatly  did  he  fear
to  look  upon  that  countenance  which  had
slain  him  ;  that  not  daring  to  lift  his  eyes
towards  it,  there  he  sate,  using  sucb  griev-
ous complaints,  that  Selvian  marvelled  to  see
f.o  mighty  a  liuia  brought  into  such  subjec-
1  3


í)0

tion  by  the  force  ol"  love.  But  Annello,
whose  grief  for  the  loss  of  his  master  never
forsook  him,  could  not  conceal  the  displea-
sure tiiese  lainentatioiis  gave  him,  believing
that  none  was  worthy  either  to  serve  Miru-
guarda/jr  keep  that  pass,  hut  only  Florendos.
]Sot  beiiii;  able  to  master  his  vexation,  he  said
to  the  giant,  ^  on  may  well  think,  sir  kiiight,
that  fortune  hath  greatly  favoured  you,  in
that  my  master  is  absent,  and  you  keep  the
jewel  of  his  joy  ;  but  durst  he  shew  himself
in  this  place,  you  would  manifest  less  pride
and  contidence  than  you  now  display.  But
this  is  the  fault  of  Miraguarda's  anger;  she
hath  by  her  unjust  commands  laid  upon  him
w  ho  hath  none,  overcome  him  with  sorrow,
so  that  he  cannot  overcome  you.

Squire,  replied  Dramuziando,  the  faith  thon
bearest  to  thy  mast-r,  secmeth  to  me  worthy
of  great  commendation  ;  and  as  his  deeds
remain  a  true  conánnation  and  witness  of
your  words,  yet  you  should  not  despise  nor
think  little  of  iinn  wiiom  you  have  never
s;  en,  and  whose  worth,  be  it  what  it  may,  is
altogether  unknown   oi'  you.     I   should   do


91

battle  with  your  master,  were  he  present  ia
this  place  ;   and  if  it  were  my  chance  to  be'
vanquished  by  him,  1  would  content  mysclt" to
be  placed  among  these  other  conquered,  who
were  not   worth   less  than  me  ;   and  pcrad-
vcnture  this  might   be   my   gain,   since    in
token  of  my  defeat  1  should  leave  a  shield,
and  perhaps  jny  life.     On  the  other  hand,  it
might  so  iortune,  if  it  were  your  chance  to
see  nie  combat  with  your  master,  you  would
conceive  another  opinion  then  as  yet  you  do,
and  judge  me  better  than  at  this  present
you  make  account.     To  serve  the  lady  JNIi-
raguarda,  I  am  us  good  as  he  ;  in  deserving
her,  he  may  be  more  worth  than  I  ;  to  dis-
parage myself  farther  would  be  a  falsehood,
and  to  deny  him  his  deserts  against  reason.
But  if  you  remain  here  awhile  some  one  may
come,  upon  whom  you  may  see  me  proved.

Aimello  had  not  yet  answered  him,  when  he
espied  afar  of!  two  knights,  come  riding
along  the  river  side;  one  of  thein  rode  a
grey  liorse,  and  had  his  armour  black  and
wliite,  with  borders  o/  gold  iinely  wrought
upon  it;  bearing  in  his  shield  I'oi  his  device.


92

a  dead  body  in  a  field  of  sanguine  ;  the  otlier
had  his  armour  of  green  and  tawny,  in  (juar-
ters,  and  in  his  sliield  argent,  two  lions  ramp-
ing. These  two  were  no  sooner  arrived  at
the  castle^  but  Dramuziando  incontinently
knew  them  ;  for  the  one  was  Don  llosuel,  and
the  other  prince  Graciano  of  France,  who
some  time  had  been  his  prisoners,  and  whose
amity  he  always  made  great  account  of.

But  albeit  it  wa?  his  wish  to  serve  them  in
all  things,  yet  the  promise  he  had  made
Miraguarda,  bound  him  now  to  the  contrar}',
and  he  must  needs  oilcnd  against  friendship,
in  obedience  to  love.  So  lacing  on  his  hel-
met and  mounting  his  steed,  he  came  forth
before  tiitm  ;  they  perceived  he  provided
himself  to  the  joust,  and  seeking  nothing
else  themselves,  righted  themselves  in  the
saddle,  having  nothing  else  to  do.  So  pass-
ing on  they  came  where  the  shield  of  Mira-
gtiarda  was  hung  up  above  all  the  shields
that  Florendos  had  conciuered,  at  the  sight
V. lureof  they  were  surprised  with  such  a
sudden  amazement,  that  they  neither  re-
liiCiubered   wliat  they    iiud  to  du,  nor  who


y3

vas  awaiting  them, nor  what  they  came  lor;
Avhich  Dramuziaiido  seeing,  addressed  him-
self to  them  with  this  manner  of  sakita-
tion  :

Sir  knights,  the  portrait  of  this  lady  is  not
here  placed,  to  be  contemplated  with  so
great  ease  ;  so  great  a  good  must  be  pur-
chased by  some  hazard.  One  by  one  ye
must  do  battle  with  me  ;  and  he  who  con-
quers me  may  contemplate  it  at  his  leisure.
Certes,  answered  Graciano,  if  this  content-
ment is  to  be  deserved  by  any  hazard,  I  will
prove  it  first.  So  concluding  his  speech,  he
met  Dramuziando  valiantly,  with  the  break
of  the  spear,  which  was  with  such  force,  that
the  prince  was  thrown  to  the  earth  with  so
strong  a  violence,  that  for  a  while  he  was
void  of  any  feeling.  This  moved  Don  Ro-
suel  to  such  displeasure,  that  to  revenge
his  friend,  he  pricked  forth  against  Dramu-
ziando, who  being  ready  provided  with  an-
other spear,  from  store  which  were  always
at  hand  in  the  field  by  Almourol's  appoint-
ment, sent  him  to  bear  Graciano  com-
j)any.


94

This  rufle  encounter  made  tlicui  bolli  mar-
vel and  look  at  each  otlier,  being  a  thing
they  were  so  httlc  accustomed  to,  and  they
would  have  supposed  that  their  enemy  was
Palmcrin,  if  the  great  size  of  his  body  had
not  satisfied  them  to  the  contrary.  Graeiano
being  the  hastiest,  and  not  able  to  brook
the  displeasure  he  had  received,  went  against
him  covered  with  his  shield,  and  sword  in
hand,  saying,  Knight,  though  your  attaint  is
such  that  it  may  well  make  your  other  deeds
to  be  dreaded,  draw  your  sword,  for  I  would
prove  all,  that  I  may  bear  testimony  to  all,
if  I  escape  from  your  hands  in  phght  to
do  it.


Dramuziando,  who  was  made  up  of  good-
ness and  virtue,  seeing  his  design,  though  he
might  now  have  gained  honour  where  he
so  greatly  desired  it,  would  not  do  battle  with
hiui,  since  the  end  could  not  have  been  but
to  his  sorrow.  Drawiníí  back  therefore,  he
said.  Sir  Graeiano,  1  do  not  make  so  small
estimation  of  life,  as  to  pkice  it  in  this  daa-
ger.  Your  anger  against  me  yoi\  may  abate,
seeing  it  is  against  one  of  the  truest  friends


95

you  Iiave  in  this  world.     At  these  words  he
took  ofí"  his  hehnct,    when   presently   they
both  ran  nnd  embraced  him,  nnd   their  mis-
chance was  now  put  clean  our.  ot  mcmorv,
because  the}' judged  it  no  shame  to  be  foiled
at  the  hands  of  Dramuziando.     So  having
requested  of  him  for  what  cause  he  remain-
ed in  that  place,  he  recited  the.  whole  occa-
sion of  his  journc}',,  and  liow  he  made  pro-
mise to  ^Nliraguarda,  after  he  had  conquer-
ed the  giant  Almourol,  to  keep  tlie  shield  in
that  place,  until  some  knight  by  his  prowess
could  brins:  him  under  his  obeisance.     Cer-
tainly,  said  Don  liosuel,  then  I  perceive  you
intend  to  keep  it  all  your  lifetime,  because  I
know  nothinc:  but  death  can  overcome  vou.
Trust  me,  quoth  prince  Graciano,  my  own
overthrow  was  well  deserved  from  my  lady
Clarisia;  for  the  face  of  Miraguarda  appear-
ed so  beautiful  to  me,  tliat  my  mind  was
employed  upon  that  and  no  other.     And  I,
replied  Don  Rosuel,  am  not  so  free  from  this
fault,  that  I  know  how  to  bave  myself  wiih
my  lady  Drainieiana,  exeej)t  by  ilying  iVoiu
this  place.     I'hen  mounting  on    liorseback,
lie  rid  away  as  fast  as  possibly  he  could,  not


96

uniting  for  Graciano^who  followed  him,  nor
taking  leave  of  Dramuziando,  who  could  not
refrain  from  laughter,  to  sec  the  fear  with
which  he  set  oft";  nor  was  it  to  be  wondered
at,  for  things  which  bring  great  hurt  with
tliem  should  alway  be  held  in  great  fear.


97


CHAPTER  61.


l*a!iiicrii),  aller  lie  luid  Icit  the  castle  of
-Alinuurol,  wcnl  ou  day  after  day  till  he  had
traversed  nearly  the  whole  of  Spain,  with-
out meeting  any  adventure  worthy  of  men-
tion. At  length  he  came  to  the  frontiers
of  iSavarre  and  of  France,  where  hy  reason
that  those  parts  were  little  peopled,  there
were  many  giants  and  knights  of  their  ge-
neration, among  whom  he  behaved  himself  so
uorihily,  doing  such  signal  feats  of  arms,  that
every  day  his  fame  spread  wider  through
the  world;  so  that  the  deeds  of  all  other
famous  knights,  past  or  present,  being  put
clean  out  of  mind,  his  only  were  taled  of,
as  a  miracle,  as  well  in  the  courts  of  princes,
as    where    the    people  were  met    together.

vol..    II.  K


98

Thus,  as  he  went  on  exercising  his  prowess,
and  divulging  his  exploits,  and  succouring
those  who  were  in  need  ;  one  day  ahout  the
hourof  vespers,  as  he  was  travelling  along  the
foot  of  a  high  serra,  thicklier  set  with  soli-
tary trees  than  with  populous  dwellings,  he
beheld  upon  the  left  hand  a  castle  seated  on
a  high  l.ill,  not  only  strong,  but  of  marvel-
lous composition,  being  built  with  green  and
white  stones,  so  perfect  in  their  colours  that
each  one  appeared  to  give  lustre  to  the
other.  At  the  foot  of  it  was  a  pavement
paved  with  the  same  stones,  and  in  the
midst  thereof  a  large  square  tank  of  water,
under  the  shade  of  green  willows  which
grew  all  around.  So  that  it  was  a  place,
not  only  worthy  to  be  seen,  but  which  als«
would  call  up  pensive  thoughts  in  one  whose
heart  was  not  free,  or  who  had  within  him
subject  for  sorrowful  contemplation.  Pal-
merin,  fergetful  of  any  danger  which  might
befal  him,  alighted  from  his  horse,  to  let
him  feed  awhile  in  the  pasture  ;  and  sitting
down  on  the  edge  of  the  tank,  under  the
shade  of  the  trees,  took  off  his  helmet  that
he  might  wash  the  dust  and  sweat  from  his


99

lace,  for  the  day  had  been  very  hot.  He  had
first  looked  to  the  castle,  if  he  could  see
or  hear  any  one  there  frotn  whom  any  thing
^vas  to  i)e  dreaded,  and  perceiving  none, won-
dered tliat  so  goodly  a  place,  seated  so  well
and  so  well  worthy  to  be  inhabited,  should
yet  be  without  inhabitants.  Then  laying
aside  his  shield  and  helmet  that  he  might  be
wholly  at  case,  and  giving  the  reins  to
thought,  lying  with  his  face  over  that  clear
and  quiet  water,  he  began  to  call  his  lady
Polinarda  to  mind,  and  the  length  of  time
it  was  since  he  had  seen  her,  and  the  fear,
which  because  of  her  command,  he  still  felt
of  appearing  before  her  in  Constantinople,
Selviam  was  not  now  at  hand  with  season-
able discourse  to  put  these  imaginations  out
of  mind  ;  the  passion  therefore  became  so
strong  upon  him,  that  his  strong  heart
failed,  and  such  was  the  power  of  these
fantastic  thoughts  over  him,  that  with  the
semblance  of  one  dead  he  lay  at  the  foot  of
the  willow  trees.  In  this  state  he  remained
till  it  was  now  near  sun-set.

At    this     time    there    came    out     of     the
K  2


100

castle  four  damsels,  sucli  gallant  gentle-
women as  were  worthy  to  be  the  inhabitants
of"  such  a  place  ;  and  seeing  him  in  this  stale
they  drew  nigh,  as  well  moved  by  conipassion,
as  in  fear  of  what  might  have  befallen  him.
Seeing  him  so  young  and  comely,  they  had
still  greater  pity  for  his  state.  He  had  all
the  signs  of  death,  but  when  they  drew
nearer  this  fear  left  them  ;  for  though  his
limbs  lay  lifelessl}',  his  ej'es  were  still  shed-
ding tears.  Then  one  of  the  damsels,  being
of  rare  and  excellent  beauty  above  the  rcst^
moved  by  compassion,  and  somewhat  affect-
ed by  his  beauty,  called  for  certain  of  her
servants,  and  bade  them  carry  him  into  the
castle,  where  having  disarmed  and  laid  him
in  a  bed, they  brought  him  with  certain  reme-
dies to  himself,  being  little  content  to  find
liimself  in  such  place,  and  rising  at  once  he
would  instantly  have  departed,  if  he  had  had
his  arms  :  but  as  the  intention  of  the  lads'
of  that  castle  was  to  keep  him  longer  there,
she  had  ordered  these  to  be  secured  as
pledges  for  him.  And  grieving  to  see  him
so  bent  upon  departing,  she  strove  with
loving  words  to  detain  him,  bescecliing  hiin


101

for  some  days  to  accept  the  hospitality  of  that
house,  for  which  it  seemed  he  stood  in  some
need;  urging,  that  the  good  uillwith  wliich
it  was  oflered,  did  not  deserve  refusal.
When  she  said  this,  such  changes  of  colour
toolv  placcin  her  cheeks,  at  one  time  of  shame,
at  another  of  the  desire  which  she  felt,  that
he  perceiving  it  and  understanding  the  cause,
without  waiting  for  liorse  or  armour,  chose
presently  to  depart.  But  she,  whose  love
at  this  time  exceeded  all  honest  bounds,
seeing  that  neither  with  amorous  words  nor
yet  with  unfeigned  tears  she  could  prevail,  in
that  sudden  change  to  which  women  arc  prone,
called  some  of  her  knights  to  seize  him.  A~
gainst  these  he  could  do  little,  having  neither
arms  nor  armour  ;  so  they  carried  him  by
force  to  a  chamber  in  their  lady's  aj)artments,
where  she  kept  him  in  irons,  but  sup[)lied
with  all  things  needful,  for  some  days  ;  often-
times confessing  to  him  in  plain  words  her
love,  and  beseeching  him  not  to  kill  her  by
his  cruelty,  whose  youth  and  beauty  were
rather  worthy  to  be  courted  than  scorned.
As  these  words  were  death  to  Palmerin,  he
not  only  continued  to  reject  lier  suit,  but
K  3


102

showed  himself  less  displeased  with  the
chains,  than  with  the  company  of  her  who
had  placed  him  in  them;  and  as  women  are
alway  in  extremes,  she  turned  her  hot  fove
into  as  hot  hatred,  and  what  with  shame  for
what  she  had  abased  herself  to,  and  anger
at  the  little  success  of  her  suit,  committed
cruelties  to  which  siie  was  little  accustomed,
after  the  nature  of  her  sex.  But  this  cruel-
ty had  no  long  time  of  lasting,  for  it  was
soon  tempered  with  some  moderation,  ari-
sing from  that  compassion  which  wont  to
have  a  place  in  lier  royal  heart;  and  then
she  excused  the  knight  and  blamed  herself,
seeking  all  means  possible  to  banibli  him
out  of  her  memory:  but  this,  her  love  was
too  great  to  let  her  cH'ect.  Then  overcome
with  shame  at  once  for  her  own  shameless-
ncss  and  the  scorn  wherewith  it  had  been
requited,  she  shut  herself  up  in  her  chamber,
struggling  with  herself;  at  length,  asa  last
remedy,  she' determined  to  keep  him  in  pri-
son, either  till  her  passion  abated,  or  his
obstinacy  gave  way.  A  vain  thougiit,  as  it
respected  him:  for  he  who  is  wholly  given  up
to  his  love,  regards  life  as  little  in  compari-
son with  it.


103


CHAPTER    Go,


Florian  of  the  Desert^  of  wlioin  no  mcniiou
hath  been  made  sint.e  l^ilaierin  cleparted
out  of  J:!ngland,  stayed  a  certain  time  in  llie
court  of  tlic  king  his  graudfatlier,  to  intrcat
favour  for  Orianda  and  her  sisters,"  the
ihuighters  of  the  marejais  lieltauior.  Tor
remembering  the  great  service  they  had  done
to  liim,  at  such  lime  as  tlie  giaiiL  C'aluunio
had  wounded  him  so  sore,  and  wiihng  to
discharge  liie  [)romise  he  made  them  at  his
dcnarture,  one  (hiv  lindins;  the  kint;-  in  Fie-
rida's  apartment,  and  Don  J /nardos  also
being  present,  he  addressed  him  in  this  man-
ner: 1  have  always  heard  th;U  laudable  deed ■;
ought  to  be  reeoinpcnerd  with  the  lil<c,  and
that  ingratitude  and  unkind  dealmg,  sliould


104

ever  be  banished  from  thelicartsof  princes  ;
Aviicretorc,  fearing  lest  myself  should  be
luimd  faulty  in  sueh  a  heinous  erime^  1  shall
<ksire  your  graeious  furthcrauee  in  a  cause
as  shall  present  my  duly,  and  your  own
honour.

It  is  so,  my  good  lord,  that  at?uch  time  as  I
embarked  myself  from  Greece,  the  tempest
over-reached  me  with  such  a  violent  mean,
tliat  our  ship  attained  the  coast  of  Ireland,
uherc  I  would  needs  go  on  land  ;  albeit
both  th.e  master  and  all  in  the  ship  persuaded
me  to  the  contrary.  Being  then  on  land,  such
Aviis  my  fortune,  that  1  met  with  [the^  giant
Calfurnio,  whose  strength,  although  it  was
redoubted  indeed,  yet  good  hap  gave  me  tlie
lionour  of  his  death.  In  this  bloody  fight,  I
received  so  manv  grievous  and  danticrous
wounds,  that  i  could  no  way  have  escaped
the  death  myself,  had  not  three  ladies,
daughters  to  the  marquis  Beltamor,  (whom
this  cniel  giant  kept  there  perl'orce)  used
such  honourable  and  goodly  provision,  that
by  thcii  no  small  labour  and  travail,  I  reco-
vered a  sound  and  perfect  estate  ;  assuring


IOj

yoii,  my  loi'd,  tliati  not,  only  make  liigli  esti-
mation ot"  their  fiien(]lv  coiutcsy,  but  also
confess  myself  indebted  to  tliem  for  ever,  to
spend  my  licart-blood  in  their  graeious
service.

AVlierelore,  remrmhering  their  misfortune,
that  for  their  latlier's  oifcnee  they  arc  disÍ!i-
herited_,l  promised  to  use  such  intercession  to
your  grace,  as  tliey  should  be  restored  to  their
lost  patrimonies.  In  the  mean  time  they  live
in  hope,  and  I  entreat  your  wonted  noble  for-
giveness on  their  bchali".

Vou  need  proceed  no  farther,  replied  the
king;  1  have  known  this  for  some  time,  and
though  from  the  marquis  I  received  many  of-
fences worthy  to  be  remembered,  and  dis-
services uhieh  touched  my  crown,  yet
would  [  not  that  his  daughters,  being  igno
rant  and  innocent  of  their  father's  crime,
shall  snd'cr  j)unishinent  lor  his  oilenee  :  see-
ing also,  that  if  they  had  borne  part  therein,
what  they  have  done  for  you  would  nvorc
than  atone  lor  it,.  That  you  nuiy  see,
lliereforu,    inv  sense   oi"  th.e   debt  von    owe


106'

them,  and  bnw  greatly  I  esteem  their  per-
sons, 1  have  dctermineil  to  give  tlic  eldest  in.
marriage  to  Don  Kosiram,  your  friend  and
iny  neplicw;  and  the  second  to  Argolante,
son  to  the  duke  ot"  Ortain,  both  of  whom
1  think  will,  for  your  love  and  at  my  desire,
he  well  pleased  to  accept  them  to  wife  ;  and
for  the  third,  we  restore  her  to  the  marquisatc
of  her  father,  and  will  join  her  in  marriage
with  Beltamor,  brother  to  Don  Rosiram.

Dorian,  kissing  his  higliness's  hand,  in
t')kcn  of  the  joy  he  received  at  the  words,
sent  with  all  speed  to  bring  the  ladies  to  the
court,  as  well  to  see  the  king's  will  accom-
plished in  eflcct,  as  to  make  proof  of  the
good  will  he  bare  to  them.

A'^'liPn  the  ladies  were  come,  and  every  thing
in  due  and  decent  order  finished,  Florian
took  leave  of  tiie  king,  as  also  of  Don
Duardos  and  Florida  ;  and  arming  himself  in
new  arms,  with  a  different  device  from  that
of  the  Savage,  with  the  which  he  had
atchievcd  so  many  exploits,  he  departed,
meaning  to  try  the  adventure  at  the  castle  of


107

Miraguardii,    which  now   was  so  renowned
thoiovv  the  world.

So  takhig  the  road  to  Spiijn,  and  mcethig
no  adventure  to  dchiy  liini,  neither  touching
at  the  court  of"  king  Recindos,  lest  lie  should
be  constrained  to  make  some  tarriance  there,
he  went  on  in  the  way  where  he  was  direct-
ed, and  arrived  at  the  castle  of  Ahnouroi,
at  such  time  as  Dramuziando  had  Just  van-
quished three  kniglits,  whereof  one  was
l'oinj)ide3,  which  made  Florian  somewh;;t
abashed;  but  when  he  knew  it  was  Jjramuzi-
ando  who  had  overthrown  them,  his  wonder
was  the  less.  And  seeing  the  shields  of  so
many  famous  men  hanging  up,  which  the
giant  had  won,  on  the  one  hand,  he  wished  tD
venture  his  own  also  ;  and  on  the  other,  his
friendship  forbade  him.  But  envy  at  sa
many  victories,  putting  all  friendly  thoughts
<jut  of  remembrance,  he  determined  to  per-
form the  custom  of  the  fortress  ;  so  rigluing
himself  in  his  saddle,  with  his  sliitld  upon
his  arm,  and  his  lance  in  rest,  he  took  his
place  in  the  course,  as  if  he  came  ilure  ior
no  other  purpose.     Dramuziando,  never  so


108

well  pleased  as  when  lie  was  venturing  hi?
])C'i^c)n  ill  Miraguarda's  service^  was  notliing
w(  aried  with  what  he  had  already  done  ;
contrariwise,  the  more  knights  came  against
him,  the  more  spirit  he  felt  in  himselt'  to  sus-
tain the  peril  and  fatigue  of  combat  ;  and
seeing  that  this  knight  awaited  him,  he  took
a  lance,  and  protecting  hiinsell"  with  his
shield,  ran  at  hini_,  lillle  tlTnikiim,  that  this
was  riorian  of  the  Desert,  the  son  of  Don
Duardos,  with  whom  lie  would  not  have
waged  battle  ior  all  in  the  world.  1  he  en-
counter was  given  on  both  sides  with  such
forcCj  that  both  came  to  the  ground  with
their  horses.  Florian  had  disengaged  him-
self sooner  than  Dramuziando,  and  seeing
that  the  giant's  helmet  had  got  awry  in  the
fall,  would  not  strike  him  till  he  had  replaced
it.  Dramuziando  was  well  aware  of  this
courtesy,  but  yet  so  little  pleased  to  think  he
should  have  stood  in  need  of  it,  that  he
\\i.-.hed  to  requite  it  with  what  was  little
worthy  of  thanks  ;  that  is  to  say,  hard  hlows
given  w ith  all  that  strength,  with  the  which
nature  had  endued  him;  hut  the  other,  who
was  of  no  less  worth  than  he,  dealt  him  such


109

iîeadly  strokes  in  return^  as  mack:  liiiii  suspect
i'roin  whom  they  came.  Nevertheless,  as  lie
never  felt  fear,  nor  suffered  ought  like  unto
it  to  be  seen  in  him,  he  dissembled  the  sus-
picion, and  so  cruel  and  fierce  a  battle  ensu-
ed between  them,  as  equalled  any  which  had
been  fought  during  the  imprisonment  of  Don
Duardos.


Miraguarda,  leaning  in  her  window,  evtolled
marvellously  the  haughty  valour  of  them
both,  so  tliat,  excepting  the  combat  of  the
Tristful  Knight  with  Palmerin,  she  gave  the
only  commendation  to  this  singular  fight,
which  continued  with  such  outrage  between
them,  that  they  were  constrained  to  retire  to
take  a  little  breathing.  Dramuziando  feeling
the  prowess  of  his  adversary,  supposed  hini
certainly  to  be  Florian  of  the  Desert,  and.
therefore  many  times  was  minded  to
discover  himself;  but  fearing  lest  it  should
be  reported,  that  he  gave  over  for  want  of
courage  to  maintain  his  quarrel,  changed  his
intent  ^  and  remembering  also,  that  this
battle  was  in  service  of  Miraguarda,  he  de-
termined to  pursue  it  to  the  end,  saying,

VOL.    II.  L


no


I^ady,  T  well  know  that  all  my  servicr-s  will  be
repaid  by  you  with   forg.tl'ulncss,  and  that
^hscontent  and  sorrow  must  be  mv  guerdon,
tliat  hcng  the  or.Iy  guerdon  whi^h  vou  be-
stow upon  those  who  deserve  other^return.
l^"t  It  IS  upon  this  condition  that  I  serve  vou'
«ince  such  as  I  can  only  serve,  and  not  merit
you;  nevertheless,  as  in  some  things    vou
may  even  for  your  own  pleasure  favour  me
regard     now    the    knight   against    whom    Í
inamtamyour  cause,  and  the  force  of  his  de-
iivercd  atteinpts   will  witness  in  what  need  I
stand  of  your  friendly  furtherance.      Favour
nie    now,  as    being  yours,    the  which   you
I<now  me  to  be,  and  let  not  Ima  who  con-
qners  me  say  that  he  did  so  when  Í  was  fio-ht-
ing  ni  your  name.  °

But  FWian,  whom  so  much  love  and  so
much  delay  put  out  of  patience,  desirous  to
imish  h,s  enterprize,  came  and  char-M
Bramuziando  the  second  time,  protecting
i^imself  wuh  what  little  of  his  shield  was  left
and  tins  second  battle  was  so  fiercely  fought,'
tha  Almourol  thought  it  surpassed  all  tka[
he  had  ever  seen.    Miraguarda  and  Lademia


Ill

said  to  ilio  damsels,  that  ilio}-  had  never  be"
held  one  like  it  ;  and  it"  they  esteemed  mar-
vellously the  valour  of"  the  giant  in  keeping
the  shield,  not  less  did  they  that  of  the
knight  who  maintained  the  field  against  him.
They,  in  whom  no  weakness  appeared,  never
eeased  striking  each  other,  dealing  their
blows  with  such  force,  that  there  was  no  ar-
mour left  in  such  state  as  to  withstand  them,
and  the  Hesh  felt  the  fur}'  with  which  they
were  laid  on.  Selviam  standing  in  doubt  that
Uramuziando  would  be  slain,  which  would
be  great  grief  to  his  lord  and  master,  came
to  the  squire  of  Florian,  whoui  he  presently
knew,  which  made  him  full  joyful,  believing
now  verily  that  he  should  save  the  lives  of
both  ;  wherefore  he  came  to  Florian  with
these  wurtls  :  I  beseech  you,  sir,  pass  no  fur-
ther in  this  doubtful  fight,  for  he  whom  you
labour  against  is  Dramuziando,  your  trusty
and  loyal  friend.  Selviam  had  no  sooner
spoken  these  words,  but  that,  as  if  they  had
not  before  known  each  other,  they  pre-
sently threw  down  their  swords,  embracing
one  another  with  gentle  salutations  and
friendly   words,    albeit    but   few,  inasmuch

L'2


]\íl

as  their  wounds  would  not  permit  tliein
time  for  long  tmrioncc.  Florian  wa-»
greatly  amazed  to  see  Solviam  there  without
his  master;  wherefore  he  demanded  of" him
how  all  things  had  happened  :  but  when  he
imderstooil  the  loss  of  his  hrother,  he  re-
mained in  grief  beyond  all  persuasion,  so
that  he  determined  to  go  straight  to  Con-
stantinople, and  if  he  failed  of  him  there,
he  would  seek  all  the  world  over,  but  he
^vould  find  him  a^ain.

So  taking  leave  of  Dramuziando,  accom-
panied v.ith  Selviam,  he  departed  from
thence,  not  desiring  to  see  Miraguarda,  lest
he  should  be  brought  into  the  like  state  as
■was  the  gentle  giant.  Pompides,  who  had
stood  by  to  behold  the  battle,  lamenting
heavily  that  he  had  been  vanquished,  came
and  presented  himself  to  bear  him  company  ;
so  they  rode  on  lovingly  together  to  a  place
near  at  hand,  where  they  might  meet  with
some  one  to  cure  their  wounds.


US'


CHAPTER  61


Dnuiniziundo  was  lodged  after  the  battle  in
I  he  apartmentb  olthe  giant  Ahiiourol,  where
as  great  a  care  was  used  to  hiin  as  might  be
possible  :  but  so  dangerous  were  liis  liiirts,
that  of  a  good  while  after  he  was  not  able
to  endure  the  travail  of  armour,  iu  which
lime,  -Miraguarda  would  not  suffer  Ahnourol
to  eater  the  iiglit  any  more,  because  she  had
seen  him  twice  vanquished  :  so  that  many
knights  coming  thither  to  try  the  ad\eik-
iure_,  were  fain  to  return  and  lose  their  ia-
bour.  Some  indeed  there  were,  so  s;niiti.ii
with  the  beauty  of  the  picture,  that  they  de-
termined to  alude  while  Dramuziando  was
recovered;  after  which  they  remained  with
their  grief,  and  tb.eir  shields  went  to  kn  ;
L  3


114

company  with  the  others.  Among  these
Avas  one  \\ith  the  nanrie  of  Tremoran,  and
anotlicr  of"  Francian  the  Musical,  which
might  well  have  surprised  any  one  who
saw  them  there,  and  did  not  know  the
conqueror.

riorian  and  Pompides  journfying  together,
happened  into  the  house  of  an  ancient
knight  \\\\o  lived  beside  the  w,iy,  and  whose
skill  was  very  great  in  the  science  of  chirur-
gery.  There  they  remained,  being  cured  by
his  hand,  and  supplied  with  all  things  need-
ful; and  they  passed  away  the  time  in  dis-
coursing the  haughty  adventures  enterpriz-
ed  at  the  castle  of  Almourol,  on  the  behalf
of  the  beauty  of  Miraguarda,  of  whom  Pom-
]ndes  spake  as  of  a  miracle,  not  being  able
to  dissemble  the  shame  he  felt  at  having
been  discomfited  before  her  ;  but  Florian
laughed  and  mocked  at  him,  rejoicing  that
he  had  not  seen  her,  and  so  had  escaped  the
peril  into  which  all  others  had  fallen.

When  they  had  well  recovered  their  strength,
yielding  great  thanks  unto  their  gentle  host.


115

tlîC}'  departed  from  thence,  taking  the  road
towards  Constantinople,  where  there  was
the  flower  of  all  the  chivalry  of  the  world.
They  went  the  strait  way,  meaning  to  take
ship  from  some  part  of  France,  where  they
might  most  readily  find  passage.  Now  it
fell  out,  that  a  few  days  after  Palmerin  was
made  prisoner  they  came  to  that  same  place;
and  seeing  the  castle  so  well  edified  and  in
so  pleasant  a  site,  marvelled  greatly  that  it
sliould  be  in  a  ])lace  so  desert  and  uninha-
bited. So  drawing  nearer  to  behold  it  bet-
ter, they  beheld  a  damsel  mounted  on  a
white  palfrey,  accompanied  with  two
esquires,  come  forth  of  the  castle,  she
being  not  only  well  apparelled  and  gayly
adorned,  but  also  fair  in  no  little  degree.
The  knights  approaching,  accosted  her  with
that  courtesy  which  they  alway  used,  and
which  is  duc  to  women,  and  requested  to
whom  that  goodly  castle  belonged,  if  their
demand  might  be  no  hinderancc  to  her  hasty
aftairs  :  whereto  the  damsel  m,ade  this
answer  :

Albeit  my  haste  may  be  great,  yet  the  gentle


HG

tlemand,  both  of  your  spcccb  and  outward
lehaviour,  would  make  me  stay  till  I  have
satisfied  your  desire.  Tliis  castle  was  first
founded  at  the  commandment  of  Vasilas,
sometime  the  king  of  Navarre,  of  whom  ye
may  have  heard  :  he  being  now  deceased,
the  princess  Arnalta,  his  daughter,  is
come  to  inhabit  this  famous  mansion.  For
she  being  unwilling  to  govern  her  people,
by  reason  she  is  but  young  of  years,  as  also
unmarried,  committed  the  guiding  of  so
weighty  a  charge  to  such  honourable  per*
sons  in  her  court,  as  she  knew  both  virtu-
ous, wise,  and  discreet,  to  use  justice  to  the
usurping,  and  equity  to  her  loving  sub-
jects in  general.  During  the  time  she  hath
remained  here,  report  hath  blazed  abroad
the  adventures  at  the  castle  of  the  giant
Alniourol,  in  the  maintenance  of  the  beauty
of  JNJiraguarda  ;  whose  beauty  being  so
highly  commended,  is  the  cause,  as  she
supposeth,  that  she  is  not  beloved  of  a
knight  who  remaineth  in  the  castle,  and  to
whom  she  bearcth  great  love  and  aftection.

On  this  belief,  she  hath  commanded  me  to


117

go  see  IVriragnarcIa,  whereby  she  may  be
certified  if  her  beauty,  that  is  so  liighly
extolled,  may  surmount  that  wherewith  na-
ture hath  so  plentifully  adorned  herself;
which,  if  it  so  fall  out,  then  is  she  minded  to
deliver  the  knight;  but  if  my  lady  prove  su-
perior to  this  canonized  specta(;le,  then  I
fear  she  will  put  the  knight  to  death,  con-
sidering the  injury  he  hath  offered  her,  who
hath  so  much  abased  herself  as  to  bear  an
ungrateful  person  such  affection.  This  lady
of  yours,  said  Florian,  is  she  fairer  than  you  ?
Trust  me,  sir,  quoth  she,  if  you  find  any
thing  in  me  that  deserveth  to  bear  the  title
of  beauty,  when  you  shall  chance  to  have
a  sight  of  my  lady,  you  will  say  you  have
made  a  very  simple  comparison.  Then,
said  Florian,  you  may  turn  back  ;  for  Mira-
guarda  would  be  well  pleased  to  be  as  hand-
some as  you  arc.  Lady,  quoth  Pompides,
let  not  these  words  stay  you  from  your  mis-
tress's command,  but  proceed  in  your  enter-
prize,  and  you  shall  see  that,  which  neither
of  us  is  woithy  to  use  talk  of;  so  shall  ye
gave  the  life  of  lhe  knight  whom  she  loveth,
and  certify  your  lady  a\  ith  a  certain  report.


lis

As  for  what  it  bath  pleased  this  knight  to  say,
his  words  are  but  jesting,  tor  he  never  saw
the  fair  Miraguarda.  It  seems  then,  sir
knight,  answered  the  damsel,  that  yo>i  have
been  aftectioned  to  the  fair  view  of  this  lady,
that  you  can  so  readily  stand  for  a  witness
in  the  behalf  of  her  bf-auty.  I  beseecb  you,
therefore,  return  with  me  to  the  princess  m}'
lady,  so  shall  you  save  me  a  journey.  So
alighting  from  their  horses,  they  went  to-
gether into  the  castle,  where  the  damsel  gave
her  lady  to  understand,  that  she  had  met  w  ith
two  knights  who  were  lately  come  from  the
castle  of  Almourol,  and  could  at  large  inform
her  concerning  the  beauty  of  Miraguarda.
The  princess  Arnalta  being  very  glad  of
these  news,  caused  a  fair  chamber  to  be
provided  for  the  two  knights,  where,  when
they  had  disarmed  themselves,  and  taken  a
little  ease,  being  w^eary  with  travel,  she  came
and  courteously  welcomed  them  to  her
castle,  shewing  all  the  commodities  that
might  urge  them  to  pleasure  ;  and  walking
forth  to  the  side  of  the  tank,  setting  them
down  under  the  shadow  of  the  willow  trees,
she  addressed  herself  to  Floriun,  who  sirem-


U9

ed  to  be  tlie  cliicf  of  the  two,  in  this  man-


ner :


Albeit,  sir,  Í  am  ignorant  how  you  may  ac-
cept my  words,  yet  will  1  relate  to  you  my
own  afl'airs,  to  learn  something  from  you
which  I  greatly  desire  to  know.  I  am
daughter  to  the  king  of  Navarre,  and  lady
of  all  ihii  land.     At  such  time  as  the   kin"-

o

my  father  died,  1  betook  myself  to  live  in
this  habitation,  till  the  governors  of  my  kin o--
dom  had  chosen  me  such  a  peer  as  might  in
all  respects  satisfy  the  \viil  of  my  late  de-
ceased father,  isiow,  1  know  not  how  many
davs  since,  there  comes  hither  a  knidit.
whom  for  what  I  saw  in  him,  without  any
other  knowledge,  I  desired  to  make  lord  of
my  person  and  of  all  my  dominions.  I  know
not  what  reason  he  had  to  reject  these  two
things,  which  arc  by  many  princes  so  de-
sired ;  but  he  hath  not  only  rejected  mv
offer,  but  hath  even  told  me  that  he  is  bet-
ter pleased  with  the  company  of  the  irons
^vhorewilh  1  have  charged  him,  than  with
mine.  Though  this  is  a  great  grief  to  me,  I
have  dissembled  it,  believing  that  he  is  either


]20

out  of  his  wits^  or  that  some  other  love  hath
so  bound  his  affection  prisoner^  tliat  he  can-
not acknowledge  so  great  a  good.  Now,  as
in  all  these  kingdoms  I  know  no  person  whose
beauty  could  so  bind  liim,  except  Mira-
guarda,  who  is  so  loudly  lauded,  I  com-
manded one  of  my  damsels  to  take  lier  jour-
ney thither,  to  see  her  beauty  :  ii  so  be  she
were  only  perfect  without  comparison,  tlieu
had  I  determined  to  set  the  knight  at  liberty;
but  if  I  were  found  to  deserve  as  liigh  a  title
as  she,  then  would  1  reu  ard  him  with  punish-
ment, according  as  his  disdainful  nature  did
worthily  deserve,  that  others  might  not  be
encouraged  to  treat  with  contempt  persons  of
such  high  worth  as  me.

Florian,  who  all  this  while  had  his  eyes  upon
her  and  his  wishes  not  far  off,  wished  to  see
if  she  could  be  satisfied  with  words,  perceiv-
ing that  she  was  vain  as  well  as  fair,  quahties
which  in  women  often  go  together.  Lady,
said  he,  you  should  not  see  this  knight  again,
nor  niiuct  upon  him  any  other  chastisement
or  worse  pain  than  to  let  him  live:  for  the
longer  ne  saall  live  the  more  he  will  feol  his


12Ï

folh'  and  wliat  he  has  lost  by  it  ;  seeing  ihkt
your  person  is  not  such  a  one  as  sliould  be
rtjccted  for  any  other.     Miraguarda  is  as
fair  as  she  is  famed  ;  yet  are  you  nothing  in-
ferior to  her,  nor  would  she,  if  she  saw  you,
fuul  any  eause  to  exult.     Arnalta  was  well
pleased    with   these    words  of  Florian,  and
stedfastly  fixing-  her  eounteiiance  upon  him,
even  as  lightly  as  she  grounded  her  love  on
Palmerin,  so,  aeeordiuL''  to  the  mutabilitv  of
an  unstedfast  woman,  she  began  to  grow  in
as  great  good-liking   of    him  ;    and    taking
them  by  the  hand,  she  returned  with  them
into  the  castle,  where,  again.^t  their  coming,
the  tabic   was  ready  covered.    Before  they
sat  down  Tlorian  desired  to  see  the  knight,
who  at  his  request  was  immediately  sent  for.
But  when   Florian   and  Pompides  saw  liim,
thi-y  were  not  able  to  conceal  the  great  joy
they  sustained,  and  Selviam  cast  himself  at
his  feet.     Arnalta  seeing  the  greeiing  they
gave  him,  was  grieved  to  have  them  in  her
house,  and  would  fain  have  dismissed  them
all  ;   but  Florian,  to  whom  the  lady  did  not
ap[)ear  amiss,  sootiied  her  with  words  and
blandishments  to  such  clfect,  that  she  oider-

VOL.  11,  M


ed  one  Led  to  be  made  ready  for  Pompidcs
and  Palmerin,  and  another  for  him  b}'  him-
self, where,  when  the  hour  gave  her  oppor-
timity,  she  went  to  visit  liim.  Eight  davs
they  made  abode  with  her,  at  the  end  of
whicii  time  Florian  and  Arnalta  separated,
he  heing  satiated  and  slie  sorrowful.  He
made  her  a  promise,  that  so  soon  as  he  could
he  would  return  to  her,  and  the}-  all  depart-
ed, taking  the  road  to  Constantinople;  they
going  away  well  content  with  their  adven-
ture, and  she  with  the  full  hope  of  Fioiian's
return  ;  but  to  return  was  little  in  his  mind.


CHAPTER  64.


When  these  three  knights  were  thus  depart-
ed from  the  princess  Arnalta,  Pahnerin,  by
the  way.  rode  with  Selviam  aside,  to  whom
he  expiessed  the  great  perplexity  wherein
l)e  remained,  for  the  love  he  bare  his  lady
Polinarda:  to  whom,  though  now  knowing
whose  son  he  was,  he  might  more  confi-
dently serve  her  he  yet  feared  to  approach,
because  of  her  commandment:  and  though
Selviam  broucflit  to  his  mind  reasons  for
foregoing  this  fear,  none  of  them  availed,
for  love  overpowered  them  all,  so  that  Pal-
merin  was  in  more  perplexity  than  ever.
And  also  he  held  it  as  a  reproach  that  he
liad  not  been  able  to  conqner  Florendos  when
îhe  combat  was  concerning  his  lady.  All
M  'Z


124

these  things  made  him  more  discontented
than  he  had  ever  before  been.  Floriaa
and  Pompides,  perceiving  his  discontent
though  they  knew  not  the  cause  tliereof,
Mere  in  consequence  little  cheerful  :  for  this
is  the  nature  of  friendship,  that  friends
should  conform  to  each  other  in  inclinatioa
as  well  as  in  deeds.

Havinii;  travelled  some  davs  in  the  kinirdom
of  France,  into  the  which  they  had  now  en-
tered, they  came  one  da}'  at  the  hour  of  tierce
into  a  pleasant  valley,  at  the  edge  whereof
there  Mas  a  little  stream  of  clear  waier,  be-
side which,  under  a  shadow  of  trees,  they
perceived  four  fair  tents  erected,  and  twelve
shields  hung  on  high  about  them,  so  as  to  be
seen  from  far.  But  that  which  was  most  to
their  admiration,  there  was  a  brave  corn-
pan}'  of  ladies,  who  disported  themselves
tinder  those  green  trees.  The  knights  rejoic-
ing to  find  such  gallant  company  in  so  solitary
a  place,  betook  themselves  presently  toward
the  tents,  when  there  came  forth  from  one
of  them  twelve  knights  in  rich  and  lust-
rous armour,  better  than  which   they  had


125

ncvpr  beheld.  One  of  them  mounted  iiis
stecdj  and  took  a  strong  lunce  in  his  iiand,
preparing  himself  to  enter  the  joust.  The
three  companions  perceiving  this,  made
themselves  ready.  Presently  an  esquire  ad-
vanced, saluting  the  princes  in  this  manner:
Sirs,  Florenda,  daughter  to  the  king  of
France,  who  is  in  these  tents,  by  me  greetetli
you,  giving  you  to  understand,  that  going
on  a  certain  pilgrimage,  she  stayelh  here  in
this  pleasant  valley  to  pass  the  sesta;  and
seeing  it  is  so  fair  a  place,  will  remain  here
till  the  heat  of  the  day  be  somewhut  more
declined.  And  forasmuch  as  she  hath  seen
in  you  the  appearance  of  knigVitly  behavi-
our, she  desireth,  if  you  will  favour  her  re-
quest so  much,  that  you  would  break  a  few
lances  with  certain  of  her  knights,  if  it  be
not  displeasing  to  you.

1  could  have  willingly  served  the  lady
Florenda  in  aught  else,  replied  Palmerin,
if  it  had  so  pleased  her  ;  but  seeing  it
is  her  pleasure  to  see  us  joust,  certify
her,  that  we  remain  at  her  gracious  com-
mand. As  they  were  making  them-
M  .i


126'

sielves    ready,  Flori.m    entreated    that    the
first   encounter    might    be    his.      Pompides
would  willingly  hav- been  the   first,   that  he
might  luive   displayed    himself  before   his
brethren  ;  but  seeing  Florian's  wish,  he  re-
frained, and  Palmerin  willingly  gave  it  up
as  it  was  an  affair  of  women,  and  his  brother
greatly  affected  such.     So  putting  heels  to
horse,  he  encountered  the  first  knight  with
such  haughty  courage,  that  he  sent  him  to
measure  his  length  on    the  earth.      In    this
manner  he  served  five  without  breaking  his
lance,    but  on   the  sixth   he  sliivercd   it  in
pieces;  wherefore    Pompides  delivered  him
his,  being  glad  to  see  him  speed  so.

The  princess,  somewhat  moved  to  see  her
knights  foiled  so  fast  by  one,  exhorted
the  others  to  make  better  proof  of  their
chivalry;  but  in  the  mean  while,  a  damsel
came  crossing  the  valley  on  a  black  pal-
frey, lamenring  with  a  loud  voice,  as  one:
who  was  suffering  or  had  endured  some
sore  affliction  ;  and  looking  up  and  down,
and  seeing  Palmerin  thus  ■  armed,  she
came  up    to   him,   saying,   I  beseech  you.


\Z1

sir  kniglit,  by  \\hai  you  owe  to  the  order  ot
kriiglithoodj  if  you  have  courage,  follow  mc^'
and  you  will  render  one  of  the  greatest  suc-
cours that  ever  knight  did.  Palmerin,  who
bare  arms  only  to  succour  the  weak  estate  of
the  distressed,  without  making  her  any  other
an^jwcr,  turned  his  horse  and  fpllowed  her,on]y
saying  to  Pompides,  do  you  remain  here
and  tell  Florian  to  ge  on  in  the  same  road  ;
by  God's  ])leasurc  I  will  soon  be  with  you.

Pompides  remained, though  loath;  \vhen  one
of  tlic  latiies  belonging  to  the  princess  Flo-
venda,  seeing  Palmerin  to  depart  on  such  a
sudden,  came  to  him  Avith  these  words  :  It
.«eemeth,  knight,  that  you  would  bear  arms
with  less  fatigue  than  your  companions,
.since  you  see  how  the  one  is  engaged  here,
and  let  the  other  depart  alone,  not  knowing
the  mishap  of  the  damsel,  or  the  hard  for-
tune that  may  hap  to  attach  the  knight.
Lady, (answered  Pompides)  she  is  in  the  go-
vernment of  so  gond  a  knight, as  I  dare  war-
rant slic  shall  have  little  cause  to  fear,  and  I
be  little  needed  ;  but  because  you  shall  not
account  me  of  such  cowarchcc,  I  will  direct


128

my  course  after  him,  ratlicr  to  bcliold  liis
prowess,  than  to  think  he  should  staud  in
need  of  my  hel{>.  So  taking  liis  leave  he  fol-
lowed Pahnerin,  who  had  by  this  time  got
so  far,  that  many  days  past  before  he  over-
took him.

Florian,  havinpi;  dismounted  eight  of  i!ie
knights,  could  deal  with  no  more  because
his  limce  was  broken,  and  waited  therefore
to  see  what  Florcnda  would  order  him  to  do.
But  one  of  the  damsels  came  and  presented
him  with  another  in  her  name,  desiriiig  him
not  to  give  over  the  joust,  since  he  demean-
ed himself  in  it  so  well.  He  took  it,  making
courteous  acknowledgment  to  her  who  gave
ir,  who  was  a  young  dame  and  a  fair,  and  pro-
mised to  use  it  as  a  gift  from  her  hand;  then
took  his  place  in  the  course.  The  ninth
knight  advanced,  in  grey  arms  with  scallops
of  gold,  and  upon  a  mulberry-coloured  horse,
heing  of  better  countenance  than  those  who
had  adventured  before  him.  As  this  knÍG:ht
Avas  full  confident  in  himself,  he  cameon,say-
ing,  I  rejoice,  knight,  to  behold  in,you  such
signal  deeds,  for  \\  ho  conquers  you  wiU  be


held  In  the  more  esteem.  Saying  this  he
fixed  hjs  eyes  upon  Carmclia,  Florcnda's
îady  of  the  bed-chamber,  with  whom  he
Avas  enamoured  ;  and  then  in  full  contentment
at  her  &iglit,  and  confidence  in  himself,
couched  his  spear  against  Florian,  thinking
to  honour  her  with  his  overthrow.  But
reckoning  without  his  host,  he  was  fain  to
make  a  new  account,  and  possess  the  place
on  the  groimd  himself,  being  now  as  sorrow-
ful for  his  ill  fortune  as  he  was  pleasantly
disposed  before  he  entered  the  joust.  The
otiiers  who  yet  remained,  though  they  were
of  great  worth,  came  on  less  haughtily  than
this  last  one,  that  they  might  feci  the  less
shame  if  they  also  should  be  overthrown,
l^rcscntly  the  tenth  advanced,  in  arms  of  red
and  carnation,  with  roses  of  silver  rivcttcd
iijjon  them.  But  not  to  tarry  in  detailing
encounters,  he  fell  like  his  companions,  and
the  eleventh  like  him.  The  last  now  came
lorth,  in  whom  Florenda  had  more  trust
than  in  all  the  rest.  He  rode  a  spotted  gray
horse,  with  arms  of  gold  and  green  in  quar-
ters, and  among  a  thousand  devices  and  gal-
lantries upon  his  shield,  bore  a  lion  in  a  field


130

or,  tearing  in  pieces  a  wliite  stag.  This  one,
according  to  the  show  of  his  person  and
mariner  of  liis  limbs,  appeared  of  greater
■worth  than  the  others  ;  and  saying  nothing,
came  on  against  Florian,  who  received  him
as  he  was  wont  to  do:  but  as  this  was  the
brave  Germam  of  Orleans,  he  could  not
make  him  void  the  saddle  as  he  had  done
his  coiiiL anions,  till  two  careers  had  been
run;  and  at  the  third  attempt,  he  was  en-
forced to  keep  his  friends  company,  not  a
little  displeased  to  be  foiled  in  the  presence
of  h^:;r  to  whom  he  had  vowed  the  honour  of
all  his  victories  :  for  as  ye  have  heard,  Ger-
mam of  Orleans  served  Florenda  with  intent
to  marry  her,  he  being  a  great  lord,  and  one
of  the  especial  knights  of  France.

Floreada,  seeing  all  hor  knights  overthrown,
besought  Florian  to  take  off  his  helmet  and
say  who  he  was;  since,  for  one  whose  deeds
manifested  him  so  well,  it  could  be  little  ne-
cessary to  wish  to  conceal  himself.  He  obey-
ed her,  beseeching  lier  of  her  bounty,  that
if  in  this  joust  he  had  disserved  her,  she
would  be  pleased  to  let  him  make  amends


131

ill  something  uliicli  might  be  greatly  to  her
service;  and  taking  off  his  helmet,  alighted
and  offered  to  kiss  her  hand,  but  she  would
not  sulîcr  him  so  to  do.     Germain  of  Or-
leans,   knowing    him,  came   and    embraced
him  in  great  joy,  and  turning  to  Florenda,
said,  I  account  it  no  dishonour,  lady,  to  be
vanquished  by  this  knight,  lor  in  all  his  at-
tempts he  ever   remainetli  victor.      AVheii
the  princess  understood  that  it  was  Florian
of  the  Dcsert,hcr  own  cousin,  she  welcomed
liiu)  anew  with    other   greeting    and  cour-
tesy, thinking  nothing  now  of  the  overthrow
of  her  kniglits.     And  then  commanding  the
tents  to  be  taken  down,  because  it  was  the
time  of  her  departure,  she  would  not  suffer
Florian  to  accompanj*  her,  but  besought  him
to  remain  some  days  in  the  court  of  France,
where  he  would  be  received  with  that  love
which  was  due  to  him.    lie  excused  himself,
saying,  that  he  must  needs  follow  the  knights
who   went  with  the    damsel,  for  he  feared
some  treachery.     Florenda  asked  him  who
that  knight  was,  as  he  a|>peared  to  be  some
great  person.    Lady,  he  replied,  you  arc  no


wrong  in  thinking  so:  it  is  Pulnuiinof  Eng-
land, my  lord  and  brother.  j\o\v  then  I
coní"cs.í  lo  you,  sir,  quoth  she,  that  1  am  sorry
to  learn  it.  since  I  was  so  uníortunate  as
having  him  here  not  to  know  him,  being  the
thing  I  most  desired.  But  i  beseech  you
loilow  him,  and  if  it  be  possible  lo  bring  him
to  tlie  court  ol"  the  king  my  luther,  do  so,
for  you  will  be  served  tliere  as  tliat  of  Great
Britain.  Then  the  damsel  who  had  made
Pompides  depart  came  to  Florian  and  said.
Sir,  I  would  fain  have  knowledge  of  the
knight  who  hath  gone  after  l^ilmerin,dcsiring
you  to  certify  him  the  sorrow  Í  conceive
for  the  words  I  gave  him.  Lady,  answered
riorian,  he  is  one  who  will  be  ready  at  all
times,  to  employ  himself  in  your  service  ;
he  is  named  Pompides,  my  brother  and  ever
iipproved  good  friend.  1  humbly  pra\'  you,
said  the  lady,  that  you  would  excuse  nie  to
him,  in  the  oflence  I  have  ungently  offered,
riorian  answered,  in  this  and  in  whatever
else  you  may  please  to  employ  me,  I  am  a5
certainly  obedient  as  such  a  face  deserves.
So    taking   leave    of   Florenda,    he    posted


apac-e  that  way  which  Palmerin  had  taken,
standing  in  great  fear  least  any  mischance
should  happen  unto  him,  as  one  who  knew
that  of  mischances  the  world  and  the  times
were  liberal


vol,.  II.


134


CHAPTER    G5.


Palmerin  of  England  rode  after  the  damsel
at  full  speed,  for  her  haste  allowed  him  no
rest;  and  though  he  oftentimes  wished  to
know  of  her  whither  she  was  leading  him,
she  could  never  answer  for  weeping.  Thus
they  went  on  all  day  and  all  night  without
halting,  till  their  beasts  were  so  weary  that
they  could  hardly  move.  On  the  next
morning,  just  as  da}'  began  to  break,  they
came  near  the  foot  of  a  castle,  where  wateh
was  kept.  The  damsel  here  left  the  road,
requesting  Palmerin  to  wait  for  her;  and
going  up  to  the  castle,  spake  to  one  of
the  watchmen  thereof,  and  then  returning
to  him,  went  on  with  more  speed  than  ever,
till  noon,  when  they  came  into  a  wide  and


135

gooílly  vallcy,extciuUng  before  a  little  town,
which  was  ill  the  dutchy  of  Roussillon.
Tlieic  she  told  hiiu  to  alight  while  she  went
into  the  town,  and  that  she  would  presently
return.  In  the  mean  while,  ]-*almerin  took
oH'  his  helmet,  and  sat  him  down  to  rest
hiin,  being  weary  with  travel.  The  damsel,
wliosc  íiíTairs  allowed  of  no  delay,  went  to
the  towji,  and  returned  as  fast  as  if  her  pal-
frey hail  been  fresh;  and  beholding  Pal-
nicrin  to  be  so  young  and  beautiful,  she
believed  that  she  had  found  weak  htlp  for
her  trouble,  and  began  lo  complain  of
her  fortune,  lamenting  more  bitterly  than
ever.

Pahncrin,  not  knowing  the  cause  of  her
sorrow,  and  moved  with  compassion,  be-
sought her  that  she  would  express  it  to  him;
whercu[)on  she  re{)lied.  What  would  you
have  me  tell  you,  sir  knight,  but  that  Í  am
the  only  unfortunate  woman  in  the  world,
who  have  ;raveiled  throuL;li  the  whole  king-
dom of  irancc,  thinking  lo  iind  a  valiant
and  renowned  knight  for  a  case  of  great
necessity  ;  and  relating  my  story  to  the  best
N  '2


136

î<iiiglus  in  the  court  of  Francr,  none  would
undertake  the  adventure,  deeming  it  too
liard  to  be  atcliievcd  ;  so  I  went  in  despair,
meaning  to  intrcat  the  princess  Florenda
to  give  mc  one  of  her  most  strong  and  hardy
knights;  and  finding  you  in  the  company  of
one  who  unhorsed  lier  champions  with
great  valiancy,  I  had  so  good  an  opinion  of
you,  supposing  that  you  had  been  like  him,
that  I  intreated  you  to  follow  me,  not  re-
hearsing the  perilous  danger  I  should  bring
you  to.  So  that  now,  being  at  the  place
where  you  should  put  your  deeds  in  proof,
I  find  you  so  young,  and  to  appearance  of
such  small  force,  that  I  am  void  of  all  hope
to  have  any  good  success.  Lady,  answered
Palmerin,  I  wish  you  may  have  reason  and
justice  on  j'our  side  :  for  the  rest,  I  will  do
what  I  can,  which  peradventure  may  be
more  than  from  m}'  age  you  expect.  Now
then  tell  me  to  what  intent  you  have
brought  me  with  voii,  and  doubt  not  but  I
will  adventure  my  life  in  any  peril.  O  sir,
quoth  she,  Avhat  good  words,  if  your  deeds
should  agree  with  them  !  Know  then,  that
there  are  in  this    town    three  damsels  held


137

prisoners,  the  daughters  of  one  of  the  most
iiobic  lordj  in  this  country,  who,  because
their  father  would  not  give  them  in  marriage
to  the  duke  of  Roui^sillon  and  his  two
brethren,  they  found  the  means  to  murder
him,  and  brought  these  three  ladies  by  force
to  tliis  fortress.  And  because  they  never
would  yield  to  their  desire,  they  have  given
them  scope  of  time  till  this  day  to  iind  a
knight  to  combat  for  them,  and  deliver
them  out  of  their  hands;  and  tlie  order  of
the  combat  is  this.  Tirst^at  the  entrance  of
the  fortress,  he  must  do  battle  with  Branja-
rim,  cousin  to  the  duke,  and  one  of  the  most
renowned  kniglits  in  all  this  country.  If  it
chanceth  that  he  be  vanquished,  then  must
you  lia/,aiil  yourself  against  his  t\\(j  kinsmen,
Olislar  and  Alfariin,  both  redoubted  knights  ;
3'et  all  these  being  conijiiered  will  not  re-
turn the  victory,  for  then  must  you  deal
Mith  the  duke  and  his  two  brethren,  wlio
are  known  to  be  such  stout  and  noble  knights,
that  cither  one  would  singly  be  suHicient  for
the  best  in  this  land.  And  as  tiiis  is  the  last
day  of  the  time  appointed,  tiie  ladies  must
this  day  find  a  knight,  or  else  the  duke  !,iath


15S

.sworn  they  shall  lose  their  heads;  and  tlii>  is
the  reason  why  I  have  brought  you  here
■with  such  speed.  Now  I  have  been  into
the  town  to  say  I  have  found  a  cham-
pion, at  which  the  duke  is  greatly  incensed,
thinking  to  have  executed  his  purpose.
Certes,  cried  Palmerln,  Í  do  not  wonder  that
many  knights  should  have  refused  to  enter-
prise so  doubrful  an  adventure.  The  king
doth  ill  in  suilering  a  thing  so  unreasoniiblc
within  his  dominions  ;  but  the  day  is  far  ad-
vanced, and  little  time  enough  left  for  so
much  as  is  to  be  done.  Let  us  go.  I  trust
in  God  that  the  badness  of  this  duke's  cause
shall  occasion  his  overthrow.  Saving  this
he  laced  on  his  lielmet,  being  melancholick
at  so  heinous  a  wrong.  The  damsel  perceiv-
ing his  noble  mind,  and  the  little  doubt  he
had  to  deal  with  these  enemies,  took  better
hope,  and  they  went  together  into  the  town,
and  proceeded  to  the  castle,  which  was
well  situate  and  strong;  such  a  strong  hold
as  sliould  not  be  permitted  to  the  bad,  for
the  confidence  of  such  strength  is  oftentimes
the  cause  of  many  errors.


139


CHAPTER  66.


The  damsel  entered  tlic  town  wiili  Palmerln^
not  po  contented  with  the  hope  of  her  suc-.
eess  as  she  might  have  heen,  liail  she  know  u
whom  she  brought  with  her  :  for  this  vantage
thfv  have  to  whom  nature  hath  given  large
limhs  and  robust  semblance,  that  greater
courage  and  worthier  deeds,  are  expected
Irom  ihem  than  from  others.  Having  reach-
ed  the  fortress,  they  found  the  walls  and  the
top  thereoi'  full  of  people  to  see  the  battle*
and  every  place  which  they  coulil  see  round
them  was  thronged  with  s])ectators.  And
because  this  castle  was  moated  round  about
with  a  walled  ditch,  deep,  and  the  sides  of
good  masonry,  certain  men  came  out  and
let  down  a  draw   biidge.     Puhnerin  would,


140

ha^o  tro?scrl  liy  it,  Lui.  Bramarim  sallied  out
from  the  foitrcis  to  ]>revent  it,  in  aims  of
vermilion,  upon  a  chcsnut  horse,  brandishing
his  lance,  and  saying,  Abide,  knight,  before
you  approach  further  you  must  deal  with  me;
If  3'ou  conquer  me  yon  may  enter  then  to
other  combats  which  will  cost  you  dearer.  I
know  not,  answered  Palniciin,  \\hat  it  may
please  fortune  to  do  ;  but  neither  here  with-
out, nor  there  within,  do  1  think  that  reaso'.i
V.  ill  iavcur  those  who  have  so  little  in  their
dealings.  Let  us  to  the  field  then  and  perform
this  battle,  for  Í  ^hall  have  littic  day  light  for
so  many.  You  talk  lightly  of  this  adventure,
cried  Bramarim,  since  you  only  complain  of
the  day  light  ;  I  warrant  you  we  shall  end,
and  that  right  soon,  and  the  rest  of  the  day
you  may  spend  in  the  conversation  of  our
prisoners,  who  arc  just  such  fools  as  yourself.

So  giving  scope  to  their  horses,  they  met
with  tluir  spears  so  nobly  together,  that
Bramarim  was  thrown  to  the  ground,  void
of  any  feeling  ;  which  Pulmerin  perceiving,
alighted  from  his  horse,  and  set  his  sword  to
his  throat,   with   these  \vords:    Yield,  and


141

fíNvear  henceforth  never  to  maintain  this  cus-
tom, or  thou  shall  die  the  death.  Bramarim
seeing  his  life  in  such  jeopardy,  did  forth-
Avith  as  he  was  commanded.  Then  Pahiierin
mounting  on  horseback  again,  and  passing
tiie  bridge,  found  the  gale  of  the  fortress
now  open,  and  entering,  in  the  court  espyed
Olistar  and  Alfarim,  each  of  them  in  fair
green  armour,  beset  with  azure  flowers  ;
who,  when  they  beheld  Palmerin,  they  ran
both  at  once  against  him,  without  giving
him  time  to  adjust  liimself  in  the  saddle.
This  shock  made  him  lose  a  stirrup,  and  as
he  was  without  a  lunce,  having  broken  it  in
the  former  battle,  all  he  could  do  was  to  pro-
tect himself:  so  drawing  out  his  sword,  he
awaited  (heir  turning,  and  galuictl  the  lirst
so  soundly  on  the  head,  that  he  made  a  great
wound  tliere,  and  disabled  him  iVoni  doing
much  hurt  in  the  combat.  1"he  other  seeing
him  thus  enfeebled,  thought  to  do  the  part
of  both  ;  fighting  right  bravely,  delivering
his  blows  so  well,  and  so  well  defending  him-
self, as  little  contented  Palmerin,  who  being
wrath  and  mclauch(jliel<  to  see  that  one  man
resiited  him  so  lomr  when  he  had  so  much  to


14^2

do,  lliiowinçr  the  shield  hchind  him,  he  took
th  \v  ord  iu  roth  hands,  and  dealt  hi.-ii  a
blow  on  the  head,  which  laid  him  senseless
ar  his  i'cet  ;  at  the  same  time,  the  clher  fell
dead  with  hi-;  fiist  wound.  Palmerin  alighted,
and  taking  ofi"  the  helmet  of  the  one  who
Avns  yet  livinir,  asked  liim  if  he  would  yield  ;
and  finding  that  he  would  not,  confiding  in
the  help  of  the  other,  who  yet  remained,  he
.'^mole  oil'  his  head,  saying,  Take  the  gner-
(!on  of  tiiy  obstinacy.  Ihcn  looking  at  his
arms,  and  seeing  them  as  yet  sound,  and
liimself  unhurt,  he  looked  round  to  the  dam-
sel, a;id  said.  Lady,  have  we  more  to  do  here  .'
I  now  think,  she  replied,  that  any  tiling  is
littio  for  you  to  accomplish  :  you  must  now
hazard  yourself  a^iiinst  the  duke  and  his
breiliren,  and  their  use  is  to  combat  above  :
go  up,  therefore  ;  he  who  hath  given  you
s-ueh  speed  hitherto,  Mill  not  forsake  you
now  ;  and  tiiough  I  thought  to  have  turned
back,  such  now  is  n.y  confidence  in  vou,
that  Í  will  be  present  at  all.  So  shewiiighim
a  broad  and  well-wrought  stone  stair-case  by
the  which  to  ascend,  Palmerin,  command-
ing Selviam    to  star    liis  cominíí  with   the


143

horses  hl  the  court,  alight^c],  and  took  his
s'.vord  and  wcac  up  lie  had  not  ascended
many  steps  belurc  he  i'ound  himself  iii  a
Jan^e  liall  ;  at  one  side,  high  up  in  the  -.vail,
was  the  grated  window  of  a  chamber,  v.  hieh
opened  upon  this  hall,  and  at  tlie  bottuni  of
this  grating  he  belield  the  three  ladies  sitting,
attired  all  in  black,  and  endued  wdth  such
singular  beauty,  that  no  excess  could  be
condemned  which  was  committed  on  their
account.

Presently,  three  knights  came  along  the  cor-
redor to  these  damsels;  they  were  armed,  but
their  beavers  opeii,  and  they  appeared  so
young  and  comely,  and  in  such  rich  armour,
that  they  seemed  men  of  great  price.  Draw-
ing near  the  damsels,  he  among  them  who
appeared  to  be  the  chief  said,  L;idics,  I
know  not  why  you  should  chuse  to  be  the
occasion  of  so  great  evil,  bringing  no  good
to  yourselves.  ^ly  cousins  are  slain  by  the
hands  of  this  knight;  do  what  he  can,  he
must  at  last  pay  with  iiis  life  for  theirs,  and
you  with  yours  make  some  atonement  for
ibis  loss;  but  with  all,  I  shall  not  rer.uiin  con-


144

íentcd,   nor  liavc  reason  to  be  so  ;   so  that
we  shall  all  have  cause  lor  sorrow^  and  none
for  joy.     Then  taking  leave  ol'  them  with
his  accustomed   courtesy,  he  and    iiis  bre-
thren descended  into  the  hall.     They  were
all  clad  alike,    in  green  armour  with   arti-
chokes of  gold,  bearing  all  one  manner  of  de-
vice in  their  shields,  which  was  Cupid  in  a
field  veri,  held   prisoner  by  a  v.oman,  and
bis  bow  broken.  The  duke  advanced  himself
to   Palmerin,  on  this  wise.    Sir  knight,  suf-
fice  yourself  with   what  you  have  already
done,  and  yield  ;  for  it  would  be  to  my  great
grief  to  see  one  lose  his  life  who  so  well  de-
serves to  live.     Sir  duke,  replied  Palmerin,
I   did  not  think  that  in    a  person  of  such
worth  as  you,  deeds  would  be  found  so  op-
posite to  what  they  ought  to  be.     But  since
I  see  you  mean  togo  on  with  your  intention,
I  may  be  excused    from  wasting  time    in
words,  or  counselling  you  with  them.   Then
covering  himself  with    his  shield,   he   went
forward  against  the  three,  who  received  him
ivith  many  and  weighty  strokes.  And  though
in  this   battle  Palmerin  did  all  he  could,
■warding      and     foining     with     îurpassincr


145

strength  and  skill,  notwithstanding  this  he
was  woundfd  in  many  places,  and  confessed
to  himself  that  this  was  one  of  the  greatest
and  most  perilous  hattles  in   which  he  had
ever   been   engaged  :  for  the  duke  and  his
brethren,  besides  being  especial  knights,wtre
fresh,  and  îhree  in  number,  against  one  al-
ready weary  with  former  fights.     The  dam-
sels who  beheld  him  in  this  great  danger,  be-
sought God  with  many  tears  to  be  mindful
of  his  life,  in  which  theirs   also   consisted.
Pahnerin  struck  one  way  and  another  with
such  quick  and  well-dclivcred  aim,  that  none
of  his  enemies  being  able  to  ward  themselves,
their  shields  were  all  hewn  to  pieces,  :md  he
also  had  none  left  wherewith  to  delend  liim-
self.      The  blows   echoed   through   all  the
apartments  of  those  palaces  as  though  the
fabric  were  fallinsr.     No  weakness  was  ma-
nifested  in  either  one,  but  instead  it  seemed
as  if  their  strength  and  fury  increased  ;  the
blood  lay  in  large  spots  upon  the  floor,  and
splinters  of  shiekis  so  thick  that  there  was  no
free  place  whereon  to  set  foot.     At  tliis  time
Pahnerin,  seeing  how  long  these  men  wiih-
<tood  him,  how  little  he  hiird  done,  and  how
yoL.  II.  o


146

much  it  was  necessary  for  him  to  do,  gave  a
great  blow  to  one  of  the  ilukc'a  brothers,
upon  his  right  arm,  which  througli  ilie  ar-
mour made  such  a  wound  as  maimed  l)im  ;
and  not  being  able  to  fight  longer,  he  left  the
hall.  The  duke  seeing  him  so  handled,  and
his  own  life  in  hazard,  made  at  Palmerin
>vith  new  efforts  ;  laying  on  blows  which
did  not  seem  to  proceed  from  a  weary  man.
All  these  efforts  were  now  needed,  for  with
another  blow  Palmerin  had  now  laid  liis
other  brother  on  the  ground.  Then  the
duke  holding  his  own  perdition  to  be  cer-
tain, drew  back,  saying,  I  pray  you,  let  it
not  displease  you,  sir  kuight,  if  we  rest  a
little.  Toll  me  your  name,  that  I  may  know
him  I  shall  vanquish,  or  that  shall  remain
victor  over  me.  Sir,  said  Palmerin,  the
knowledge  of  my  name  is  so  needless,  that
I  will  not  waste  time  to  satisfy  your  desire  ;
iirat  lot  us  make  an  end  of  our  combat,  and
then  I  will  tell  you  who  I  am.  Make  you,
quoth  the  duke,  such  certain  account  of  the
victorj^  that  you  will  admit  no  leisure  to  par-
ley ?  I  do  not  yet  conceive  such  weakness
of  myself,  that  I  will  make  suit  to  yon  for


147

favour.  Then  they  began  again,  tlie  great
effusion  of  their  blood  witnessing  the  peril-
ous clanger  of  the  fight;  but  the  duke,  not  able
longer  to  bear  up  against  ]'almerin,  now
waxed  so  weak  that  he  thought  of  nothing
but  ciefcnding  himself,  and  Palmcrin  per-
ceiving this  pressed  upon  hiin  so  that  by
force  he  laid  him  at  his  feet  :  as  ill  pleased
as  he  was  ill  handled.  But  as  this  defeat  was
to  him  a  less  grief  than  to  think  that  he  had
lost  his  lady  and  all  hope  of  her,  he  besought
his  conqueror  for  mercy  to  kill  him  at  once,
that  being  the  greatest  benefit  he  could  re-
ceive at  his  haudj.  He,  seeing  him  so  ena-
moured, and  judging  him  by  himself,  had
compassion  on  him,  and  raising  him  from
the  grounti,  promised  him  not  only  his  life^
but  lielp  in  whatever  he  could  afford  it  him.
The  duke,  though  he  loathed  life,  yet  ac-
cepted it,  on  this  condition,  that  without  her
he  could  not  keep  it;  for  an  unhap()y  life  is
not  to  be  «lesired  by  any  except  by  him  who
dare»  not  meet  death.


©  2


14b


CHAPTER  67.


Having  ended  these  battles,Palmerin  thought
he  had  nothing  more  to  do,  when  on  a  sud-
den he  heard  a  great  noise  of  arms,  and
twenty  men  armed  with  halbcrts  and  brigan-
dines  entered  the  hall,  and  before  ihcni  two
inights,  crying.  Kill  him,  kill  him,  who  has
slain  the  best  knight  and  noblest  lord  in  the
world  ;  and  with  this  they  set  upon  Palme-
rin,  who  awaited  them  sword  in  hand,  de-
spairing of  life,  by  reason  of  the  condition
he  was  in,  but  yet  resolved  to  sell  it  dearly.
But  the  duke,  who  was  still  in  the  hall,  see-
ing this  came  between  them  as  well  as  he
could,  grieved  at  this  breach  of  order,  which
was  against  his  will.  And  least  Palmcrin
should  suspert  that  he   had  any  knowledge


149

uí"  this  dishonourable  attempt,  Ijefore  he  •
would  have  his  wounds  looked  to,  he  dis-
missed all  these  offenders  from  his  house-
hold, and  banished  them  from  his  dutchy,
vowing  if  they  disobeyed  to  put  them  to
death  ;  but  this  rigour  was  not  carried  into
effect,  for  Palmerin  bcibrc  he  departed  pro-
cured their  pardon.

'riieti  was  the  duke  carried  to  his  bed,'and
I'ahnerin  to  another  in  the  chamber  of  the
ladies,  where  they  themselves  looked  to  his
wounds,  as  being  one  from  whose  hand,  they
had  received  new  life;  and  he  was  served  witli
all  things  needful  by  Organel,  the  duke's
steward,  who  was  as  careful  for  him  as  for
the  duke  his  lord.  This  Organel  being  a
man  of  years  and  discretion,  looked  to  all
things,  as  well  to  the  wounds  of  the  living,
as  to  giving  burial  fu  the  dead  suitable  to
tluir  [xrsons.  Diuiug  the  lime  that  Pal-
merin staid  with  the  damsels  he  laboured  to
win  their  good  w  ill  towards  ihc  tbikc,  remind-
ing ttRui  how  esprrial  a  knight  lu;  N\a>-,  how
dearly  lie  loved  them,  and  tiie  rank  in  which
he  desired  to  place  them  ;  which  was  to
u  3


150

riake  the  one  lady  of  all  his  esiatrs,  and  to
wed  the  others  to  his  brethren^  who  were  also
persons  of"  great  worth,  and  with  wiiom  they
ought  to  be  greatly  contented.  'I'he  three
sisters,  knowing  that  Palincrin's  intention
•was  good,  and  his  words  directed  to  good
end,  and  remembering  what  they  owed  him^
knew  not  how  to  deny  what  he  desired  ;  fear-
ing also,  that  if  they  persisted  in  denial,  a
deadly  hatred  would  ensue  and  lead  to  wars,
■which  they  as  women  could  not  be  able  to
resist  ;  so  that  putting  themselves  in  his
hands,  they  concluded  that  he  should  do
with  them  as  he  thought  best.

Palmerin  was  so  joyful  to  see  the  damsels
conformable  to  his  appointment,  that  he
made  more  account  of  the  conquest  of  them,
than  he  did  of  the  honour  he  received  in  the
combat,  V^  herefore  he  walked  to  the  duke's
chamber,  who  now  began  to  leave  his  bed,
and  taking  him  in  his  arms  with  unusual  joy,
communicated  to  him  these  good  tidings,
which  had  well  nigh  produced  evil  ;  for  his
heart  not  being  able  to  bear  the  sudden  joy,
he  fell  to  the  ground,  and  it  was  necessary  to


151

Lasicii  to  him  with  remedies  to  biini?  liim  to
himself.  Jiut  then  hfting  up  his  eyes  he  said,
Certes,  sir  i<night,  if  at  your  hands  I  have
reecived  any  damage,  I  must  needs  confess
your  recoujpenee  is  double;  but  I  have  been
so  unaccustomed  to  joy  that  1  know  not  how
one  who  has  so  long  lived  in  sorrow  can  be-
lieve tidings  of  such  delight.  Blame  me
not  for  this  weakness  ;  t  am  not  worthy  of
so  great  happiness,  neither  can  my  lieart
sustain  it.  Palmerin  seeing  him  so  truly
enamoured  had  pity  on  him,  as  one  who
suffered  himself  the  like  passion,  and  clieer-
ed  him  with  meet  words,  assuring  him  that
all  would  he  to  his  wish.  While  they  were
engaged  in  this  talk,  which  made  the  duke
the  less  feel  the  grief  of  his  overthrow,  two
knights  knocked  at  the  gate  of  the  fortress,
whom  the  duke  ordered  to  be  admitted  with
Jess  risk  to  themselves  than  had  been  the
custom  of  that  place.  Palmerin  presently
saw  that  they  were  his  brethren,  whereat  his
contentment  was  the  greater,  for  his  uncer-
tainly concerning  what  might  have  befallen
Flinian  in  the  jousts,  wherein  he  left  him
engaged^   had   till   now  somewhat  troubled


152

him.  So  asking  him  of  what  had  befallen.
Florian  told  him  how  the  jousts  hud  end-
ed ;  and  how,  hearing  tiiat  Pompides  had
followed  him  by  reason  of  certain  words
spoken  unto  him  reproachfully  by  one  of
Florenda's  damsels,  he  had  ridden  on  the
same  Avay  also,  and  caine  up  with  liini  at
last  at  the  foot  of  a  castle,  wherein  watch
and  ward  were  kept,  >\here  he  found  him
doing  battle  against  two  knights,  who  would
have  forced  a  damsel;  whom  he  conquered,
Flaj-ing  the  one  ;  and  there  the}'  heard  tid-
ings of  him.  This  castle  which  was  so  guard-
ed was  that  of  the  three  sisters,  and  it  was
this  to  which  the  damsel  who  guided  Pal-
merin  turned  aside  to  speak  to  the  watchmen..
Palmerin  was  well  pleased  to  hear  of  this
adventure  which  Pompides  had  atchieved,
as  also  how  the  damsel  had  thousrht  little  of
him.  The  duke  seeing  the  friendship  be-
tween these  three,  thought  that  they  must
needs  be  persons  of  great  consideration,  as
well  because  of  their  goodly  appearance,  as
of  the  richness  of  their  arms  ;  and  he  com-
manded Organel  to  see  that  they  were
worthily  lodged  and  provided  with  all  thuiiis


153

in  abuiitlancc  ;  but  though  Organel  appoint-
ed them  lodging  coufbnnable  to  theirpersons,
yet  would  not  they  accept  it  any  where  ex-
cept with  Palmerin,  where  that  night  he  cer-
tified them  what  he  had  done  in  the  castle  ;
as  also  the  marriage  he  hud  appointed  be-
tween the  duke,  his  brethren,  and  the  three
ladies  :  and  they  judged  the  duke  to  be  a
rare  person,  attributing  his  errors  to  the
force  of  love  which  possessed  him  :  and  thus
they  discoursed  till  sleep  overcame  tliem.

On  the  morrow  morning,  as  had  been  con-
certed, the  duke  and  his  brethren  were
wedded  to  the  three  sisters  in  this  manner  :
the  duke  to  Diomana,  who  was  the  middle
sister,  and  the  fairest;  Tragonel  to  Armissa,
who  was  the  eldest,  and  heiress  to  all  her
father's  state  ;  Dorafonte  to  Arisniena,
the  youngest  of  all,  whom  they  endowed  so
liberally,  that  she  was  as  richly  provided  as
her  sisters.  Then  was  the  feast  solemnized
with  marvellous  great  royalty  ;  and  Palme-
rin discovered  himself  and  his  brethren,
which  made  tli«  duke  to  conceive  the  better
opinion  of  hini-clf,  that   he   had  been  foiled


154

l)\'  such  a  worthy  knight  ;  and  to  them  he
.shewed  great  honour  during  the  time  of
their  staying  there,  which  was  longer  than
they  would  have  done^  but  only  to  pleasure
the  duke  and  the  ladies.  At  length,  taking
their  leave  of  all  the  honourable  company,
they  departed  from  thence,  intending  to  go
straight  to  Constantinople,  if  no  other  chance
should  turn  them  again.


CIIAFTER    GS,


Now  must  we  ii  while  leave  Palnierin  and
ills  biotl)icn,  wlio  having  left  the  duke,  are
tiavelliuif  on  ihoir  iouraev  towards  Con-
stantinoplc,  and  see  what  hath  happened  at
the  castle  ot"  Almourolj  in  maintaining  the
beauty  of  Miragiuuda.  It  hath  been  related
elsewhere  in  this  history,  how  upon  the  death
of  Olorique,  the  soldan  of  Babylon,  the  son
whom  he  left  to' inherit  his  kingdom  was  a
right  good  knight,  and  a  great  enemy  to  all
Cliristeudom.  Besides  this,  he  left  another
son,  who  was  even  a  better  knight  than  his
brother,  and  who,  seeing  himself  poor  and
without  estates,  determined  to  follow  the
course  of  knightly  adventures,  and  to  make
his  valour  known  among  the  nuniber  of  the


156

most  famous.  It  happened  iliai  first  lie
went  to  lhe  Great  Turk's  court,  vvliich  in
those  days  was  great  and  prosperous  among
the  Moors,  and  being  stored  with  courage-
ous knights,  he  had  the  better  mean  to  try
his  hardiness  there  ;  which  proved  so  efi'ec-
tual,  that  above  all  there  the  fame  was  attri-
buted to  him  as  the  patiern  of  all  iheir  chi-
valry.' i\lbayz:ir,  as  this  prince  was  named,
seeing  himself  thus  greatiy  esteemed,  deter-
mined to  serve  Targiana,  the  Turk's  daugh-
ter, and  heiress  of  liis  kingdom,  to  whom  the
only  name  of  beauty  was  given  thorow  all
the  Turk's  dominions.  And  as  love  usually
goes  on  from  little  to  much,  and  from  much
to  more  ;  so  it  befell  to  Albayzar,  who  hav-
ing till  now  been  iVee,  submitted  himself  en-
tirely. Thus  having  his  desire  forced  and  his
wish  lost,  he  lived  so  well  contented  with
such  loss,  that  no  danger  disinaycd  hirn,  and
no  apprehension  made  him  sad,  except  it
were  from  something  wherein  love  had  part,
Targiana,  to  whom  he  did  not  appear  amiss,
being  desirous  of  novelties,  after  the  manner
of  all  her  sex,  would  try  if  love  had  such  a
sovereignty  over   him,    as   in   protestation?


157

and  sweet  parley  he  often  confessed,  and  if
it  were  as  powerful  in  deeds  as  it  was  liberal
ill  words.     Now  they  were  sometimes  wont
To  commune  through  a  little  win(iow  of  her
chamber,  so  little  as  to  afford  room  for  no-
thing more  than  speech.     One  night,  there-
fore, when  he  had  been    uttering    his  com-
plaints after  the  way  of  men,  she  said  to  him,
1  have  already  told  you,  sir  Albayzar,  that
nothing  more  is  wanting  for  me  to  satisfy
your  wishes,  than    to   know   whether    your
deeds  deserve  me  ;   and    now   I  remember  a
thing  by  whicli   I  may  be  certified  thereof:
you  have  often  told  me,  that  Í  am  the  fairest
woman   living   on    the  earth,   and  that  you
would  venture  your  life  against  any  one  who
should   dare  gainsay  it;  now    it  hath   been
blazed  abroad,  that  there  is  an  adveuture  in
Spain,  at  the  castle  of  Almourol,  concerning
the   face  of  Miraguarda,  whose    beauty    is
spoken  of  as  a  wonder,  which  is  painted    to
the  life  upon  a  shield,  and  hung  upon  a  tree,
in  sight  of  all  who  conie  there  to  do    battle.
To  tliis  place  1  would  have  you  go  for  love  of
me,  and  on  my  part  and  in  my  name  do  battle
with  her  champion  ;  and  having  conquered

VOL.    II.  P


153

liun,  you  shall  bring  the  shield  of  the  picture
)ïere,  passing  tluough  the  court  of  the  em
peror  Palmerin  oa  your  return^  where,  by
forc'i  of  aruis,  you  shall  make  all  wjin  deny  il
confess  that  you  serve  tlje  fairest  lady  iu  Ú>c
world  ;  the  ful  til  ling  hereof  inaketh  you  lord
both  of  uje  and  núae.

Now  lady,  answered  Albayzar,  I  heliovc  yoa
may  renieniber  me  to  shew  me  favour,  scíiog
that  you  vouchsafe  to  employ  me  in  your  lio-=
nourablc  service,  Í  will  presently  depart,
and  rejoice  that  you  may  sec  the  force  of  my
]o\c;  for  this  shield  I  will  bring  vou,  and  tiie
lady  of  the  shield  1  will  place  at  your  ieet,
where  all  the  ladies  in  the  world  ought  tu
humble  themselves.  And  albeit  you  should
hear  much  of  what  I  shall  atehievt;  in  this
enterprizc,  think  you  ahvay  little  of  il,  lor
tRe  vantage  which  there  is  in  you  above  all
others,  will  make  all  easy.

Then  taking  leave  of  her  v,  ith  such  words  as
love  is  wont  at  such  times  to  sup[)ly,  he  clad
himself  in  green  armour,  whereon  was
wrought  many  golden  spheres,  and  iu  his


159

shickl,  upon  a  field  vert,  he  bare  for  hib  de-
vice a  pliuMiix  carrying  in  its  beak  in  golden
letters,  the  name  of  Targiana.

'iVavelling  thus  through  divers  kingdoms,  at
last  he  arrived  at  the  castle  of  Almourol,  soon
alter  the  combat  between  Dramuziando  and
I'lorian  of  the  Desert;  but  when  Dramu-
ziando was  in  disposition  to  undertake  an-
other of  equal  peril,  Albayzar  perceiving  the
number  of  shields  upon  the  tree,  well  under-
stood that  the  knight  could  be  of  no  little
goodness  who  had  placed  them  there.
Above  them  all  vi'as  the  shield  of  Mira-
guarda,  which  when  he  beheld  he  could  not
choose  but  confess  the  advantage  she  had
above  his  lady  Targiana.  Nevertheless^  be-
ing coniident  in  himself  and  in  the  love  he
bore  her,  he  determined  to  go  on  uith  the
adventure;  and  as  it  was  now  late  he  Avaitcd
till  the  morrow,  sleeping  on  the  field  thaï
night.  It  was  not  yet  broad  day  when  he
presented  himself  before  the  castle.  J)ra-
muziando  being  advertised  of  his  arrival
came  forth  in  great  h;iste,  armed  at  a'l
points,  and  aficr  a  few  \\ord:>  of  courtesy
r  3


160

had  passed  between  tliein,  tlioy  couched
their  spears,  and  shivering  theui  in  the
aitaint,  passed  by  each  other  gallantly  and
unshaken.  Presently  they  took  others  and
ran  a  second  career,  which  was  given  with
so  much  greater  force,  that  both  were  driven
backwards  to  the  ground,  to  the  suHicient
<liscontent  ot"  Draniu/.iando,  as  being  before
his  lady  Miraguarda,  who  beheld  them  iVoni
a  window  ;  though  he  was  well  excused,  in-
asmuch as  the  girts  of  his  saddle  had  given
•way.  Howbeit,  thinking  to  avenge  himself
in  the  sword  combat,  he  drew  and  attacked
Albayzar,  who  with  no  less  fury  and  courage
received  him.  And  as  each  was  confident
in  himself,  they  both  did  such  wonders,  that
this  was  one  of  the  best  battles,  and  moii^t
worthy  to  be  seen,  which  had  ever  been
fought  there.  Dramuziando  was  so  hot  and
melancholick,  that  not  a  blow  which  he  de-
livered was  of  little  hurt.  Albayzar  feeling
iiis  strength,  nimbly  shifted  before  him,  mak-
ing him  deal  the  most  of  his  strokes  in  vain,
and  moving  as  quickly  and  with  as  much
watchfulness  as  he  well  saw  was  necessary  for
one  who   had   to  do  with  such    an   eueniv.


^Iiraiiuarda,  (lismaj'cd  at  tlie  valour  of  this
knight,  and  seeing  ho'.v  long  they  had  now
fought  without  any  respite,  began  to  fear
some  mishap  ior  lier  champion.  But  now
as  the  heat  was  very  great,  and  they  more-
over heated  with  their  armour,  they  drew
back  perforce  to  take  breatlu  Dramuziando
so  highly  esteemed  the  valour  of  this  man,
that  he  doubted  the  end  of  the  battle-  Al-
bayzar  w  ho  had  never  before  felt  such  blows
as  those  of  his  enemy,  did  not  now  think  the
end  of  his  enterprize  was  so  assured  as  he
had  promised  his  lady  Targiana.  But  that
promise  coming  to  his  mind,  and  what  had
passed  with  her,  he  took  fresh  courage,  and
grasping  his  sword  made  at  Dramuziando,
who  welcomed  him  as  he  came,  the  battle
beginning  agni.i  with  such  force  as  the  prize
for  which  they  combated  enabled  them  to
put  forth.  Now  began  mail  to  be  broken,
harness  hewed,  helmets  dinted,  shields  splin-
tered, and  blood  to  flow  from  so  many  places,
that  it  seemed  impossible  they  could  con-
tinue to  stand  on  foot.  Yet  could  there  not
be  seen  any  abateinciit  of  strength  in  them,
nor  failure  of  breath;  so  that  tlie  battle  wa«
r  3


162

in  full  rigour  and  cruelty,  and  tlie  ][\os  oi
both  in  great  danger,  and  the  desire  in  l>uili
still  greater  to  carry  it  on  to  the  end.  At
length  they  separated  a  second  time.  Drainu-
ziando  perceiving  in  what  peril  he  stood,
doubted  at  times  whether  it  were  not  J'al-
merin  :  for  in  no  other  had  he  ever  expe-
rienced such  strength,  except  in  him  and  in
his  brother  of  the  Desert;  but  certifying
himself  that  it  was  neither  of  these,  he  knew
not  what  to  think.  He  looked  at  the  shield
of  Miraguarda  and  said.  Lady,  if  I  am  of  no
worth  for  any  thing  good,  it  is  well  that  you
should  abandon  me  ;  but  being  one  v.ho  in
recompence  for  the  good  will  he  bears  you,
desires  nothing  more  than  that  you  should
remember  him  at  this  time,  that  he  may
«erve  you,  it  would  be  well  that  you  should
not  disfavour  him,  for  in  so  doing  he  would
liave  the  victory  over  you  who  deserves  it
not.  On  the  other  hand  Albayzar,  whose
heart  began  something  to  fail  him,  seeing
himself  in  such  a  strait,  said  within  himself,
O  my  lady  Targiana,  I  shall  now  bce  how
much  I  remember  you  :  this  is  no  man,  but
niy  death;  which  for  your  service  Í  have  tra-


163

veiled  so  far  to  seek.  I  will  do  what  I  can
to  fulfil  my  promise  to  you,  and  when  1  can
do  no  more  will  finish  my  hfe  in  that  cnd^
the  which  T  have  alway  desired  may  con-
cUide  it.  Then  seeing  himself  wearied,  his
arms  demolished,  and  Dramnziando,  whose
strength  and  scmhlanee  promised  such  great
things,  before  him,  commending  himself  to
Fortune,  he  would  fain  have  derived
strength  from  his  weakness  ;  and  making  at
him  once  more,  they  renewed  their  battle
with  doubled  rage  and  courage,  albeit  with
less  force.  Dramuziando  so  greatly  esteem-
ed the  valour  of  Albayzar,  that  many  times
he  wished  to  know  his  name,  fearing  that  he
was  one  of  his  friends  ;  but  then  again  the
desire  of  overcoming  him  prevailed,  because
he  feared  that  this  wish,  if  it  were  made
known,  would  be  interpreted  amiss.  So
that,  setting  aside  all  remedy^  neither  of
them  expected  aught  else  than  death,  and  if
any  thing  preserved  them  it  was  the  skill
with  which  they  warded  themselves,  so  that
the  blciwsdid  less  hurt.  Well  may  it  he  be-
lii'vcd  that  this  Albayzar  might  be  reckoned
aa  one  of  ihe  three  knights  in  the  world,  and


104

that  this  battle  was  one  of  the  best  that  ever
was  seen.  So  resting  many  times,  and  many
times  retinniníç  to  tlie  fight,  they  continued
the  whole  of  the  day,  t;il  night  separated
them,  the  victory  belonging  to  neither.

Dramuziando  entered  his  lodging,  mean
ing  on  the  morrow  to  end  their  strife  one
v,ay  or  other,  and  Albayzar  retired  down
the  plain,  being  of  the  same  mind  ;  but
afterwards  j)crceiviiig  himself  wounded,  and
knowing  no  where  to  rest  him  for  that
night  ;  standing  somewhat  in  doubt  of  his
enemy,  and  fearing  to  lose  the  love  of  his
lady,  he  returned  to  the  castle  when  every
one  was  fast  asleep,  and  taking  down  thiî
shield  of  ^  Miraguarda  departed  with  it,
meanino;  to  bear  it  with  him  into  Turkev  ;
but  first  he  would  pass  the  court  of  the
emperor  Palmerin,  according  as  his  lady
had  commanded  him  ;  and  fearing  least  he
should  be  pursued,  he  staid  in  no  place
till  he  was  five  leagues  from  thence,  bear-
ing the  shield  covered  that  no  body  should
know  it.  And  there  he  lodged,  and  staid
until  his  wounds    were    healed,  being  dis-


165

contented  for  what  had  passed  at  the  castle,
because  he  had  not  won  the  victory,  that
being  a  thing  wliich  is  esteemed  above  all
others  by  mcn^  by  reason  of  the  joy  and
honour  which  are  jointly  gained  thereby.


IGG


CHAPTER  69.


Early  on  the  morrow,  Dramuziando  having
dressed  his  -wounds  so  well  as  he  might  in
so  short  a  space,  armed  himself  in  the  same
armour  all  hroken  as  it  was,  that  he  might
have  no  vantage  over  his  enemy,  and  went
into  the  field,  intending  to  end  the  comhat
or  to  leave  his  hfe  there.  Not  seeing  the
knight  as  yet  arrived,  he  went  to  the  tree
whereon  the  shields  were  hung,  to  beseech
help  and  favour  from  the  picture  of  Mira-
guarda,  and  commend  himself  to  her,  ac-
cording as  he  was  wont:  so  fixing  his  eyes
upon  the  place,  when  he  saw  it  not  he  was
so  beside  himself,  that  not  being  able  to
keep  his  seat  upon  the  horse,  he  alighted
and  leant  against  the  tree,  accusing  his  own


167

negligence,  and  suspecting  that  the  knight
against  Avbora  he  maintained  the  combat
had  stoltn  it  ;  wherefore  being  mastered  by
rmger,  he  concluded  to  pursue  presently  af-
ter him,  not  staying  till  ]\l;iaguarda  was
certiHed  thereof,  because  he  could  not  yield
account  of  that,  which  she  had  connnittecJ
to  his  keeping.  And  he  determined  to  seek
all  the  world  over,  and  be  revenged  on  this
discourteous  knight,  with  greater  cruelty
than  was  his  custom.  Then  calling  Almou-
rol  he  told  him  what  had  happened,  and  with
tears  in  his  eyes  took  leave  of  him,  not  sta)'-
ing  till  his  wounds  were  healed,  nor  yet
thinking  on  the  danger  in  which  they  placed
his  life.

After  Dramuziando  was  gone,  Miraguarda
understood  how  her  shield  was  stolen,  and  he
gone  in  search  of  it  ;  which,  though  it  some-
thing grieved  her,  yet  she  being  as  ye  have
heard,  light  of  condition,  dissembled  any
trouble  which  this  might  occasion  her.
Nevertheless  she  could  not  choose  but  re-
member riorendos,  believing  that  wherever
lie  were,  if  he   knew  wluU  had  chauced,  ho


168

■Hould  liaàten  lo  recover  the  sliicld,and  brinsç
it  buck  witli  victory  over  the  robber,  which
from  any  other  hand   she  did  not  expect.
Now  Arnielloj  his  squire,  who  as  has  beea
before  said   ahvay   remained    there,    seeing
the  shield  was  stolen  and  Dramuziando  gone,
had  good  hope  now  of'liis  master's  life,  think-
ing tiiat  this  chance  would  restore  his  spirirs
and  make  him    take   arms  again,  and  seek
adventures,  following   the   knight  wlio  had
stolen  it.     W  h\\  this  contentment  he  depart-
ed, leaving  the  arms  of  Florendos  to  Almou-
rol's    keeping  ;    and    travelling   some    days
along  the  Tagus,  crossing  hilis  and  valleys  ou
both  sides  thereof,  one  day  at  evening  he
came  into  a  glade,  where  there  was  a  foun-
tain of  much  water,  surrounded  with  thick
and  high  trees,  from  under  which  he  heard
the  sound  of  a  flute,  touched  with  such  mar-
vellous sweetness,   that  it  made  him  íjtand
and  listen;  and  sometimes  he  wlio  touched  it
staid   to  utter  the  complaints  of  an    over-
charged mind,  so  that  Armello    was  greatly
moved    to    hear    his    lamentations.      Then
came  he  a  little  nearer  to  see  who   it  might
be.  He  who  was  thus  complaining  sate  upon


159

the  grass  beside  the  fountain  with  tlie  flute
in  his  lumdj  tears  running  down  his  face,
which  was  so  wan  and  languid  that  he  seem-
ed more  like  one  dead  than  alive.  At  the
i'er\  of  ihi":  one,  I3  ing  on  his  faee  upon  the
ground,  was  another  man  clad  in  poor  ap-
parel, who  from  time  to  time  uttered  sucli
mortal  sighs,  that  it  seemed  as  if  iiis  soul
went  with  them.  Armello  greatly  compas-
sionating these  men,  and  knowing  his  lord
had  minded  such  a  solitary  life  at  such  time
as  he  left  the  castle  of  Almourol,  could  not
refrain  from  shedding  tears  himself  to  behold
them;  and  drawing  near  to  him  w  ho  had  the
flute,  said,  f  íood  men,  to  whom  d'od  grant
more  comfort  than  you  seem  to  possess  at
present,  report  to  me,  if  you  can,  some  tid-
ings of  a  young  knight  whom  love  hath
caused  to  undertake  a  solitary  kind  of  life,
in  these  parts,  at  a  time  when  he  could  beiier
serve  him  elsewhere.

So  many,  replied  the  otlier,  are  they  w!io  arc
thus  aggrieved,  that  I  know  not  for  whom
you  ('uquiri-'  ;  in  myself,  I  may  truly  say,  he
hath   (hsplayed  his   i"orc('  iixuiv  than  in  any

VCif,.    II.  g


17()

other,  and  that  my  pain  may  be  the  greater,
hath  made  it  of  such  a  nature  as  not  to  kill
me,  for  that  would  be  to  give  me  rest.  At
these  words  the  other  one  rose,  saying,
Certes,  sir  knight,  I  know  not  why  you
should  choose  to  impr.te  to  Love  the  faults
of  Fortune.  Love  dealt  with  3'ou  as  lie
ought,  and  gave  you  what  you  desired  ;  if
by  mishap  you  afterward  lost  it,  complain  of
that  mishap  and  not  of  him.  Leave  me  to
complain  of  these  wrongs,  who  am  the  only
man  born  to  suffer  them.  Armello  seeing
his  facc,-disfigurcd  as  it  was,  knew  that  it  was
his  lord,  albeit  he  was  well  nigh  changed  out
of  all,remembrance  ;  and  seeing  him  so  weak
and  exhausted,  that  speech  seemed  to  be  the
only  power  of  life  which  he  had  still  left  in
him,  his  sorrow  at  the  sight  was  so  great,
that  for  long  time  he  could  not  speak  ;  and
falling  at  his  feet  with  that  love  which  he
had  ever  borne  him,  he  began  to  beseech
him  to  have  some  pit}'  upon  his  own  life,
and  no  lonsrer  execute  on  himself  such  ex-

o
treme  grief,  since  in  so  doing  he  did  no  ser-
vice  to  her  who  had  thus  commanded  him.
Florcndos  somewhat  displeased  that  in   dis-


171

olículcncc  of  his  orders  lie  should  have  come
to  seek  iiiin,  received  him  with  ;i  discontent-
ed semblance  ;  but  Armcllo  perceiving  him
still  bent  to  pursue  lus  purpose,  said  to  him.
Sir,  I  nm  come  here  only  to  relate  to  you
some  things  which  have  taken  place  at  the
castle,  knowing  that  I  serve  you  in  this.
Then  told  he  him  how  Dramuziando  had
long  time  kept  the  shield  of  Miraguarda,
and  brought  many  knights  under  his  obei-
sance, but  at  last  one  came,  with  whom  he
fought  a  whole  day,  neither  being  able  to
conquer  the  other  ;  and  when  it  was  dark
this  knight  stole  away  the  shield.  He  told
him  also  how  Dramuziando  had  departed  in
pursuit  of  him,  not  waiting  to  have  his
wounds  healed,  and  the  more  to  rouse  him
affirmed,  that  Miraguarda  had  no  hope  to
recover  the  shield  but  only  by  his  means,
and  had  therefore  sent  him  to  seek  him,  and
carry  him  the  tidings.

Florendos,  to  whose  heart  was  already
stricken  a  sudden  joy,  began  in  this  man-
ner: \Miat  will  you,  Armello,  wish  me  to
go  succour  others,  seeing  me  scant  able  to


172

help  myself?  '\^'"hat  strength  do  you  see
ill  me  to  entcrprize  any  clanger,  or  do  hattle
■with  any  one  ?  the  days  in  which  I  could
have  done  this  are  past,  and  now  1  am  fit
for  nothing  more  than  among  the  sorrowful
to  he  more  sorrowlul  than  all.  Nevertheless,
that  luy  life  may  have  its  end  in  those  things
for  which  1  have  alway  reserved  it,  I  w  ill
follow  the  knight,  and  if  I  find  him,  will  do
what  I  can;  at  least,  if  he  should  slay  me  I
shall  be  out  of  all  trouble  and  sorrow  in  this
world.  AVhosohad  then  seen  Florendos,  in
all  his  weakness,  might  have  seen  new  breath
in  him,  and  spirit  to  undertake  any  thing;  as
anger  oftentimes  createth  strength.  So  rising
up,  he  desired  his  fellow  to  bear  liim  com-
pany, inasmuch  as  he  knew  not  how  to  live
in  any  part  without  his  conversation  and
friendship,  giving  him  many  reasons  why  he
should  leave  that  sad  and  silent  kind  of  life,
to  follow  the  noble  exercises  wherein  he  had
been  always  trained.  And  he,  though  lie
was  content  with  that  sorrowful  life,  as  best
suitable  to  his  condition,  yet  had  he  not  the
power  to  refuse  the  recpiest  of  Horendos.
So  they  departed  together,  and  went  into  a


173

town  lianl  by,  where  they  remained  till  tlicy
were  strong  enough  to  endure  travel.

And  in  their  time  of  stay  there,  they  each
of  them  had  made  black  armour,  both  alike,
without  mixture:  ibr  as  Florendos  would  not
be  known,  he  forbore  to  send  for  his  own
from  the  castle.  Then  departed  they  from
thence,  and  travelled  to  seek  the  shield  of
Miraguarda;  but  they  travelled  not  long
togetlier,  for  that  misadventure  parted  them,
which  is  no  marvel  ;  for  what  chance  will
have,  none  can  avoid.


Ô  3


174


CHAPTER  70.


Because  you  shall  understand  who  the  kiiiglit
was  that  kept  Florendos  company,  tlie  his-
toiy  declarcth,  that  after  the  knights  wlio  were
prisoners  with  Don  Duardos  were  departed
from  the  realm  of  England,  after  his  deli-
verance, prince  Floraman  took  his  way  to-
ward Spain,  purposing  to  try  the  adventure
of  Miraguarda.  And  because  he  arrived  at
the  castle  of  Almourol  when  Florendos  was
gone  into  England,  to  try  the  adventure  at
the  castle  of  Dramuziando,  he  had  leisure
sufficient  to  behold  and  muse  on  the  portrait
ofMiraguarda,whichseemed  to  hiïh  the  fairest
thing  he  had  ever  seen,  and  he  kept  his  eyes
a  long  time  upon  the  shield,  praising  the
perfection  of  nature,  who  seemed  to   him


175

iluMC  to  luivc  outdone  herself.  Thea  he
thought  with  what  great  contentment  any
kniíçlit  might  serve  so  fair  a  thing,  and  that
thought  led  to  the  remcmhrance  of  his  lady
Ahca's  death,  which  was  never  out  of  his
mind  ;  and  he  grieved  that  he  could  not  dis-
play his  love  before  her,  as  the  knight  did
\\  lio  kept  this  shield,  and  iiad  hung  so  many
below  it  in  triumph.  O  Floraman,  said  he,
why  shouldst  thou  wish  to  follow  arms,  since
she  who  occasions  thy  labours  cannot  guer-
don them  ?  It  might  well  have  sutíiced  to
cure  mc  of  this  error  when  I  was  vanquished  at
Constanlino[)lc.  That  should  have  taught  mc
not  U)  take  to  arms  atjain,  seeing;  that  I  am
no  longer  tit  for  them,  nor  they  for  me;  but
I  deceivid  myself,  and  am  roaming  over  the
M  orld  to  see  others  happy,  while  there  is  no
liappiness  for  me.  But  seeing  too  late  1
come  to  the  knowledge  of  mine  error,  yet
better  now  than  later  to  follow  that  which
fortune  hath  reserved  for  mc.  A  joyful  lite
is  for  the  joyful,  a  sorrowful  one  for  mc:  this
tiicrefore  will  I  seek,  this  will  1  have,  and
with  this  will  I  content  myself,  till  life  is
M'caiy  of  mc,  and  then  my  miseries  w ill  cud.


176

Thpn  seeing  the  banks  of  the  Tagus  so  fair
with  trees,  .nnd  its  gentle  waters  bringing  to
those  who  beheld  them  thoughts  not  less  of
conteniplation  than  of  delight,  a  wish  arose
within  him  to  pass  his  lime  in  those  goodly
woodlands,  and  there  to  make  his  end.  So
forsaking  horse  and  armour,  there  he  passed
his  days  in  that  solitary  life.  And  the  great-
est contentation  he  had,  was  to  play  mourn-
ful devices  upon  his  f.ute,  and  to  grave  in
the  bark  of  trees,  some  virelay  of  amorous
iind  rare  conceits,  such  as  love  and  sorrow
could  devise,  cutting  the  letters  upon  the
trees,  for  in  that  place  he  had  no  other  ink;
and  then  this  lasted  long  time,  growing  as
the  poplars  grew  in  which  they  had  been
graven.

And  albeit  he  was  resolute  to  live  from  all
company, yet  when  Florendos  came  there  he
found  him  so  near  agreeing  to  his  com-
plexion, and  manners  and  motions  coined
in  the  like  stamp,  that  he  was  glad  to  re-
ceive him  for  a  partner  in  his  heaviness.
So  that  they  lived  together  with  mountain
herbs'  and   wild   fruits,  pangs,   grief,  5obs,


177

sigliíi,  and  sail  tears,  the  daily  food  and  sus-
tiMiatn.-c  ot"  u  luvcr;  this  was  both  iheir  so-
la(  (.'  and  scjitow  till  Arinello  causcti  them  to
d(*i)ari  iVouj  iheiice,  as  you  have  heard  dis-
couraged.

^A'hcn  now  tliey  had  recruited  their  strength,
they  set  out  in  tlieir  black  armour,  as  like  in
their  caj)arisons  as  in  their  wills;  meaning
not  to  separate,  unless  sonie  adventure
should  divide  them.  ]3ut  as  in  those
times  adventures  were  always  to  be  found,
it  so  fortuned,  that  one  day  as  they  rode
along  by  the  sea  side,  the  waves  by  reason
of  the  calm  season  being  smooth  and  still,
they  saw  coming  along  the  shore  a  boat
with  eight  oars,  and  in  the  poop  upon  silken
cushions  sate  a  lady  attired  in  blacky  young,
and  endued  with  such  singular  beauty,  as
might  well  have  captivated  any  heart  which
as  yet  was  free.  Two  diunes  of  greater  age
sate  at  her  feet,  and  when  they  came  oppo-
site the  knights,  they  bade  tlie  boatmen  rest
upon  their  oars.  The  lady  fixmg  her  eyes
upon  them  said,  Sirs,  who  appear  so  well
iu  arms,  will   one   of   vou   enter  this  boat


178

alone,  to  carry  succour  in  an  ad  venture
wherein  he  cannot  have  a  couij)anion  f
Lady,  answered  Florcndos,  we  bear  arms
for  no  other  purpose,  but  to  adventure
them  in  perils  of  this  kind  jointly  with  our
persons  ;  and  without  saying  more  he  alight-
ed and  gave  his  horse  to  /\rmello,  telling  him
to  return  to  the  cq,»tle  of  Almourol  and  there
wait  for  him,  for  soon  or  late,  unless  death
prevented  hiui,  he  would  join  him  there.
Then  taking  leave  of"  Floraman,  who  would
willingly  have  undertaken  the  voyage  him-
self, he  entered  the  boat,  which  pushed  off
and  quickly  got  out  of  sight  of  land.

Floraman  rode  on  that  day  and  all  the  next,
uneasy  at  the  departue  of  Florcndos,  whom
he  greatly  afiectionated.  On  the  third  day,
going  down  a  valley,  he  came  to  a  great
river,  over  which  there  was  a  bridge,  well
edified  and  strong,  and  at  each  end  a  tower,
not  less  strong  than  goodly  to  behold.
Drawing  near  it  he  perceived  a  knight  well
made  and  of  great  stature,  who  would  fain
have  pasted,  but  another  denied  the  pas-
sage to  him,  telling  him,  that  if  he  would


179

pass^  he  must  leave  his  shield  with  his  name
written  upon  the  rim  thereof,  for  such  was
the  custom  of  the  fortress.  Such  an  ill
custom,  answered  the  knight,  was  not  or-
dained to  hinder  such  as  myself,  but  rather
lor  such  as  could  not  make  their  part  good
against  their  encuiv.  This  said,  he  gave  his
shield  that  he  bare  to  his  esquire,  and  re-
ceived another  of  him,  and  so  encountered
with  the  knight  of  the  liridge  ;  who,  not  able
to  withstand  the  force  of  the  spear,  was  dis-
mounted and  thrown  into  the  water,  whcrq
he  was  drowned.  Floraman  somewhat  abash-
ed at  this  hardy  encounter,  approached
nearer  to  see  who  it  was  that  had  given  it  ;
and  looking  at  the  shield  in  the  esquire's
hand,  he  saw  the  portrait  of  Miraguarda,  by
which  he  knew  that  this  was  he  who  had
stolen  it;  and  he  marvelled  that  so  great  vil-
lainy should  be  found  in  so  brave  a  man.
AVhile  he  waited  to  see  how  this  cnterprize
would  take  conclusion,  he  heard  a  horn
sounded  on  one  of  the  towers,  so  vc!iement-
ly  that  the  sound  thereof  rung  through  the
whule  valley.  At  this  out  came  a  knight
of  Jarge  limbs,  in  armour  of  grey  and  uhite.


180

liolding  in  his  hands  a  battle  axe,  in  the  use
of  which  he  greatly  prided  himself,  being
full  skilful;  wherewith  approaching  to  the
kniglit,  he  charged  him  with  many  sharp
and  dangerous  strokes,  but  in  the  end,  such
was  tlic  valour  of  the  other  kniglit,  being  bet-
ter than  he,  that  by  force  of  many  wounds
he  laid  him  in  short  time  at  his  feet,  in  such
plight  that  he  never  more  obstructed  the
passage.  This  one  had  hardly  fallen  when
there  issued  out  a  giant,  in  arms  made  to
look  like  flames  of  fire,  so  stroiig  and  goodly
that  they  made  him  who  wore  them  seem  of
the  greater  worth.  In  his  right  hand  he  bare
an  iron  mace,  and  in  his  left  a  shield  of  ex-
ceeding strength.  Drawing  near  the  knight,
he  cried  out  to  him  with  a  loud  and  terrible
voice.  Thou  destroyer  of  my  blood,  do  thy
best  to  defend  thyself;  for  to  revenge  the
horrible  injury  thou  hast  ofiered  me,  [intend
to  cut  thy  body  into  pieces  and  give  it  for
food  to  the  beasts:  for  with  any  thing  else  I
should  not  be  contented.  The  knight  giving
him  no  answer,  covered  himself  with  his
shield,  so  that  between  the  giant  and  him  bc-
çaii  u  terrible  çwwbat;  for  hi,'  knew  well  how


181

to  Wíird  his  blows,  and  to  requite  them  with
others  of  equal  might;  andas  the  battle  pro-
ceeded, they  were  delivered  on  both  sides
with  sueh  good  will,  that  the  strength  of  ar-
mour was  not  such  as  to  withstand  them,  and
pieces  began  to  be  hacked  off  and  to  fall,
l^'loraman  thought  this  so  fierce  a  battle,  and
the  knight  so  excellently  brave,  that  it  seeni-
<d  to  him  hardly  could  a  better  be  found  iu
the  world.  And,  not  to  detain  myself  in  ad-
ventures foreign  to  the  history,  the  right
brave  Albayzar  demeaned  himself  so  well  and
did  such  wonders,  that,  demolishing  the
giant's  shield  upon  his  arm,  and  hewing
away  his  armour  on  all  sides,  after  long
time  he  brought  him  dead  to  the  ground,
he  himself  remaining  with  some  wounds  :
then,  seeing  uo  more  résistants,  lie  entered
the  fortress,  where  he  stayed  till  he  was
well  recovered.  Floraman,  though  his  in-
tention had  been  to  do  battle  with  him  fur
the  shield  of  Miraguarda,  seeing  him  in  this
condition  esteemed  it  dishonour  to  assail
him  ;  wherefore  he  past  the  bridge,  the  pas-
sage now  being  free,  not  knowing  whither
to    take    his    way,  and   meaning  to  wander

VOL.  II.  R


182

about  in  those  parts  for  awliile,  in  the  hope
that  he  miglit  meet  with  Albayzar  again,  and
•thon  do  but  lie  with  him^  a^  lie  greatly  de-
sired.


183


CHAPTER  71.


The  history  sailh,  that  duke  Art'dao  in  Spain,
liad  a  daughter,  who  Hving  to  enjoy  his  pos-
sessions after  him,  was  nourished  in  com-
pany of  the  infanta  Belisanda,  daughter  of
king  Recindos  ;  she  living  there  at  the
court,  became  enamoured  of  tlie  infanta's
brother,  Onistaldo,  and  as  she  did  not  ap-
pear amiss  to  him,  love  had  such  power
between  them,  that  in  the  end  their  desires
took  cfleet.  But  after  the  prince  had  re-
ceived the  order  of  knighthood,  in  the  court
of  the  emperor  Pahnerin,  he  became  aíTec-
tionatc  towards  another,  so  tliat  he  forgot
}irr,  and  never  saw  her  more,  though  wiien
he  left  Spain  he  had  given  her  great  hojx*
of  his  relurn.  I'lie  dutchess,  who  greatly
R  2


1S4

lovcfl  him,  and  with  all  these  wrongs  could
not  cease  to  do  so,  despairing  to  recover
him  by  any  other  means,  determined  to
try  if  by  force  sh.e  could  have  him  in  lier
power  wliom  love  would  no  longer  bring
there.  So  cominíí  to  this  castle  of  the
briJge,  which  was  one  of  the  best  in  her
estates,  having  in  her  company  the  giant
Lamortan,  with  two  knights  of  his  hneage,
she  established  this  custom,  that  no  knight
should  pass  the  bridge  ^^ilhout  leaving  his
shield  and  name  in  writing  ;  persuading
liersclf  by  this  device  at  length  to  recover
Onislaldo.

This  was  the  reason  why  this  pass  was  kept,
to  the  hurt  of  many  who  would  fain  have
forced  it,  and  whom  it  cost  dear,  till  the
valiant  Albayzar  came,  who  ended  the  cus-
tom with  the  death  of  the  keepers  of  the
bridge,  to  the  great  grief  and  vexation  of
the  di.tchess.  iSevertheless,  for  the  bounty
and  valour  she  perceived  in  him,  she  com-
manded that  he  should  he  honourably  used,
and  entertained  him  till  he  had  recovered
the  hurt  of  his  wounds;  when  thanking  her


185

as  so  noLle  entertainment  deserved,  be  de-
])arted  and  took  his  journey  towards  Con-
stantinople.

Return  we  now  to  Plorendo?,  who  went  on
fill  niííht  with  the  lady  in  the  boat,  till  in  the
mornini^  they  diseovered  a  castle  in  the
midst  of  the  sea,  which  was  founded  upon
a  rock  ;  here  the  lady  seeing  herself  where
she  wished  to  be,  began  to  Florendos  in
this  manner  :  Sir  knight,  now  will  1  declare
for  what  cause  I  have  brought  you  to  this
]»lace,  letting  pass  my  boldness  under  your
knightly  courtesy.  Within  this  castle
al>ideth  a  lady,  of  as  little  virtue  as  beau-
ty, who,  when  I  had  espoused  one  of  the
fairest  lord:»  in  this  country,  became  ena-
moured of  him  at  a  tourney,  and  not  daring
to  (hscovcr  to  him  a  wish  which  deserved
to  be  rejected,  availed  herself  of  her  ac-
customed cunning,  telHng  him  with  many
feigned  tears,  úu\t  a  knight  had  deprived
her  of  this  her  castle,  so  that  by  her  intrea-
ty  she  won  him  to  go  with  her  as  her  cham-
pion in  her  distressed  cause.  \\  hen  she  had
gotten  him  iiere  she  wouUl  never  sufVer  him
K  3^


ISG

to  depart,  but  si\y%,  tliat  here  slie  will  krrp
liini  i'or  ever,  unless  a  knight  i-hall  (Jeliver
him  by  ibree  of  arms.  JS'ow  when  any  one
hath  come  to  attempt  thi^  rcsriie,  five
Ivnights,  \vliom  she  hutli  within  the  castle,
sally  out,  and  presently  overpower  him  ;
but  if  more  than  one  come,  then  will  she
not  suffer  her  knights  to  fight  then),  but
fires*  at  them  from  the  castle.  Lady,  re-
plied Fiorendos,  in  a  case  of  such  danger
as  this,  before  you  bring  men  here  you
ought  to  tell  them  ^vhere  they  are  going,
that  they  may  have  no  cause  to  complain
of  you.  But  since  we  are  here,  let  us  land,
and  Fortune  may  dispose  of  us  as  she
please  th,

Tlicn  lacing  on  his  helmet  he  leapt  from  the
boat,  the  lady  remaining  therein,  for  she  did
not  venture  to  land  :  so  advancing  himself
toward  the  castle  gate,  before  which  there
was  a  little  open  space,  the  live  knights
came  forth,  all  strongly  armed,  saying.  Since


*  Antes  as  bombardadas  os  desviam  do  castello.


187

}ou  have  bocii  so  ill  advised  as  to  come  here
in  search  ot  youi  owji  hurt,  yield  yourself
to  prison,,  which  will  be  the  least  you  can
receive.

Trust  me,  said  Florendos,  first  I  intend  to
try  your  cruelty,  before  I  will  submit  to
ynur  gentleness  ;  with  that,  covering  himself
with  his  shield,  he  rushed  among  them,  deal-
ing his  blows  so  forcibly  to  the  right  and
left,  that  the  lady  of  the  castle  began  to
fear  the  destroyer  of  her  fortress  was  come,
who  would  make  her  lose  the  thing  in  the
world  which  she  loved  best.  The  five
knights  being  so  many,  perceiving  in  this
their  enemy  greater  strength  and  skill  than
they  had  ever  before  experienced  in  any
otLier  man,  aided  each  other  the  best  they
could,  laying  on  their  blows  both  thick  and
J'ast,  so  that  in  spite  of  all  his  skill  he  was
wounded  in  many  places.  Ikit  Tlorentlos,
aware  that  it  was  necessary  to  make  good
speed  against  so  niany,  dealt  one  a  blow
over  lhe  shield  upon  the  helmet,  to  such
good  purpose  that  it  went  through  lu-lmet
and  head  ;  and  by  good  ha[),  gave  another


188

\vlio  was  behind  him  such  a  back  blow  with
the  liilt  of  his  sword,  as  brought  him  to  the
ground  also.  When  the  others  perceived
this  they  began  to  think  more  of  saving
themselves  than  of  conquering  him.  The
lady  of  the  castle  seeing  them  thus  faint,
called  out  to  them  from  a  window,  en-
couraging them,  and  shaming  them  for
their  weakness.  At  this,  what  with  shame
and  anger,  they  took  heart  and  set  on  him
again,  with  greater  resolution  than  they  had
yet  displayed  ;  but  he  knowing  his  danger,
and  relying  upon  his  good  cause,  did  such
wonders  that  in  short  time  he  slew  one  of
the  three,  and  pressing  upon  the  other  twain,
being  now  indignant  that  they  should  have
resisted  him  so  long,  he  drove  them  here
and  there,  they  striving  how  they  could  to
save  themselves  ;  seeing  no  way  to  escape,
because  on  the  one  side  the  sea  hindered
ihem,  and  into  the  castle  they  could  not  re-
tire, for  the  lady  within  had  commanded
the  gate  to  be  made  fast  ;  so  that  perforce
they  did  their  best,  having  no  remcdj'.
One  of  them  at  length  with  his  wounds  and
the  exceeding  fatigue  of  battle,  fell  down


189

flead  before  liini;  when  the  last  knight,  see-
ing himselt"  left  alone,  and  in  such  plight
that  he  had  scarcely  strength  to  stand,  took
the  point  of  his  sword  ni  his  hand,  and
kneeling  down,  said.  Sir  knight,  I  beseech
you,  since  you  have  had  valour  enough  to
overcome  .so  many,  you  will  not  be  without
inercy  to  [)ardon  one.  Florendos  answered,
I  will  spare  thee,  though  to  show  mercy  to
the  wicked  is  a  fault,  because  it  seemeth
cruelty  to  slay  one  who  cannot  defend  him-
self.

Then  he  sate  down  upon  a  seat  of  marble,
which  was  made  after  the  manner  of  a  bench
at  the  castle  gate,  that  he  might  rest  him-
self awhile  after  so  great  toil.  And  now  the
lady  came  from  the  boat,  right  joyful  at  this
victory,  and  ordered  one  of  her  dames  to
look  to  his  wounds,  who  was  full  skilful  in
such  matters,  and  had  been  brought  with  her
lor  this  especial  purpose.  She  found  that
iliey  were  many,  but  none  of  any  danger,
^\lu•r(^at  lhe  lady  was  greatly  contcntetl.
I'n!srnily  a  damsel  came  and  opened  the
ca?tle  gate,  by  command  of  its  mistress,  w  hu


190

standing  in  fear  least  her  stubbornness
might  procure  lier  greater  injury,  no  longer
resisted.  Florcndos  took  the  lady  by  the
hand  and  entered  the  castle,  where  they  met
the  knight  her  husband,  who  had  been  pri-
soner there  so  long;  he  having  embraced  her
with  as  great  love  as  she  deserved,  came  to
riorendos,  saying,  Certes,  sir,  the  sight  of
your  prowess  delighted  me  so  greatly  that  I
did  not  remember  what  I  was  to  gain  by  it.
Come  up  and  rest,  as  you  must  needs  require
to  do  ;  and  then  we  will  depart  when  it  shall
please  you  ;  for  in  so  bad  a  house  long  tarri-
ance  is  not  needful.

Here  Florendos  remained  eight  days  by  rea-
son of  his  wounds,  during  which  time  he
never  saw  the  mistress  of  the  castle,  because
she  had  made  herself  fast  in  her  chamber,  so
that  no  one  might  come  to  have  a  sight  of
her.  This  she  did  that  Florendos  might  not
know  her  if  he  should  ever  thereafter  meet
lier:  for  her  determination  was  to  bring  about
his  death  if  she  could,  if  her  own  had  not
cut  her  off  sooner  than  she  expected.  The
first  day  of  his  abode  there  Florendos  went


191

to  see  tli.c  place  vvlicre  the  lady  used  To
imprison  the  knights  who  failed  in  this  ad-
venture :  amongst  wliom  he  Ibund  Goarini,
from  wliom  he  would  fain  have  concealed
hiuisclf,  but  he  could  not,  for  Goarim  knew
him:  and  though  he  grieved  that  it  had  not
been  his  own  fortune  to  conquer  the  custom
of  this  castle,  was  yet  well  contented  that  his
cousin  Floreados  should  be  he  who  atchieved
it,  holding  him  already  to  be  one  of  the
best  knights  in  the  world,  by  what  he  had
seen  him  do  on  the  bridge  of  Dramuziando's
castle;  for  al'ter  his  departure  Daliarte  had
declared  who  he  was.

After  that  eight  da\'s  were  expired,  they  de-
parted in  a  galley,  which  the  knight  whom
he  had  delivered  sent  for,  and  went  to  his
dwelling  place,  where  Goarim  and  he  found
themselves  so  graciously  used,  and  with  as
much  ceremony,  as  if  the  knight  had  been
some  great  prince.  There  they  remained
a  few  days:  for  Florendos,  for  ever  accom-
panied by  his  own  careful  thoughts,  could
not  suffer  repose.  So  taking  leave  of  his  host
he  departed  upon  a  goodly  steed,  w  liich  the


Ií)í3

knight  liad  given  liiin.  And  because  Goarim
Avas  little  of  an  innamorato,  his  conversation
was  not  so  pleasant  to  Florendos,  that  it  did
not  make  hiin  oftentimes  r(  grtt  that  oi"  prince
Florainan  ;  so  for  this  reason,  with  ilie  best
words  he  could,  he  parted  froifi  him,  telling
liim  thai  he  must  needs  for  his  honour's  sake
travel  alone,  by  reason  of  a  certain  adven-
ture, at  which  he  was  bound  to  appear  by  a
certain  time.  Goarim,  by  what  he  had  al-
ready heard  reported,  understood  him,  and
did  his  pleasure  ;  so  ihey  parted,  each  going
his  way.


]93


CHAPTER    7í:.


Paliuerin  and  liis  l)i\'thrcn,  coutiniiiiiir  in
llieir  travel  towards  (,'onsUiuliiiople,  uent
on  without  niLMniiig  any  notable  adventure,
till  one  evening  riding  ihorow  a  fore>t,  tar
trunr  any  inhabiti  d  place,  they  saw  a  damsel
upon  a  bay  paltVey  come  riding  to^vards
them,  in  such  haste  as  if  she  were  flying  Irom
some  great  danger  ;  who  being  come  some-
what near  them,  Florian  staid  her  palfrey,
saying,  Lady,  if  it  will  not  hurt  you,  I  piay
you  to  shew  us  the  cause  of  your  fear  ?  Alas,
s^r,  quoth  she,  how  can  I  stay  to  report  any-
thing, seeing  1  dare  scant  assure  myself  in
your  company.  1  was  going  to  the  court
of  Irance  with  a  message  to  the  queen,  when
two  knights,  \\  horn  (Jod  confound,  came  and
VOL.  II.  s


I


Jâ-lí

laid  hands  on  nic,  endeavouring  dicmselves
to  abuse  mine  lionuur  ;  but  fortune  wm  so
favourable  to  jno,  that  at  ni)'  cry  a  kniglit
came  who  dcloiidcd  my  cause,  and  behaved
himsch"  so  wortliil}'  against  them,  tbat  in
open  fight  he  slew  them  both.  Then  passing
by  a  castle  at  the  end  of  this  valley,  he  Nva*
assailed  by  ten  or  twelve  knights,  who  I  íèar
me  will  be  the  death  of  liim,  if  he  be  not
speedily  helped  by  some  good  rescue  ;  and,
trust  me,  the  loss  of  him  would  be  very  great,
being  one  of  the  most  hardy  knigiits  in  oli
the  world.  I  pray  you,  lady,  said  Floriau,
bring  us  to  the  castle,  for  it  were  great  pity
to  suffer  such  a  knight  to  die  for  lack  of
help,  xllthough,  quoth  she,  Í  was  oilifr-
wise  determined,  yet  will  I  bring  you  to  the
place,  to  see  if  any  help  can  be  icudcreii
hiin.

This  said;  <he  turned  the  reins  of  lier  palfrey,
and  they  rode  together  down  the  forest,  iiic
following  them  at  full  speed,  in  short  time
they  saw  ujx^n  the  left  iiand,  where  thei-e
were  some  high  trees,  a  castle  standing  upon
a  iitile  eminence,  well  edified  and  itrong.


iy5

aiul  at  the  foot  thcieof,  from  a  part  which
they  could  not  see,  they  heard  so  great  a
dill  of  arms  that  it  echoed  well  nigh  through
the  \vlKjle  of  the  valley.  Drawing  nearer,
tliey  found  a  knight  surrounded  by  six  or
seven  on  foot,  who  had  slain  his  horse;  but
he  demeaned  himself  so  valiantly  that  Pal-
merin  and  Florian  and  Pompides  marvelled
to  see  him  :  for  he  had  already  laid  three  or
lour  at  his  feet,  and  never  delivered  blow
which  <lid  not  bring  down  him  on  whom  it
fell.  The  damsel  who  had  led  them  there,
seeing  how  they  sate  still,  and  looked  on,
making  no  haste  to  succour  him,  said  to
them,  Why,  sirs,  if  you  determined  to  do
nothing  when  you  came^  it  had  been  more
■honour  for  you  to  have  kept  on  your  jour-
ney than  to  sutler  so  good  a  knight  to  be
slain  in  your  presence,  and  you  stand  by.
Methinks,  these  arms  of  3'ours  are  rather  for
show  than  for  the  proper  use  for  which  they
were  made.

Lady,  answered  Falmerin,  the   knight  doth

so  well  discharge  his  duty,  that  we   should

oiler  him  great  wrong  if  wc  presumed  to  aiil

S  2


Î9(î

liim  ;  for  so  miglit  wc  eut  off  the  praise
which  he  shoukl  worthily  bear  ia  ohlainint;
the  victury,  which  is  in  liis  hands.  But  it'
■ue  should  perceive  the  knights  to  have  any
danijcrous  advantacre  over  him,  then  would
we  show  him  such  aid  in  their  res-istance
that  3-ou  should  recal  your  w  ords,  and  have
a  better  opinion  of  us.  AVhile  they  con-
tinued this  parley  the  knight  was  not  idle  :
for  often  knights  who  had  at  first  beset  him
only  four  wcye  left,  the  others  either  h'ing
dead  or  sorely  w'ounded  upon  the  field, which
was  covered  with  blood,  and  strewn  with
fragments  of  shields,  and  mails,  and  breast-
plates ;  he  the  while,  albeit  he  had  receiv-
ed some  hurt,  yet  demeaned  himself  so
actively  and  well  as  if  he  had  but  just  enter-
ed the  battle:  for  neither  in  an}'  blow  which
he  gave,  nor  any  movement  which  he  made,
could  sign  of  weakness  be  discovered.  Pal-
merin,  amazed  at  seeing  what  he  had  never
till  now  beheld,  said  to  Florian,  Certes,  I  see
now  what  I  never  thought  to  have  seen.  In
this  man  then  is  the  height  of  arms,  for  such
strength  and  courage  and  breath  I  never
witnessed  in  any  other,     Fiorian  replied,  I


197

know  n(»f  what  to  think,  except  that  this
k!iiii;ht  is  ordained  to  darken  the  deeds  ot"
nil  others  :  lor  setting  aside  yours,  which
are  not  to  be  taken  into  account,  I  know
not  any  one  so  confident  in  his  own,  as  that
seeing  those  ot  this  knight,  he  would  not
greatly  envy  hini.  By  this  time  they  per-
ceived all  the  knights  to  be  slain  except  two,
who  were  so  feeble  and  weary  that  they  could
scant  keep  themselves  on  foot  ;  and  because
the  other  gave  them  no  respite,  laying  on
load  of  blows,  tîiey  were  constrained  to  yield
iheniselves  to  his  mercy.  AMien  presently
<ame  forth  iVoni  the  castle  a  knight  armed
in  yellow  plates  of  steel,  upon  a  great  roan
horse,  and  he  himself  so  huge  and  well-
limbed  that  he  seemed  to  be  of  surpassing
strength.  The  strange  knight  seeing  him,
nothing  regarded  the  other  twain,  but  sprang
upon  one  of  the  horses  which  was  without
a  rider,  and  approaching  Palmerin  and  his
brethren,  said,  I  pray  yon,  sirs,  bestow  one  of
your  spears  upon  me,  to  receive  this  knight,
and  1  will  serve  you  with  others  whenever
you  shall  please  to  command  me.  Sir,  said
I'alirurin.  because  it  is  well  bestowed  upon
s  'J


IDS

yon,  I  am  content  to  give  you  mine  ;  but
metliinks,  seeing  yourself  sore  liurt,  yon
should  rest  a  while,  and  refer  the  joust  to
one  of  us  ;  for  what  you  have  already  done  is
sufficient  for  your  honour.  The  kniglii  took
the  spear,  saying.  If  my  fortune  should  not
be  such  as  to  let  me  go  througii  with  tliis
victory,  you  will  tiien  have  time  to  satisty
your  wish.  Then  his  esquire  seeing  his
master  to  want  a  shield,  came  and  j)rcsented
liim  another  which  bore  the  portrait  of  ^lira-
guarda  ;  but  Albayzar,  for  this  was  he,  re-
lused  it,  saying,  That  it  was  rather  made  to
be  adored  than  to  be  employed  to  any  use  in
fight.  Then  addressing  himself  towards  the
knight  of  the  Castle,  he  would  have  run
against  him  ;  but  he,  seeing  him  destitute  ot
a  shield,  cast  his  own  to  the  ground,  wiili
these  words:  I  am  sorry  to  sec  thee  in  this
poor  state,  because  the  victory  I  might  ob-
tain in  vanquishing  thee  will  be  but  poor  ;
do  not  think  therefore  that  I  will  attack  thee
with  any  vantage  of  arms.  Here  ending  his
talk  they  fetched  their  course,  and  met  each
other  with  such  puissance,  that  they  were
both  forced  to  lall  to  the  ground,  and  both


199

T>cing  without  shields,  were  ?ore  hurt;  then
i i>ing  and  taking  their  swords,  which  were
luigc  and  keen,  they  hegan  so  fieree  a  com-
ida, that  Palmerin  did  highly  commend  the
valour  of  Albayzar,  and  would  gladly  have
had  knowledge  of  him.

Nay,  fjuoth  Pompidcs^  Î  do  not  now  think
so  much  of  this  battle,  for  I  think  more  of
seeing  the  shield  of  Miraguarda  in  his  pos-
session, whici)  showeth  that  Dramu/iando,
who  had  it  in  keeping,  hath  been  vanquished
and  brought  into  his  subjection,  which  is  in-
deed more  to  be  wondered  at  than  this;  and
were  this  knight  in  better  condition  I  would
hazard  myself  against  him,  to  restore  the
shield  to  the  place  from  Avhenee  he  hath
brought  it,  or  die  in  the  endeavour.  Certes,
replied  Florian,  Í  hold  it  so  great  a  thing
for  Dranuiziando  to  be  overcome,  that  I
know  not  what  to  think  :  nevertheless,  on
the  other  hand,  the  prowess  of  this  man
is  such  that  any  thing  may  be  believed  of
him.  Let  him  first  fniish  his  combat,  and  then
we  may  be  resolved.


200

By  this  time  Albayzar  and  his  anungonist
had  separated  lor  a  while  to  take  bicatli.
Albayzai's  arnisweie  haeked  and  hewn  away,
and  he  hiniseU'had  lost  so  niueh  blood  from
many  wounds,  tiiat  he  began  somethiiiir  to
doubt  the  vietory.  This  kindled  in  iiini
sueh  anger,  that  witliout  fartiier  delay,  taking
his  sword  in  both  hands  he  made  at  the  lord
olthe  Castle,  who  received  him  with  no  less
wrath  ;  and  in  short  time  they  made  such
havock  with  each  other's  iiesh,  that  it  seem-
ed impossible  they  could  kcej)  on  foot.  Pal-
merin,  seeing  them  in  such  plight,  and  griev-
ing for  Albayzar,  would  have  parted  ihcn»;
but  he  would  by  no  means  give  ovi-r,  rcque^t-
inchim  to  let  him  g:o  ihrouiih  with  the  bat-
tic,  for  he  felt  himself  able  to  finish  it  to  ids
wish.  1'hen  setting  again  at  his  enemv,
both  began  to  wax  weak,  especially  Dramo-
rante  the  Cruel,  as  the  lord  of  the  tower  was
called,  who  could  scared}'  believe  that  such
fitrtàngth  and  endurance  had  been  in  mortal
man  as  he  now  found  in  this  knight.  Albay-
zar well  perceiving  his  weakness,  prest  on
him,  and  at  length  cutting  off  his  right  arm,
brought  him  dead  to   the  ground,  he  him-


Í201

self  being  so  foredonc  that  he  tell  besiclo  tiiiii.
Incontinently  he  was  succoured  by  Pahncrit^i
and  I'lorian,  and  the  damsel  who  had  led  then»
there,  wjio  bound  up  his  Avounds  the  best
they  could,  and  carried  him  into  the  castW,
A\  here  they  were  better  received  than  they
looked  for,  and  had  good  leisure  to  attend
the  wounds  of  Albay^iar,  which  were  very
nianvj  but  not  dangerous  except  for  lack  of
blood;  a  thing  which  it  is  necessary  to  sup-
ply when  it  is  wanted,  and  to  reduce  when
it  abounds,  since  we  see  that  either  lack  or
excess  thereof  many  times  makes  life  doubt-
ful.


doa


CIL1PTER    7í


Because  you  shall  understand  more  of  tli'is
Dramoraute  the  Cruel,  the  history  declareth
liow  Eutropa,  aunt  to  Drarauziando,  had  a
brother,  who  was  named  Dramorante,  one  of
the  stoutest  giants  that  lived  in  his  time.  He
being  in  his  flourishing  days,  became  amor-
ous of  a  fair  damsel,  the  daughter  of  a  wise
and  discreet  gentlewoman,  who  would  not
give  her  consent  to  the  marriage;  wherefore
he  took  her  away  perforce,  and  had  a  son  by
her,  named  Dramorante,  like  himself,  whose
haughty  and  pityless  deeds  in  time  obt^iined
the  name  of  Cruel.  The  mother  died  in
her  travail,  which  struck  so  deep  to  the  heart
of  the  giant,  seeing  her  dead  by  whose  love
his  life  was  maintained,  that  he  through  ex-
treme grief  died  shortly  after;  wherefore  his
child  was  kept    by  his  grandmother,    until


'203

such  time  as  he  grew  in  years  and  strengtli,
more  than  in  decent  and  virtuous  manners  ;
tor  liis  wliole  endeavour  was  to  kill  the  in-
noccnt;,  and  ravisli  anti  spoil  lair  ladies,  so
that  witU  his  continual  inclination  to  all
desperate  and  cruel  attempts,  all  thai  coun-
try feared  him  like  the  devil.  And  these
tilings  he  did  without  any  other  cause  than
tliat  perverse  will  with  which  he  had  been
U'gotten;  and  he  always  kept  knights  in  hi<;
service  to  range  the  forest  and  bring  home
damsels  to  be  beastly  abused  by  him.  In
this  manner  he  lived  long  time,  doing  deeds
worthy  of  cruel  chastisement,  until  such  time
as  Albayzar  cauR'  and  prevailed  against  him^
as  you  have  heard  beiorc.

Now  Albayzar  remained  in  the  uastle  some
days  while  his  wounds  were  being  cured.  Pal-
merin,  Florian,  and  Pompides,  keeping  him
company  until  he  had  attained  a  better  dispo-
sition ;  and  the  damsel  also  who  had  led  them
there,  to  whom  he  gave  the  castle  in  guerdon
lor  her  care.  ^^  hen  he  w:is  in  condition  to
talk  upon  any  thing,  Florian  desired  him  to
report  how  he  had  gotten  the  sliield  of  Mi-


204

raguaida  :  for,  ciuoih  he,  I  know  not  well
what  to  ihhik,  because  lie  that  kept  it  is
«>iic  of  the  best  knights  that  ever  professed
arms.

Sir,  said  Albayzar,  I  won  the  shield  in  equal
bailie,  and  vanquished  him  that  undertook
to  keep  it.  Moreover,  I  hope  not  only  to
present  this  to  iny  lady  Targiana  ;  but  aUo
those  of  all  other  men  who  shall  gainsay  that
she  is  the  fairest  lady  in  the  world  :  and
with  this  intent  I  shall  first  go  to  the  court
of  the  emperor  Palmerin^  where  I  shall  have
better  occasion  to  fulfil  my  purpose  than  any
where  else.  Tioriaa  now  fuliy  understand-
ing that  lie  was  a  Moor,  and  hearing  his
speeches  so  proud  and  arrogant,  answered
him  somewhat  nielancholickly.  '^  ou  go,
methinks,  upon  a  bad  enterprise:  for  theie
are  in  that  court  so  many  ladies  fairer  than
Targiana,  and  so  many  knights  to  accept
your  challenge,  that  I  fear  you  will  come  oil"
with  more  shame  than  your  heart  presages.
Albayzar,  who  could  not  brook  these  words
because  they  affected  his  lady,  replied.  Sir
knight,  you  well  know  the  time  ia  which  you


205

luive  taken  uic,  but  if  you  dare  come  to  tlic
emperor's  court,  when  I  shall  be  there,  which
will  be  soon,  I  'vvill  cause  you  to  know  how-
far  the  beauty  of  Targiana  doth  surmount
all  other  women,  if  so  be  you  dare  enter  the
combat  with  me.  Good  words,  replied  Flo-
rian,  are  so  ill  requited  by  you,  that  1  will
say  nothinsç  more  than  I  will  be  with  you  in
the  court  as  soon  as  possible,  and  then  our
deeds  shall  decide  between  us.  So  taking
leave  of  him, he  besought  Palmerin  to  depart.
Accordingly  they  armed  themselves  forth-
with and  left  Albayzar.

The  three  brethren  went  their  wav,  till  at
length  after  long  travelling  they  arrived  in
the  kinirdom  of  Hun<>;arv,  beinu;  «lad  thev
had  attained  so  near  to  Constantinople.
But  Palmerin,  in  the  midst  of  this  cor.t  nt-
nient,  began  tfO  feel  greater  tears  than  ever,
having  still  present  in  his  mind  the  words
which  his  lady  had  spoken  w  hen  first  he  left
that  court.  And  not  knowing  on  what  to
<letermine  because  of  the  great  peril  in  which
he  .stood,  he  went  apart  with  Sclviaui:  i'or
this  secret  he  did  not  confide  even  to  hi»

VOL.    II.  T


Í0(J

brethren.  In  him  he  found  such  shigular
and  lively  arguments  to  draw  him  from  these
fears,  as  obliged  him  to  go  on  and  forget
such  fancies.  Nevertheless,  Love,  which
wherever  it  hath  place,  worketh  a  thousand
changes,  brought  other  doubts  to  mind,  so
that  his  judgment  was  clean  gone  from  him,
and  he  knew  not  what  he  should  do.  Thus
they  went  on  throughout  that  kingdom,
atchieving  feats  which  extended  their  re-
nown ;  and  going  towards  a  city  which  was
a  sea  port,  where  they  might  embark  for
Greece,  they  came  upon  a  great  and  wide
field,  and  looking  about  them,  regaling  their
eyes  with  the  fair  flowers  wherewith  it  was
covered,  they  saw  coming  towards  them  a
litter  covered  with  a  black  pall,  and  accom-
panied by  three  esquires,  who  were  making
very  doleful  and  grievous  lamentations  over
a  dead  body  which  was  upon  the  bier.

Drawing  near,  Florian,  who  was  alway  de-
sirous of  novelties,  wished  to  know  the  rea-
son of  this  sorrow  ;  and  hfting  up  the  cloth
he  beheld  a  knight  lying  in  green  armour,
so  embrued  with  bloody  that  one  could  hard-


207

jy  judge  of  what  colour  it  was,  and  bearing
the  marks  of  so  many  blows,  that  it  was  plain
he  had  received  thein  in  some  tircat  battle.
This  moved  him  to  great  compassion  ;  and
being  desirous  to  know  the  cause  of  this  lie
slaid  one  of  the  esquires,  willing  him  to  re-
port by  what  mischance  the  knight  was
slain,  while  the  litter  went  on.  The  esquire
having  small  leisure  to  sta}',  made  him  a  short
answer  in  this  sort  :  If  you  wish  to  know,
follow  me,  and  I  will  tell  you  along  the  road;
and  if  you  have  courage  you  may  adventure
your  arms  and  person,  where  great  honour
may  be  gained  with  great  })eril.  Certes,
quoth  Florian,  haj)  what  may  [  shall  see  the
end  of  this.  So  taking  leave  of  his  brethren,
who  would  fain  have  gone  with  him,  he  fol-
lowed the  litter,  desirous  to  «ee  the  end  of
that  the  esquire  had  told  him.  Palmerin
and  Pompides  seeing  him  gone,  went  their
way  along  ihe  field,  talking  of  what  had
chanced,  when,  as  adventures  were  always
certain  in  those  parts,  they  had  not  gone  far
before  they  saw  a  damsel  crossing  the  plain,
mounted  on  a  black  palfrey,  who,  when  she
came  up  to  theni;  stopt  and  said,  Sirs,  will
T  2


1208

one  of  you,  as  you  arc  bouutl  by  tlic  order
which  you  hear,  go  with  me  to  the  succour
of  a  damsel,  whom  three  kniglits  arc  about
to  put  to  death.  Pompidcs  hearing  this,
turned  to  Pahnerin  :  So  httlo  an  adventure
is  not  for  you.  I  pray  you  give  me  leave  to
accompany  the  damsel,  that  I  may  see  if
any  thing  may  proceed  from  me,  which  may
seem  like  vour  brother.  Palmerin,  to  whom
no  conversation  appeared  better  than  a  soli-
tary life,  easily  consented  that  Pompides
should  assist  the  damsel  ;  so  taking  leave  of
each  other,  Pompides  departed  about  his  en-
terprize,  and  Palmerin  to  the  accustomed  re-
membrance of  his  lady:  for  when  time  gave
him  occasion  he  never  cmplo^'ed  his  thoughts
on  other  subject.  In  this  manner,  travelling
on  with  Sclviam,  he  past  the  greater  part  of
the  day,  till  the  sun  went  down;  and  then  see-
ing himself  far  from  any  place  of  lodging,
was  glad  for  that  night  to  take  his  rest  in  a
little  thicket  of  trees  at  the  end  of  the  field  ;
so  riding  up  to  them,  he  alighted  and  gave
his  horse  to  Selviam,  and  laid  himself  ilown
at  the  foot  of  a  tree,  where  he  lay  thinking
of  his  ladv  till  the  thoughts  lulled  him  and


209

he  fell  asleep  ;  Lut  finding  no  rest  even  in
sleep, he  awoke  again  when  it  was  now  mid-
night. And  then,  as  all  sounds  are  heard
distinctly  at  night,  he  heard  the  voice  of  a
man,  not  far  apart  from  him,  complaining  in
such  soriowful  guise  that  it  was  pityful  to
hear  him  ;  and  being  desirous  to  hear  hiui
better,  lie  drew  towards  the  voice.  The
night  was  so  dark  that  lie  could  not  see  him,
nor  distinguish  the  colour  of  his  arms;  but
he  was  content  to  hear  hinij^because  the  sor-
rowful lind  consolation  in  hearing  the  sor-
row of  others.  The  other,  who  was  employ-
ing the  time  in  nothing  but  pa^?sionate  dis-
course, was  saying.  Why,  O  riorendos,  why
dost  thou  thus  complain  of  thy  grief,  being
so  well  contented  with  it?  My  lady  Mi ra-
guarda,  what  would  you  he  should  do  who
hath  seen  you  to  lose  himself,  and  seeth  you,
not  to  say  what  he  suffers  .''  My  sorrows  are
such  that  none  butl  could  endure  them,  and  I
live  for  nothing  else,  than  that  life  may  be
past  in  greater  suffering.  Every  thing  which  is
suffered  for  your  sake  is,  I  w  ell  know,  re|)aid
by  the  pleasure  of  serving  you  ;  but  w  hat
shall  he  do,  to  whom  your  rigour  neither  w  ill
T  3


210

give  life  to  enjoy  tliis  pleasure,  nor  destroy  it
at  once  that  he  may  no  longer  complain?
So  ending  his  moans  with  a  grievous  sigh,
he  laid  him  dtnvn,  and,  being  worn  out,  iell
asleep.  Then  Palmcrin  perceiving  it  was
Florendos,  determined  to  make  hiniselt'
known;  but  fearing  that  lie  might  hinder  him
OÍ"  his  journe}',  changed  his  mind,  bewail-
ing as  much  the  heaviness  of  Tlorcndos^  as
he  did  the  extreme  ease  of  his  own  misfor-
tune: for  it  is  the  nature  of  noble  minds  to
lament  for  the  sorrows  of  others,  more  than
for  their  own.  Before  the  day  appeared  he
ordered  his  horse  to  be  bridled,  and  pursued
his  way,  wishing  now  to  he  at  the  court  of
the  emperor  his  grandfather,  where  he  might
conclude  the  several  motions  of  doubt  and
fear,  which  love  presented  to  his  oppressed
mind  :  for  great  fears  arc  made  to  seem  less
by  hastening  through  them.


211


CHAPTER  74.


Florian  of  tlie  Desert  following  the  Lier
after  he  had  parted  from  his  brethren,  the
squire  who  was  with  him  began  thus:  Sir,
seeing  you  desire  so  mueh  to  know  the
knight  who  is  slain,  and  thinking  that  you
^vill  not  refuse  to  revenge  his  wrong  if  need
should  be,  give  ear,  and  I  will  diseourse
thereof  to  you  at  large.  For  as  arms  are
borne  for  the  sake  of  redressing  wrongs,
assure  yourself  that  in  this  adventure  better
than  in  any  other  you  may  employ  them.
You  shall  understand  that  this  knight  was
named  Sortibran  the  Strong,  first  cousin  of
king  Frisol,  wliose  worthiness  iiath  been
sueh,  that  he  ever  bare  the  name  of  the  most
redoubted  knight  in  all  his  kingdom.     So  ii


212


was,  that  yesterday  a  squire  came  to  his  cas-
tle, who  with  tears  desired  him  to  assist  him
in  a  donbtlul  cause  ;  whereto  he  courteously
gave  his  consent,  never  having  denied  suc-
cour w  hen  it  was  asked  at  his  hand,  and  went
V  ith  him,  not  suspecting  the  treacherous  in-
tent of  the  squire,  who  brought  him  into  a
place  where  four  of  his  enemies  awaited  hi;*
coming;  and  though  Sortibran,  my  lord,  did
in  battle  against  them  all,  all  that  a  brave
knight  should  do,  nevertheless,  as  odds  of
number  oftentimes  overcometh  valour,  by
dint  of  many  wounds,  in  the  end  he  was
there  cruelly  slain.  We  being  advertised  of
this  great  mishap,  came  with  this  bier  to
fetch  him  to  his  castle,  where  we  might  see
his  body  honourably  interred.  In  the  mean
Mhile  one  of  his  young  sons  is  gone  to  the
court,,  to  seek  some  knight  that  ■will  revenge
his  father's  death.  Therefore,  if  you  dare
undertake  this  you  shall  not  only  enlarge
your  renown,  but  also  shall  work  such  occa-
sion, that  none  may  presume  hereafter  to
commit  any  such  treason.  Florian,  who  de-
sired nothing  more,  offered  his  person  for
this  service,  being  grieved  at  the  death  of


213

Sorlibran,  ^vllonl  he  had  bcforotimc  hturd
named  as  a  right  good  knight.  So  riding  on
with  them  they  came  to  the  sea  coast,  where
they  entered  a  foist,  that  attended  their  com-
ing, and  having  there  sliipped  tlie  body  of
Sorti  bran,  they  took  the  horses  by  hmd,  and
rowed  along  shore.

There  they  went  on  till  night,  when  as  they
Mere  crossing  a  bay  which  the  sea  made  iu
those  parts,  they  fell  in  with  four  Turkish
galleys,  which  were  lying  there  at  anchor;
and  as  there  was  no  time  to  turn  back,  and
none  but  Floriau  to  fight,  the  foist  was  en-
tered without  resistance  bv  Auderramete,  a
chief  captain  among  the  INloor^,  who  behold-
ing tlie  rich  armour  of  Florian,  and  judging
him  to  be  a  noble  knight,  entertained  him
oourtcousl}',  commanding  the  esquires  to  cast
the  dead  body  of  their  lord  into  the  sea  ;  and
the  next  morning  they  hoisted  sails  to  go  on
their  voyage.

This  Auderramete  was  the  bastard  brother
to  Albayzar,  and  now  was  travelling  to  seek
him,  to  give  liim  to  understand,  tiiat  the  sol-


•214

dan  of  Babylon,  Ills  Lrotlier,  was  dcafl,  after
Avhoui  it  was  his  right  to  succccil.  So  in
talking  with  Dorian  he  demanded  of  him
if  at  any  time  he  had  heard  of  the  prince
Albayzar,  and  reported  such  marks  and
tokens  to  him,  that  he  knew  it  was  he  who
had  vanquished  Draniorante  the  Cruel,  and
all  his  people  ;  and  with  that,  bethinking  him
of  the  combat  assigned  between  them,  to  be
performed  in  the  emperor's  court,  and  that
his  I'ortune  had  so  chanced  that  he  could
not  meet  him  there  at  the  appointed  time,
he  remained  discontented  and  sad,  inso-
much that  Auderramcte  desired  him  to
shew  the  cause  of  iiis  heaviness.  But  when
he  had  understood  the  reason,  in  a  great
inelancholy  he  began  thus  to  say,  Thinkest
thou  there  is  any  knight  in  the  world  that
can  stand  against  my  lord  Albayzar  in  the
field  ?  Certainly  thou  art  much  beholden
to  Fortune  for  delivering  thee  from  so  great
a  danger.  Nevertheless,  if  thou  art  so  dis-
contenicd,  let  us  reach  the  court  of  the
Great  Turk,  where, before  the  princess  Tar-
giana,  I  will  do  battle  with  thee  upon  this
quarrel,   that   Albayzar  is   the  best  knight


215

living  on  the  earth,  and  if  tliou  hast  any
anger  against  him  thou  maycst  revenge  it
upon  me^  who  am  his  brother.  Fiorian,
Avho  desired  to  manifest  his  valour  in  strange
countries,  received  the  ehallonije  ;  and  the
Moor,  desirous  of  gaining  honour,  and  still
more  in  the  service  of  Albayzar,  bent  his
course  towards  the  court  of  the  Great  Turii.

Let  us  now  remember  Pompides,  \\\\o  tra-
velled wiiii  the  damsel  till  they  came  to  a
valley  thickly  set  with  trees,  when  from  the
deepest  part  of  the  grove,  he  heard  the  voice
of  a  woman,  now  so  weak  and  exhausted
that  she  had  scarce  strength  to  cry  out;
and  clapping  spurs  to  his  horse,  he  came  up
and  beheld  a  knight  endeavouring  to  force
her,  and  two  others  sitting  by  on  horseback,
laughing  to  see  her  defend  herself.

Pompides,  not  able  to  suffer  so  great  shame
in  his  sight,  couched  his  lance  against  him
that  abused  the  lady,  so  that  he  ran  him
dean  thorow  the  head,  and  Iai('  him  dead
on  the  ground,  before  him  scattering  his
brains  upon  the  earth.     The  other  two  turn-


216

tvî  instantly  upon  him  with  ihcir  sliiehii;
hefore  them  and  tlieir  spears  in  rest;  but
uU  they  did  was  to  break  them  upon  him.
Pompidcs  having  better  strength,  pierced
one  through  all  his  arms,  and  sent  him  to
bear  his  friend  company  ;  then  s\\H)rd  in
hand  lie  made  at  the  third,  and  in  short
time  gave  him  so  many  wounds  that  he
tell  senseless  ;  incontinently  he  alighted  to
see  if  he  were  dead  ;  and  taking  oft'  his  hel-
met, the  other  came  to  himself,  and  in  the
fear  of  death,  began  to  ask  for  mercy  ;  but
Pompidcs,  being  nielancholiek  at  what  he
had  seen,  would  show  him  none^  but  saying
that  this  was  the  iit  guerdon  of  such  viU
lîiiny,  smote  oft'  his  head.


Then  came  the  damsel,  and  tln-ew  herself
at  the  feet  of  Pompides  to  thank  him  for
this  succour  ;  but  the  fear  she  sustained  by
their  cruelty,  would  hardly  sufl'er  her  to
speak.  Pompides  taking  her  in  his  arms,
and  seeing  her  to  be  so  fair  a  woman,  said.
Now,  lady,  you  may  be  content,  for  there  is
none  here  but  such  as  will  employ  himself
in  your  defence.     Sir,  quoth  she,  these  mea


sir

have  brought  mc  into  such  fear,  that  albeit
I  see  thcin  dead  before  my  face,  yet  they
still  make  me  alVaid  ;  let  us  depart,  for  I  can-
not think  myself  safe  here.  Pompides  smil-
ing at  her  fear,  departed  with  her  into  the
open  field,  where,  because  it  was  now  even-
ing-, and  they  were  far  from  any  inhabited
place,  he  determined  to  rest  ;  and  there  the
(huH'^el  related  to  him  how  the  knights  that
would  have  forced  her,  met  with  her  as  she
travelled  toward  the  court  of  king  Frisol.
l*ompides,  having  heard  her  story,  tried  whe-
ther by  fair  words  lie  could  win  her  to  his
wish,  as  her  appearance  obliged  liim  to  do,
but  to  Utile  [)urpose,  the  damsel  being
chaste  and  virtuous.  On  the  morrow,  as
soon  as  it  was  light  she  went  her  wav,  and
Pompides  pursued  his  journey,  hoping  to
overtake  Palmerin,  not  only  because  of  the
love  whicli  he  bore  him,  but  also  for  the
sake  of  his  conversation:  for  the  conversa-
tion of  good  men  hath  this  in  it,  tiiat  both
the  good  and  the  bad  equally  desire  it  for
its  own  sake.


VOL.  H.


218


Cil  A  PT  ER  75.


After  Palincnii  had  left  riorendus  >lccpin<r
in  the  thicket,  on  the  fourth  day  he  tarn.-
into  u  forest,  lialf  a  league  from  the  citv
of  Buda,  where  the  king  of  Hungary  at
Miat  time  made  abode.  At  the  end  of
this  forest,  under  the  shade  of  some  poplars,
he  perceived  a  company  of  knights  and
ladies  by  a  fountain,  who  were  then  passing
the  se!>ta,  because  the  day  was  exceedinç
hot.  Wherefore  fearing  least  their  com-
pany might  be  some  hindrance  to  his  travel,
he  turned  his  horse  another  way.

Ere  long,  a^  he  was  riding, he  heard  a  great  up-
i-oar,and  turning  his  head,  espied  this  pleasant
company  by  the  fountain  to  be  fiercely  en-


219

ííaged  ill  battle,  incontinently  be  -spurred
bis  borse  anrl  galloped  tbitber;  but  before
he  came,  all  -was  done  and  quiet,  because
tbr  enemy  bad  slain  those  who  resisted,  and
taken  the  rest.  Now  when  Palaierin  saw
among  tbe  prisoners  the  dutcbess  of"  Ponlo
and  Durazo,  wbo  ^vas  tbe  wife  of  Belear,
and  among  tbe  dead  prince  Ditrco,  who
had  been  conducting  her  to  tbe  court  of  the
king  bis  father,  (for  Belcar  was  for  tbe  most
part  of  bis  tiinc  in  Constantinoplej  by  re'a-
son  of  the  great  allcction  be  bare  towards
it,  baving  been  bred  up  tbercin,)  be  was  so
sorrowful  that  be  determined  to  adventure
his  person  in  tbe  rescue  of  tbcse  ladies,  and
to  revenge  the  dead,  notbing  heeding  that
against  him  there  was  tbe  giant  Bracan-
dor,  lord  of  the  Uninhabited  Rock,  and
wilb  bim  ten  knights,  all  well  armed.  So
be  couched  his  spear  and  ran  against  the
giant  witb  sucb  force,  that  taking  him  un-
awares, be  laid  bim  along  on  the  eartb.  Tbe
ten,  seeing  this  boldness  in  a  single  knigbt,
came  altogether  upon  him,  but  be  defended
himself  so  well,  iliat  they  bad  not  the  power
to  unborsc  him  ;  and  drawing  his  sword
U  ii


2^20

he  laid  about  hjm,  and  with  his  hardy  blows
made  them  quickly  cool  their  courage.  Bra-
caiidor  bein^:  now  risen  up  again,  with  great
anger  and  pride  exclaimed  to  his  men.  Draw
back  and  look  io  tlie  prisoners  th;it  they  do
not  escape.  My  culiass  shall  give  me  such
■vengeance  upon  tliis  wretch,  that  I  shall  have
full  satisfaction  for  what  he  has  done  to  me.

They  did  as  he  commanded  them,  not  daring
to  disobe\',  and  Palmerin  seeing  his  rage,  and
veil  knowing  liis  strength,  awaited  him  with
that  good  heart  wliich  he  always  carried
about.  The  battle  endured  between  them
some  while,  each  contesting  it  as  stoutly
as  was  needful  against  such  an  enemy  ;  but
]3racandor  in  the  end  began  to  faint.  The
knights  seeing  the  danger  he  was  in,  recked
not  of  their  master's  command,  but  came
and  beset  Palmerin,  who  albeit  his  skill  was
so  great,  could  not  defend  himself  so  well
against  so  many,  but  that  his  armour  was
cut  through  in  many  places,  and  he  receiv-
ed many  wounds.  Isevertheless,  if  ever  he
displayed  his  high  prowess  it  was  now;  for
every  blow  he  gave  brought  down  its  man,


22 1

(lead  or  woundí^d^  arms  being  of  no  avail
against  his  might.  Tlie  damsels,  meantime,
t.ontinuc'd  in  prayers  for  his  good  assistance,
esteeming  him  the  best  knight  that  ever  they
had  seen.  Bracandor,  who  by  the  succour
of  his  men  had  been  enabled  somewhat  to
recover  himself,  seeing  the  marvellous  force
of  one  only  knight,  began  to  blaspheme  his
gods,  believing  that  their  anger  liad  brought
on  him  tiiis  great  destruction;  and  in  tiiis
Jury  lie  dealt  such  deadly  strokes,  that  had
not  j^ilmerin  avoided  them,  the  least  were
sufficient  to  have  slain  him,  his  own  mean-
tiiiie  not  being  delivered  in  vain.  Bracandor
beholding  six  of  his  knights  slain,  througa
his  dangerous  wounds,  and  despair  of  him-
seli",  lell  to  the  ground.  Paknerin  well  pleas-
ed to  be  rid  of  such  an  enemy,  in  short  time
sent  the  other  four  to  bear  their  master  com-
pany. Then,  before  he  rested,  he  went  to
Bracandor  to  see  if  he  were  dead,  and  be-
gan with  this  intent  to  take  olf  his  helmet.

But  while  he  wa>s  thus  busied,  Astripardo.
the  giant's  nephew  came  up  with  ten  other
knigliti,  to  accompany  hii  uncle;  and  seeing


liis  people  slain_,  and  himself  about  to  have
his  head  taken  off,  made  at  Palmeiin.  He,
hearing  the  horses,  started  up,  though  they
charged  him  so  suddenly,  that  he  had  not
leisure  to  commend  himself  to  his  lady.  Then
protceting  himself  with  what  little  of  his
shield  was  left,  he  determined  not  to  part
with  his  life  without  good  exchange,  if  his
strength  did  not  fail  him.  But  though  he
did  that  day  wonders  in  arms,  yet  was  he
so  weak  and  wearied,  and  had  received  so
many  wounds,  and  lost  so  much  blood,  that
this  had  been  the  last  hour  of  his  life  if  it
liad  not  chanced,  that  the  right  brave  and
valourous  Albayzar  came  that  way,  being
on  his  road  to  Constantinople  ;  who  seeing
so  cruel  and  unequal  a  battle  as  this  of  so
many  against  one,  and  perceiving  that  this
was  he  who  had  given  him  his  spear,  v.hen
he  fought  against  Dramoranie  the  Cruel,
he  ran  against  Astripardo  with  such  force
that  he  sent  him  a  full  spear's  length  be-
yond his  horse.  Then  drawing  his  sword,
he  made  such  havock  among  them,  that  in
short  time,  Palmerin  the  while  showing  no
weakness,  the  greater  part  were  slain,  and


o  or»

the  rest  took  to  flÍ2,lit.  Palmeriii  seeinor
himselt"  freed  from  so  great  a  danger,  would
have  thanked  Albayzar;  but  he  seen:iing  not
to  remember  what  he  had  done,  went  his
way  without  staying  to  hear  him.  This  con-
tempt of  praise  seemed  well  to  Palracrin,
who  had  seen  his  haughty  courage,  and  he
had  as  much  envy  of  it  as  lie  would  have
felt  at  tlic  deeds  of  any  other.

Then  turning  to  Bracandor,  and  finding  him
to  be  as  yet  alive,  he  commanded  the
esquires  of  Ditreo  to  take  him;  and  with
him  and  the  rest  of  the  company  he  rode
to  Buda;  the  dutchess  and  her  people,  sor-
rowful as  they  were  for  what  had  chanced,
yet  having  some  consolation  in  the  event:
for  this  is  the  way  of  Fortune;  her  wheel
is  never  at  rest,  but  always  changing.


224


CHAPTER  76,


Such  report  the  history  dclivcrelli  unto  us,
that  ill  the  Perilous  Isle  tlicre  ^vas  once  u
giant  named  Biizarcante,  who  ruled  it  in
such  cruel  manner  that  his  subjects  did
stand  ia  more  doubt  of  him  than  of  death»
so  that  they  con-;pired  his  death  hy  poison.
His  son  Bracandor,  being  yet  young,  was
innocent  of  the  wicked  and  devilish  deeds  of
his  father  ;  yet  fearing  that  government
■would  prick  him  to  the  like  cruelty,  they
chased  him  out  of  the  Isle.  He^  finding
himself  thus  poor  and  banished,  took  with
*  him  Astripardo,  who  was  his  sister's  son,
and  with  certain  other  knii^ht.'^  who  accom-
panicd  him,  went  into  the  kingdom  of  Hun-
gary^ where  they  purposed  to  dwell  in  a  little


Í225

inoimtain,  which  was  called  the  Uninhabited
Ilock,  thinking,  that  as  the  son  of  such  a
father,  in  no  olher  place  might  lie  be  suiiercd
to  live  in  quiet;  and  as  the  place  was  steep
and  strong,  and  he  had  made  a  fortress  there
which  was  both  great  and  strong,  there  he
abode  contentedly  and  without  fear  of  any.
Now^  when  this  Bracandor  was  grown  to  be
a  mighty  and  valourous  knight,  he  and  Astri-
pardo  had  gotten  a  couipan}'  of  bloody  mind-
ed and  dishonest  knights,  living  by  robbery,
and  doing  all  villainous  deeds  that  might  be
devised,  even  such  as  showed  from  what  a
race  he  was  sprung.  But  though  upon  this
rock  they  had  enough  of  all  other  things,
even  to  abundance,  yet  of  one  thing  they
were  utterly  in  want,  which  was  of  women  ;
and  as  his  people  sometimes  threatened  to  leave
him  unless  he  provided  them  therewith,  he
sought  to  get  them  b}^  all  means,  whether  by
force  or  any  other  way.  At  last  they  heard  of
this  dutchcss,  the  wife  of  Belcar,  how  with  a
bevy  of  fair  damsels  she  was  going  to  visit
king  Frisol  her  father  in  law,  accompanied
with  prince  Ditreo  and  other  knights.  Sud-
denly they  came  and  set  upon  them,  when


226

tbcy  were  takiiiii;  ibc  sesta  under  those  pop-
lar trees;  bo  that  tlie  prince  and  the  knights,
being  ill  ineeter  array  for  court  than  ior
haltlc,  were  t^luin,  live  of  them  belonging
to  Bracandor  being  slain  also;  ten  how-
ever of  iiis  party  still  remaining  when  Pal-
merin  came  up  and  rescued  the  ladies,  as
you  have  heard  before.

AVhcn  they  were  come  to  the  city  of  Buda,
king  Frisol  understanding  the  death  of  his
son,  look  it  so  heavily  as  such  a  great  loss
did  forcibly  constrain  him,  receiving  the
dutchess  with  as  much  grief  as  he  had
thought  to  have  had  joy  in  welcoming  her
with  feasts  and  rejoicings.  Nevertheless,
he  being  as  brave  and  worth}',  as  related  in
the  history  of  Palmerin  de  Oliva,  constrain-
ed himself  to  moderate  his  own  grief,  that
others  might  feel  the  less.


Palmerin,  whose  wounds  troubled  him,  left
the  dutchess  when  they  entered  the  city,
which  was  towards  night,  and  took  up  his
inn  at  a  house  where  errant  knights  were
wont  to  be  entertained;  and  thougVi  the  king.


í2C7

knowing  what  had  pasl,  used  great  dili-
gcace  to  I'uul  liim  out,  tluiL  lie  might  be
cured  and  entertained  aceording  to  his  dc-
serts,he  could  never  learn  tidings  of  him:  lor
though  some  persons  went  to  the  place
where  he  lodged,  he  concealed  himself  so
well  that  he  was  supposed  not  to  be  him
whom  they  sought.

The  citizens  took  the  giant  Bracandor,  and
without  the  king's  leave  intlicted  upon  him
so  many  kinds  of  punishment  that  at  length,
being  somewhat  satislied  with  revenge,  they
put  him  to  death,  burning  his  bones,  that
nothing  might  be  left  of  such  a  cruel  villain.
Soon  after,  king  Frisol,  not  able  to  wÍLÍi.-rantl
the  extremity  of  his  grief,  though  outwardly
he  so  well  dissembled  it,  and  being  now  of
great  age  so  that  his  nature  failtd,  meekly
yielded  his  days  to  the  stroke  of  death,
which  was  no  small  grief  to  his  noble  line-
age, and  as  well  to  his  loyal  and  obedient  sub-
jects, who  greatly  lamented  the  loss  of  such
a  gracious  prince.  His  qualities  were  such
as  to  be  worthy  of  this  regret;  he  maintain-
ed them  in  justice,  and    treated  them   with


22S

love;  lie  ruled  them  with  gentleness,  reward-
ed  services,  and  punished  oftences  as  they
deserved  ;  in  anger  he  was  temperate,  in
the  accidents  of  lite  moderate  ;  beloved  by
his  own  people,  feared  by  strangers,  de-
sirous of  peace,  and  mighty  in  war.  Vi-
nally,  he  was  endowed  with  ail  perfections
>vhich  he  who  hath  the  government  of  a
kingdom  ought  to  possess,  and  to  crown  all,
was  man  as  well  as  king,  which  has  so  sel-
dom been  found  in  human  weakness.

His  obsequies  magnifically  finished,  Estre-
lante,  the  son  of  prince  Ditreo,  received
the  name  of  their  rightful  and  renowned
king;  but  the  government  of  the  sceptre
he  committed  to  one  of  the  most  noble
lords  in  all  ilungar}',  because  his  time  of
ease  was  not  as  yet  come,  for  he  would
still  follow  the  exercise  of  a  knight  at
arms.  Palmerin  stayed  a  few  days  in  the
city  of  Buda,  till  his  strength  would  per-
mit him  to  bear  armour,  though  his
wounds  were  not  yet  healed,  and  then  he
followed  his  journey.


529


CHAPTER  77.


Here  must  we  remember  Auderrametc  and
Florian,  who  were  sailing  to  the  Turk's
court  ;  and  as  they  had  wind  at  will,  in  few
days  they  arrived  there.  Auderramete  land-
ed with  some  prisoners  whom  he  had  taken,
he  being  armed  in  gallant  arms,  in  which  he
appeared  right  well.  Florian,  in  his  accus-
tomed armour,  landed  with  him,  and  they
went  together  to  the  palace  of  the  Great
Turk,  who  received  the  Moor  wjth  such  wel-
come and  honour  as  his  great  worth  merited.
He  then  offered  to  the  lurk  all  his  prisoners,
with  which  present  he  was  well  pleased,  and
thanked  him  as  it  deserved.  Then  coming
to  the  princess  Targiaiui,  whose  gentle  na-
ture aftbrded  hiui  a  gracious  welcome,  he
VOL.    u.  X


230


delivered  his  speeches  in  tiiis  manner  :  Lad}',
since  I  departed  from  hence,  I  liavc  endured
a  long  and  tedious  travel  in  quest  of  my
lord  and  brother  Aibayzar  j  aiid  albeit  it
hath  not  bv^ei»  my  fortune  to  meet  with  him,
yet  have  I  heard  such  report  oï  his  deeds
as  doth  well  requite  my  painful  search  ;  for
he  hath  won  such  renown  among  the  Chris-
tians, which  have  no  knowledge  of  him,  as
is  the  envy  of  all  tliose  who  bear  arms  and
seek  adventures.  Moreover,  there  Í  learnl
that  he  haih  overcome  the  keeper  of  the
castle  of  Almourol,  and  won  by  ibrce  of  anas
the  shield  of  Aliraguarda,  wherewith  he  is
gone  to  the  court  or  the  emperor  Palmeriu,
to  maintain  against  all  knJLihis  that  dare
avouch  the  contrary,  your  seemly  self  to  be
the  only  paragon  of  beauty  on  the  earth  ;
and  to  bring  away  with  him  all  their  shields,
and  lay  jointly  with  this  before  you,  from
whose  remembrance  he  derives  strength  to
accomplish  such  mighty  exploits,  as  well  as
liardjhood  to  undertake  them.  Durinsr  the
time  1  was  in  his  search,  it  happened  Í  took
certain  prisoners  ;  among  whom  was  this
knight^  who  both  told  me  news  of  Aibayzar,


231

rtud  how  he  h;ul  assigned  to  fight  against  him
in  the  emperor's  court.  At  this  I  laughed
him  to  scorn,  advising  him  not  to  repine
that  he  had  escaped  so  great  danger;  where-
upon such  words  arose  between  us,  that  we
have  appointed  a  combat,  to  be  tried  and
ended  in  this  court,  and  you  to  be  the  judge
OÍ"  the  battle.

riorian  seeing  his  great  pride,  was  stricken
MÍih  eholer  ;  and  being  ah-cady  amorous  of
the  Moorish  princess,  he  could  bear  no
more,  but  rose  and  said.  Here  we  arc,  Au-
(lerramete,  where  I  can  fulfil  my  promise.
]  do  not  deny  that  Albayzar  is  a  valiant
knight  at  arms,  having  seen  him  perform
such  deeds  as  manifest  no  less  ;  but  as  little
do  1  admit  that  he  hath  won  the  shield  of
]Miraguarda  in  battle;  lor  1  nin  not  assmed
that  he  hath  done  thi.s,  and  believe  it  not,
knowini>  him  who  defended  it.  As  for  the
j)rincess  Targiana,  her  beauty  1  esteem,  and
confess  of  such  authority,  as  he  that  venliir-
cth  the  field  in  her  fiivour^  cannot  choose  but
speed  hap[iily  in  all  his  deeds,  lîut  if  it  shall
please  her  to  licence  me  the  field,  1  v.  ill  jirove


Î23i2

agíiinst  yoii^  Albayzar,  and  ail  else  \vho  «lare
gainsay,  that  1  ean  serve  lier  better  ia  one
day  than  ye  in  all  your  lives.

Audcrramete,  \vho  could  not  suiFeF  these
brave  words  from  one  that  was  his  prisoner,
in  a  rage  cast  his  helmet  on  the  ground,  with
such  force  as  to  dint  ir,  exclaiming,  O  Ma-
homet, \vh\'  dost  thou  suffer  in  my  presence,
a  Cliristian  to  presume  in  so  vile  and  pre-
sumptuous brags  ?  Lady,  since  wc  have
chosen  you  when  afar  oif  to  be  our  judge,
give  orders  to  assure  the  field j  fori  vow  not
to  put  off  my  arms  till  I  have  revenged  this
rare  and  monstrous  injurv.

Targiana  then  desired  Florian  to  take  off  his
helmet,  wishing  to  see  him  ;  to  whose  will
in  gentle  manner  he  presently  obeyed  :  but
the  anger  and  jnelancholy  which  he  received
at  the  words  of  Auderraniete  liad  sent  up  a
lively  colour  into  his  cheeks,  and  he  appear-
ed so  comely  a  person  that  Targiana  incon-
tinently was  smitten  with  him,  and  began  to
feel  the  frailty  of  the  flesh,  liowbeit,  not  to
discover  what  she  felt  she  presently  disniib»-    É|


235

rd  tlicnij  taking  Florinn  under  her  cliarqc  ;
and  for  more  security,  she  ordered  five  hun-
dred knights  to  arm  themselve^;,  and  guard
the  field  of  battle,  lie  would  have  kissed
lifT  hand,  hut  she  would  not  give  it  him,  and
rising  from  the  estrado  wiihdrcw  into  an
apartment  which  overlooked  the  place  be-
fore the  palace,  v.hercin  such  combats  were
wont  to  be  perfoniied  ;  and  then  placed
herself  at  a  window,  upon  a  cloth  of  silk,  to
wait  for  the  combatants.  It  was  not  long
before  they  appeared,  in  the  same  armK  which
they  had  worn  before  her.  Uiioso  liad
then  seen  Florian,  how  young  and  comely
he  was,  and  had  beheld  Auderramete,  of  ro-
bustcr  stature  anc)  stronger  age,  might  have
feared  the  issue  of  tlic  battle,  thinking  that

riorian  could  not  stand  acrainst  liiin.

o

^\  hen  now  the  five  hundred  knights  were
arrived  to  guard  tlie  lists,  and  the  Grand
Turk  had  taken  his  place  in  the  same  win-
dow with  his  daughter,  Auderramete  pran-
t:ing  his  steed  and  brandishing  his  lance,
began  t (J  cry  out,  JSOw,  lady  Targiana,  shall
you  see  what  the  vassals  of  your  vassals  are  !
X  3


í:34

Then  turning-  the  reins  towards  Floriun,  who
was  eyeing  him,  he  lowered  iiis  hmce,  and,
being  covered  with  his  t^hiekl,  rode  at  him
with  all  the  might  his  horse  could  carry.
Florian  met  him,  desirous  in  tliis  encounter
to  apj)ear  well  before Targiana;  and  with  this
wish  he  took  his  aim  so  well,  that  he  sent
the  Moor  clean  over  the  crup[jer,  he  himself
remaining  firm,  though  the  other  had  broken
his  lance  upon  him  ;  wlu;reat  the  Círand  Turk
was  sohicwhat  displeased,  but  Targiana  wa-
not.

Auderrametc,  enraged  for  this  mishap,  rose
and  came  on  sword  in  hand,  saying,  Knight,
1  see  you  are  satisfied  with  the  joust,  but
this  my  sword  sliall  soon  make  amends.
Alight,  therefore,  if  you  do  not  choose  me
to  kill  your  horse,  and  let  us  do  battle  on
foot.  I  perceive  well,  said  Florian,  any  ad-
vantage might  be  used  against  so  strong  a
knight  as  you  ;  nevertheless  1  forego  it,  as  Í
can  make  my  words  good  without  ;  then
descending  from  his  horse,  between  them
began  a  dangerous  combat,  so  stoutly  ibughi
and    stifflv  contc>ted.  that   none    such   had


CS5

ever  been  seen  in  that  conn,  Tiotii  were  so
eager  to  display  what  there  was  in  theiii,
that  man\'  times  they  came  so  close  as  t(»
diii  at  each  other  with  the  pummel  of  their
swords.  Long  time  they  tuiighl,  tor  Auder-
ramete  in  that  day^  which  was  the  last  of  liis
life,  was  dolei  mined  also  to  shew  the  iujl  ex-
tent of  his  courage^fightingwitl)  greater  force
than  ever,  and  showing  better  w  ind,  and  de-
hvering  such  signal  and  weighty  blows,  that
both  the  armour  and  the  flesh  of  Florian  bore
their  marks.  They  who  beheld  the  battle,
dismayed  at  its  fierceness,  knew  not  what  to
say.  Florian  perceiving  the  eagerness  of  tlie
Moor,  the  cruelty  of  his  strokes,  and  the
force  with  which  lie  fought,  putting  forth  on
his  part  what  tlirrc  was  in  him,  began  to
smite  him  with  miglitier  strength  than  his
own,  and  so  cruc-lly  martyred  the  armour  ot
Aiulerramete,  leaving  him  neither  arms  nor
shield  to  protect  himself  withal,  nor  strength
to  combat,  that  the  Great  Turk  would  gladly
have  had  them  parted,  fearing  his  death  ;
but  Targiana  desired  him  to  let  them  try  it
out,  because  she  had  secured  the  field.


£Î36

Auderramt'te  seeing  himself  so  ill  cnueated,
thought  many  times  to  have  yielded  himself;
but  thinking  on  the  shame  this  would  be,  he
determined  rather  to  fight  till  his  latter  gasp,
which  in  short  time  he  did,  and  fell  down
dead  at  the  feet  of  his  conqueror.  Florian,
though  wearied  with  battle,  presented  him-
self before  Targiana,  and  kneeling  to  her  and
the  Grand  Turk  her  father,  said,  Lady,  I  am
a  strange  knight,  whom  the  chaucc  of  for-
tune hath  by  disaster  thrown  upon  this  land.
I  beseech  you,  as  in  this  battle  which  is  the
first  I  have  performed  before  you,  it  hath
pleased  you  to  use  the  royal  greatness  of  your
nature  in  securing  the  field,  that  from  hence-
forth 3'ou  would  hold  me  as  yours,  and  em-
ploy me  in  your  service  :  they  who  know
me  to  be  so  may  then  treat  me  as  yours,  and
I  with  this  favour  shall  remain  so  contented
that  I  shall  not  know  how  to  request  other.
Targiana  somewhat  changing  colour,  looked
earnestly  on  her  father,  and  then  turning  her
eyes  upon  Dorian,  with  glad  counlcnance
•accepted  him  as  her  knight;  whereat  the
Grand  Turk  was  w^ell  pleased,  thinking  that
by  the  presence  of  such  men  his  court  would


237

be  ennobled.  In  this  planner  Floriati  re-
mained awhile  serving  Targiana  in  the  eourt
of  the  Grand  Turk  ;  he  not  appearing  ill  to
her,  nor  she  to  him  ;  and  they  say  that  where
inclinations  meet,  2ic.*


*  In  this  manner  the  original  concludes  with  the  fragment,
as  it  should  seem,  of  some  common  sayir.g.  I  have  not  found
the  snying  in  the  collection  of  Portuguese  Proverbs,  and  shall
not  after  lord  Coke  presume  to  decypher  the  mysttries  of
an  &c.


Í23S


CHAPTER  78.


The  great  Dramuziando,  of  wliotn  no  men-
tion hath  been  made  since  his  departure
from  the  castle  of  Almourol,  travelled  many
countries  in  pursuit  of  the  knight  that  had
stolen  the  shield  of  jNliraguarda  ;  in  which
travel  he  proved  both  famous  and  fortunate,
atchieving  many  signal  adventures,  which  it
is  not  necessary  here  to  treat  of,  seeing  that
they  are  discoursed  at  length  in  the  Chro-
nicles of  the  emperor  of  Gieece.  At  last  he
arrived  at  the  castle  of  Dramorante  the
Cruel,  Avho  was  his  kinsman,  and  there  he
understood,  that  he  which  had  slain  Dramo-
rante was  the  knight  that  carried  away  the
shield  of  Miraguarda,  which  made  him  the
more  affectionate  and  desirous  to  seek  him.


'239

And  as  he  rode  afterwards  through  the  do-
minions of  Hungary,  riding  along  the  foot  of
a  hill,  he  saw  coming  towards  him  a  knight
in  blacl<  armour,  but  so  full  of  heaviness  and
lost  in  thought,  that  he  had  dropt  the  reins,
and  was  lying  forward  upon  the  saddle  bow.
Urauuiziando  saluted  him  with  courteous
greeting,  but  the  knight  made  him  no  an-
swer at  all;  whereupon  he  took  him  by  the
arm,  saying,  Sir  knight,  why  do  you  not
make  answer  to  those  ^vlK)  oiler  you
courtesy?

The  knight  at  these  words  reviving  himself,
cast  his  eyes  on  Dranuiziando  with  this  an-
swer: I  am  in  such  state  that  I  neither  saw
nor  heard  you,  and  if  yon  think  otherwise
yon  are  deceived.  1  believe  you,  quotli
Dramuziando,  lor  the  signs  about  you  testify
as  much.  Nevertheless,  with  all  your  pas-
sion, as  you  have  been  travelling  in  this
country,  can  you  report  to  me  where  I
might  (ind  a  knight  who  beareth  a  shield,
wherein  is  pictured  the  fairest  face  that  ever
nature  framed,  having  on  it  her  name,  which
is   Mirairuarda.


240

At  these  words  the  other  nith  a  sudden  start
recovered  himself,  and  righting  himself  ia
lis  saddle,  said.  Certes,  i  greatly  dt-sire  to
know  uhy  you  seek  to  find  him,  for  my  tra-
vels ^re  to  no- other  end  than  in  his  c|uest.
I  seek  him,  replied  Dramuziando,  to  take
that  shield  from  him,  and  carry  it  back  to
the  castle  of  Aluiourol,  from  whence  he  hath
stolen  it,  and  with  it  to  take  his  head  also.
This  enterprise,  rejoined  the  other,  toucheth
me  more  than  any  one  alive  ;  wherefore  give
over  your  travel  and  enjoy  your  life  in  peace,
for  mine  hath  been  preserved  to  come  to  its
end  in  this  adventure.  Dramuziando  seeing
his  intent,  would  fain  have  known  who  he
was,  which  the  other  refused  to  tell  ;  so  that
from  words  lo  words  they  were  incensed  with
such  anger,  that  they  gave  scope  to  their
steeds,  and  met  together  so  nobly,  that  both
spears  shivering,  their  bodies  hurtled,  and
men  and  horses  all  came  to  the  ground;  then
rising  they  fell  to  it  afresh  with  their  swords,
with  such  rage  as  if  there  had  been  an  old  ha-
tred between  them.  Dramuziando  perceivino-
in  the  other  such  excellent  strength  and  skill,
looked  oftentimes  whether  it  were  Palmerin,


S41

or  Florian  of  the  Desert,  and  certifying  liini-
selt"  that  it  was  neither,  held  his  valour  in
great  account  :  for  except  these  two,  he  never
thouglit  to  have  received  such  blows  from
livinii  nlan.  For  this  reason  he  availed  him-
self  of  all  his  skill,  striking  so  fast  and  force-
fully, that  if  the  other  had  not  been  so  alert
upon  the  watch,  it  seemed  impossible  that  he
could  have  stood  against  him  :  but  lie  on  his
part  laid  on  blows,  to  the  weight  of  which
Dramuziando's  armour  bore  witness.  At
length  both  were  fain  to  draw  back  awhile
for  breath.  Dramuziando  lookinu;  on  his
battered  armour,  knew  not  what  to  say,  for
he  had  never  thought  that  one  nor  two,  nor
even  three  knights,  could  have  reduced  it
to  such  state.  Then,  not  able  to  contain  his
wraih,  he  made  at  the  other,  who  as  wrath-
i'ully  received  him,  and  they  renewed  the
battle  so  wilfully  that  neither  strength  of
armour  nor  slight  of  limb,  could  prevent  the
liurt  they  received.  In  short  time  he  who
vas  the  soundest  had  little  hope  of  life,  see-
ing armour  of  no  avail,  shield  demolished,
and  the  herbs  of  the  field  red  with  blood.
Both  now  became  so  fain^  tliat  tbey  could

VOL.    II.  Y


I


242

scarcely  stand,  so  that  once  again  they  took
breath.  Dramuziando,  seeing  himself  re-
duced to  such  weakness  by  a  single  man,
blessed  himself  many  times,  and  said  witliin
himself,  VVliy  do  1  bear  arms  if  1  am  so  good
for  little  »hat  I  cannot  conquer  so  weak  a
knight  as  this  ?  O  lady  Miraguarda,  I  know
this  chanceLh  because  you  do  not  remember
me.  This  fight  have  I  attempted  under  your
gracious  name,  wherein  suffer  me  not  to  be
vanquished,  but  grant  me  to  be  so  happy
that  1  may  render  your  shield  again  ;  other
guerdons  reserve  {'or  liiose  who  are  happier
and  deserve  you  more;  but  let  me  live  to
recover  your  shield,  and  then  slay  me  ;  for
that  is  the  rccompencc  I  expect.


The  knight,  on  the  other  side,  was  as  griev-
ously passioned,  thinking  verily  to  (inish  liis
days  in  tliis  combat,  but  rejoicing  in  that
thought  because  he  should  escape  from  all
further  sorrows;  with  this  joy  he  began  to
say,  x\ow,  lady,  be  content;  your  rigour  has
effected  its  purpose,  and  brought  me  to  the
extremity  which  you  have  wished.  But  I
well  know,  that  though  you  desire  my  death,


243

yet  when  3'ou  shall  no  longer  have  me  to  be
the  subject  oi'  your  eruclty,  you  will  remem-
ber ine  then,  and  nothing  of  me  \vill  remain
but  the  regret  that  you  have  thus  destroyed
me.

Then  witli  his  lifted  sword  he  met  Dramuzi-
ando,  who  was  eoming  against  him,  and  both,
with  little  hope  of  life,  laid  on  with  sueh
force,  and  wounded  each  other  so  cruelly,
having  now  no  arms  to  save  them,  that  both
at  the  same  time  at  length  fell  senseless,  in
such  plight  that  no  one  who  had  seen  them
could  have  thouglit  that  there  was  any  re-
medy for  bodies  so  mangled.  But  Fortune,
who  reserved  them  to  greater  things,  caused
Palmerin  of  England  to  arrive  at  the  very
instant  when  they  both  fell,  who  drawing
near  and  knowing  Dramuziando,  supposed
verily  that  he  was  slain,  whereat  he  was  so
sorrowful  that  the  tears  ran  down  his  cheeks.
Then  went  he  to  the  other  knight,  and  tak-
ing his  helmet  olT,  and  perceiving  that  it  was
the  noble  Florendos,  became  so  overcharged
with  grief,  that  he  could  not  sustain  him-
self from  falling  to  the  earth  beside  them.
y3


'2U

llowbeit,  seeing  lliat  îoï  so  great  an  evil
other  proof  of  friendship  was  neceásary,  he
recovered  himself  and  comuianded  Selviam
to  go  to  a  city  which  was  nigh  at  hand,  and
\vith  all  haste,  to  bring  chirurgiens  with  him,
though  he  thought  verily  they  were  past  re-
covery: and  Selviam,  knowing  that  the  death
of  these  two  knights  might  be  an  occasion
to  put  his  master's  Hfe  in  danger,  used  such
diligence,  that  in  short  time  he  returned
%vith  two  very  expert  masters  in  chirurgery.
Pahnerin  desired  them  to  manifest  their
knowledge  at  that  present,  in  recovering  the
health  of  those  dangerous  Avoundcd  knights,
and  his  recompence  should  exceed  in  libera-
lity. So  when  the  chirurgiens  had  searched
their  wounds,  they  found  them  not  so  dan-
gerous as  their  weakness  and  weariness  ;
■wherefore  they  promised,  by  the  grace  of
God,  to  bring  them  into  as  good  estate  of
health  as  ever  they  Were.  He  greatly  re-
joiced at  their  good  answer,  ai)d  caused  Sel-
viam to  fetch  a  litter  from  the  city,  wherein
they  were  brought  to  the  house  of  an  an-
cient gentleman,  and  there  Pahnerin  bare
them   company,  until  they   were    fully    re-


245

covered,  which  was  move  than  a  month,
■never  leaving  them  during  all  that  time:  for
true  love  and  friendship  are  manifested  not
in  fair  weather,  but  in  times  of  trouble.


V  3


'2i6


CHAPTER  79-


Well  ennobled  and  full  of  renowned  kni^lit.s
was  the  court  of  the  emperor  Pahncrin,  \vh&  '
was  now  feeble,  being  full  of  days,  at  such
time  as  Albayzar  arrived,  lie,  after  he  had
left  Palmerin  in  the  valley  where  he  ibund
him  engaged  in  battle  with  Bracandor  and
his  people,  went  on  for  some  days  through
the  kingdom  of  Hunc-arv,  doinii  thinûrs  which
made  his  renown  fly  above  that  of  many
men  ;  and  which  delayed  him  from  reaching
the  court  so  soon  as  he  had  wished.  At
length,  when  he  could  find  no  other  occa-
sion in  which  to  prove  himself,  he  arrived
there  one  holiday,  at  such  time  as  the  em-
peror had  just  finished  dining  in  the  apart-
ment of  the  empress,  surrounded  by  all  the


647

cliiefs  and  young  knights  then  in  Constan-
tinople, \vho  were  many.  Albayzar  alighted
at  the  palace  gate,  and  came  up  into  tlie  great
hall,  in  fair  green  armour  beset  with  golden
spheres,  with  two  esquires  attending  on  him  ;
and  as  his  confidence  and  presumption  were
great,  he  made  his  way  through  the  company
with  a  haughty  mien,  and  less  courtesy  than
pride.  Gay  and  gallant  were  his  arms  and
adornments,  and  he  himseh',  his  head  being
disarmed,  so  comely  of  countenance,  that  a
goodlier  personage  had  not  been  seen  in  that
court.  Being  come  to  where  the  emperor
and  empress  were  scaled,  he  made  his  cour-
tesy to  them,  abasing  his  head  some  little,
and  then  standing  up  cast  his  eyes  round  tho
hall,  being  ama/ed  to  sec  the  beauty  of  the
]adie>.  Presently  he  began  as  thus  :  Puis-
sant emperor,  Í  rejoice  to  visit  your  court
ior  two  causes  ;  the  one,  to  see  the  noble-
ness thereof;  the  other,  to  try  myself  against
your  knights,  on  her  behalf  that  haih  sent
me  hither.  I  am  a  strange  knight,  who  for
the  love  of  the  i'uirost  aud  most  noble  princess
in  the  world,  am  made  to  travel  in  foreign
lanils.     Tliis  lovc   mude  me  <^o  to  the  castle


I


248

of  Aliiiourol,  and  fight  with  the  keeper  of  the
shield  of  Miiaguarda,  whom  I  overcame  in
battle,  winning  by  force  of  arms  the  shield
of  contention,  which  I  bear  with  me  in  ho-
nour of  her  who  sent  me  here.  And  now,
if  30ur  highness  will  licence  irie  the  field,  I
defy  all  the  knights  of  your  court,  as  also
any  other  that  dare  avouch  the  contrary,
and  will  compel  them  to  confess  that  my
lady  Targiana  is  she  that  doth  bear  the  prize
above  all  for  beauty.  These  are  the  con-
ditions I  do  re([uire  in  mine  attempt,  that
the  defendant  on  his  shield  shall  brinu;  the
lively  portrait  of  his  lady,  with  her  name
to  be  verified  at  the  foot  thereof,  because
this  shall  be  the  recompence  the  conqueror
shall  gain.  ,  But  if  there  be  any  so  indifl;cr-
ently  favoured  of  their  ladies,  or  whose  loves
are  so  secret  that  they  choose  not  to  declare
^vho  it  is  that  slays  them,  they  shall  be  ex-
cused from  showing  the  name.  And  he
Avho  shall  vanquish  me  shall  not  only  carry
off  the  shield  of  Targiana,  but  likewise
all  the  shields  which  I  shall  have  won.
rurthermore,  the  knight  dismounted  in  the
joust,  shall  not  have  licence  to  fight  \nth  the


249

sword,  but  as  vanquished,  deliver  his  shield
and  so  depart.  Now,  emperor,  expect  I
your  answer,  and  look  to  see  what  your
knights  can  do  against  a  single  one,  who
has  come  so  far  to  seek  them.

When  he  liad  ended  his  speeches,  a  great
luniiilt  arose  among  the  knights  and  ladies
ol  the  court,  who  were  very  desirous  to  see
Albayzar  in  the  field  ;  the  ladies  to  know  the
valour  of  their  amorous  servants,  and  the
knights  to  qualify  this  presumptuous  chal-
lenge. The  emperor  commanded  silence
before  he  made  answer,  and  then  he  return-
ed this  reply  :  You  have,  sir  knight,  at-
tempted such  an  enterprize,  as  if  we  should
deny,  would  not  only  be  to  the  grief  of
yourself,  but  also  of  many  others.  Where-
fore the  field  is  licenced  you  at  what  time
you  please,  and  your  conditions  allowed.
But  Í  beseech  you  first  to  resolve  me  one
thing:  Are  3'ou  not  allied  to  the  soldan  do-
rique of  Babylon,  because  it  seemeth  you
do.  resemble  liim  in  favour.''  My  lord,  an-
swered Albayzar,  for  the  licence  you  have
irivea    me    1    kiss    vour   baud.     1   am   the


250

seconrl  ?oa  of  llic  soldan  Oloriquc,  whom
your  deeds  advanced  îo  iliat  liigh  state,
and  am  ealled  Albayzar.

The  emperor  arose  immediately  and  em-
Iraced  him  with  great  joy,  saying,  I  would
gladly,  sir  Albayzar,  sec  you  in  my  court
oi  other  cnterpfize  than  this;  but  love  shall
now  excuse  you.  And  then  he  commanded
a  chamber  should  be  provided  for  him  ;
but  he  made  refusal  thereof,  because  his
intention  was  to  abide  in  the  field  till  his
enlerprize  was  concluded.

The  empress  and  Gridonia  sent  unto  him,
desiriup-  that  he  would  sufler  them  to  see

O

the  shields  of  Targiana  and  Miraguarda  ;
and  though  Targiana  would  any  where
have  appeared  fair,  yet  when  the  ladies,
A\ho  were  then  flourishing,  saw  jNIiraguarda,
they  lost  all  hope  that  their  servants  could
accompli-h  any  thing  ;  the  others,  whose
season  was  gone  by,  had  nothing  to  be  en-
vious of  except  youth.  So  as  tlie  shields
-went  from  hand  to  hand,  at  last  they  came
to  Tolinardaj  and   though  till  now  she  had


£51

never  seen  thinsr  which  could  occasion  fear

o
iu  her,  she  could  not  now  conceal  die  pas-
sion which  this  countenance  excited.  The
ladies  perceived  her  emotion  and  whispered
about  it  : — it  is  the  nature  of  women  to  be
thus  distrustful,  that  any  thing  moves  them  ;
for  PoUnarda  was  so  fair  that  she  had  no-
thing to  fear,  and  Miraguarda  so  fair  also,
that  each  might  have  beea  well  contented
with  herself,  and  the  other  have  no  cause  for
sorrow.  And  though  Polinarda  sometimes
had  wished  to  see  her  Pidmerin  in  that
court,  yet  wished  she  it  now  more  than
ever,  weening  that  bis  worthiness  would  ad-
vance her  to  the  glory  of  the  shields.  And
at  times  she  retired  alone  to  her  chamber,
and  there  was  wont  with  tears,  which  came
from  her  very  soul,  to  accuse  herself,  re-
membering the;  words  which  she  had  spoken
to  him  ;  and  sometime  she  was  intended  to
send  f(ir  him,  and  then  by  and  by  she  alter-
ed her  tliougiit  ;  for  little  stability  is  to  be
found  in  a  woman.

But  to  return  to  the   present  subject,  Gri-
donia  then  sent   for  the   picture  of  Altea,


252

wliose  beauty  was  held  to  be  surpassing,  and
comparing  it  to  jMiraguarcla,  it  was  lound
to  be  as  nothing.  Albayzar  then  departed
to  the  place  appointed  for  the  jousts,  where
the  emperor  had  commanded  two  tents  to
be  erected  ;  and  on  a  pillar  near  adjoining
he  placed  the  portrait  of  the  princess  Tar-
giana,  and  Miraguarda  was  set  at  her  feet,
in  sign  of  being  vanquished.  And  because
it  was  as  then  somewhat  late,  the  knights  had
not  the  opportunity  to  try  themselves  that
night,  wherefore  they  referred  their  deter-
mination till  the  next  morning.


253


CHAPTER  80.


On  the  morrow,  at  sunrise^  at  the  entrance
of  the  palisiule^  which  was  ahvays  ready  lor
tiwy  combat,  some  knii>hts  were  waitinc;,
each  desirous  to  prove  liimseli"  with  Albay-
i:ar,  and  win  the  shiekls,  with  the  which  so
much  honour  was  to  be  won  ;  and  each  striv-
ing who  should  be  first,  caused  a  murmur  to
arise  among  them  :  wherefore  the  emperor,
who  had  now  risen,  commanded  the  judges
of  the  field  to  make  enquiry  who  had  come
first,  and  appoint  them  to  joust  in  this
order.  They  having  pacified  their  uproar,
decreed  that  Crespian  of  Maccdon  should
have  the  first  joust,  and  accordingly  he
made  himself  ready  ;  but  Albayzar  would
not  receive  him,  because  he  brought  not  on

VOL.  II.  z


£J4

liis  shield  the  portrait  ot"  his  lady,  according
to  the  order  appointed  ;  in  like  manner  he
rejeeted  otlicrs.  Wherefore  the  joust  was
staid  for  four  da\s,  in  which  lime  every  one
had  his  ladv  artificially  figured  on  his  shield.

On  the  fifth  day  the  first  who  came  was  I's-
mcraldo  the  Vair,  who   was   reputed   in   thr
court  for  a  good  and  hardy  knight.    lie  pre-
sented the  regardants  a  sliield,  whereon  was
pictured;,  from  the  bosom  upward,  a  woman
of  fair  appearance,  with  white  letters  below
which  declared  her  name  Artezaura.    He  ran
against  Albayzar,  who  met  him  with  such
puissance,  that  he  sent  him  headlong  to  the
grountl,    remaining   himself  a^  firm  in    the
seat  as  if  he  had  received  no  shock.     Then
Ascarol  entered  the  field,  a  young  knight  of
good  renown,  presenting  his  shield,  wherein
his  lady  Artibela  was  pictured,  being  of  the
empress  Polinarda's  household  ;  his  fortune
was  such,  that  he  was  sent  to  keep  Esmeraldo
Company,  and  both  their  shields  placed  under
that  of  Targiana.


The  next  were  Altaris  and  Regeraldo,  both


255

of  ilieiii  bC.rvanls  to  Beliaiia,  danglitcr  to
the  duke  of  Constance,  each  of  them  bear-
iuíí  her  }»ictuic  iu  his  shield;  whom  Albay-
zar  served  even  as  he  had  done  the  other.
At  this  the  emperor  began  to  resent  some
dis[)leasiire,  holding  Albayzar  in  higher  ac-
count than  before,  for  he  had  overthrown
every  one  of  these  knights  at  the  first  en-
counter; a  thing  which  seldom  chanceth.
That  first  day  there  were  no  more  jousts  ;
on  the  second  so  many  knights  assembled
that  the  field  was  fidl  of  them.  The  em-
press and  Gridonia  arose  earlier  than  they
were  wont,  to  sec  the  tilting,  and  the  ladies
were  in  such  eagerness  to  see  what  their  ser-
vants should  accomplish,  that  they  did  not
sleep  that  night,  emj)loying  it  in  preparing
for  the  next  day.  Albayzar  was  on  horse-
back, attending  him  that  should  first  come,
who  wa-i  Radiarte,  wbo  served  Luccnda,
and  who  came  to  the  ground  at  the  first
encounter,  and  his  shield  was  placed  among
the  others.  After  him  came  Rieardoso,  who
served  Dorotea,  and  went  the  way  of  Radi-
arte.  So  that  on  this  second  day  Albayzar
sped  so  W(ii,  that  he  threw  Argoaalte,who


256

served  Polifcma;  Ciineroy  of  Sclavonia,  the
kiiiííht  of  Juliana  ;  Leonardin  and  Bravo-
]ante,  French  knights,  and  both  affection-
ate to  the  princess  Arnalta  ;  Lisbanel,  the
servant  of  Armisia,  and  divers  others  that
I  will  not  name,  to  avoid  prolixity;  so  that
Avith  these  victories  his  pride  and  haughtiness
greatly  increased,  and  fortune  so  favoured
him  for  his  greater  honour,  that  all  these  also
were  dismounted  at  the  first  career.  The
emperor,  though  none  of  the  knights  of
%vhom  he  made  account  had  appeared  as
vet,  did  not  fail  to  feel  little  contented,
thinking  that  Albayzar  would  suffice  to  dis-
grace his  court.  Primaleon  resented  it
greatly,  and  was  within  himself  determined,
if  he  remained  still  conqueror,  to  enter  the
combat  against  him.  The  times  when  there
"was  none  ready  to  joust  w^ould  Albayzar  fre-
quent the  image  of  his  lady,  with  his  amor-
ous discourses,  she  being  then  surrounded
with  many  fairer  than  herfelf;  but  love  is
blind,  and  suffered  him  not  to  perceive  that,
though  among  others  which  were  there  was
that  of  Miraguarda,which  so  greatly  surpass-
ed all  the  rest,  that  the  talk   in  court  was


2.57

more  of  that  lliati  of  the  valour  of  Albayzp.r.
lie  remained  in  the  field,  bearing  the  labour
of  the  day,  till  the  sun  went  down;  and  though
at  tliis  time  the  number  of  knights  still  in-
creased,  the  emperor  bade  them  return,  and
would  suHer  no  more  to  run,  beeause  it  was
late  and  Albayzar  wearied.    That  night  tliere
was  a  ball,  wliere  he  was  present;  but  the
vanquished  knights   would  not  shew  them-
selves, because  they  were  ashamed  to  come
before  their  ladies,  in  whose  names  they  had
doiie  so  little.     1'he  dancing  done,  every  one
betook    themselves    to    their  chamber,   and
.'\ll)ayzar  to  his  tent,  enjoying  little  rest,  be-
cause of  the  desire  he  had  to  be  at  his  pas-
linic.     In  the  morning  Albayzar  was  early  in
the   Held,  armed  in  the  same  green  armour
w  ith  the  golden  spheres,  for  as  yet  he  had  no
need  of  other.     And  approaching  the  pic-
ture of   his  lady    Targiana,    with  his    eyes
ilxed  on  it,  lie  began  to  commend  her  with
words  not  less  arrogant  than  amorous.     At
this  time  the  judges  of  the  field  arrived,  and
caused  a  tree  with  many  forks  to  be  placed
by  the  pillar,  to  hang  the  shields  upon  which
Albay/ar  won,  for  till  now  they  had  lain  upon
7  3


£58


tlíc  ground  ;  and  on  the  lop  they  set  the
shield  of  the  princess  Miraguarda,  in  token
that  it  had  been  attained  in  battle,  and
the  others  not:  for  so  Albayzar  designed  to
signify.  It  was  not  long  before  Belisartc,
the  son  of  Belear,  came  to  the  gale  of  the
lists,  in  arms  of  grey  and  white,  bearing  in
his  shield  a  sagittary  in  a  white  field,  with  a
bow  in  his  hand.  This  his  squire  carried,
but  he  entered  with  another  which  he  pre-
sented to  the  judges,  and  which  bore  the
picture  of  Dionisia,  daughter  to  the  king
of  Sparta,  drawn  to  the  life,  and  so  beauti-
ful that  it  had  greatly  the  advantage  over
all  which  had  yet  been  staked,  not  speaking
of  Miraguarda^  with  which  none  was  to  be
compared.  Having  presented  it  and  fixed
his  e3'es  upon  it,  he  righted  himself  in  the
saddle,  and  covering  himself  with  his  shield
of  the  sagittary  which  he  took  from  his
sc^uire,  ran  his  career  against  Albayzar.
But  though  Belisarte  was  a  right  good
t,  neither  his  valour  nor  the  beauty
jonisia  availed,  for  .at  the  second
Í  lie  was  brought  to  the  ground  with  J
tlic  i^addle  betw^een  his  legs,  and  Albayzar


forced  out  of  one  of  his  stirrups,  which  lie
recovered  again  quickly.  After  liim  came
Don  Rosucl  his  brother,  presenting  his
shield,  bearing  the  portrait  of  Dramaciana,
the  Jady  of  the  bed-ehamber  to  llie  princess
Polinarda  :  but  he  was  likewise  dismounted
at  the  second  joust.  AA  hcreat  the  emperor
was  greatly  grieved,  and  sorry  that  he  had
granted  the  field  to  Albayzar;  for  the  knights
of  the  court  were  almost  disheartened,  be-
cause these  two  noble  brethren  were  over-
come so  soon.  Their  shields  were  placed
among  the  vanquished,  at  which  they  could
not  conceal  their  sorrow  :  for  passion  hath
thi^  ([uality,  that  when  it  is  great  it  can  bad-
ly be  dissembled.


260


CHAPTER  SI


Alhayzar  sta}'ed  long  on  the  sixtli  day  1  c-
forc  any  came  to  present  theniselvi-s  at  the
tilt.  After  dinner  the  emperor  and  empress
\vent  to  the  window  to  behold  him,  wliere
he  was  sitting  in  the  gate  of  his  tent,  using
many  amorous  cogitations  to  the  picture  of
Targiana,  as  concerning  the  travels  he  had
attempted,  onl}'  for  her  love  and  favour.
It  was  not  long  before  a  knight  approached,
of  goodly  semblance  in  the  judgment  of  all,
mounted  on  a  goodly  steed  of  mulberry  co-
lour, and  armed  in  black,  whereon  was  dis-
persed little  flames  of  fire,  bearing  in  his
shield  the  like  shew.  He  presented  to  the
judges  another  shield,  which  his  squire  gave
him^  and  couched  his  lance  to  do  his  duty.


261

placing  himself  in  the  lists  with  so  gallant
a  dcinejinour  that  this  first  display  of  him-
self promised  great  things.  Albayzar,  though
he  perceived  that  the  appearance  of  this
knight  excited  some  nun  nuirs  of  expectation,
was  nothing  moved  ;  but  seeing  that  the
shield  which  he  had  staked  bore  neither
image  nor  name  of  lad}^,  refused  to  joust
with  him,  according  to  the  conditions  which
he  had  established.

The  Black  Knight  who  had  traversed  many
lands  in  the  hope  of  finding  Albayzar,  find-
ing himself  to  he  denied  for  so  small  a  mat-
ter, came  to  him  with  these  words.  Sir
knight,  why  ask  you  much  of  him,  who  hath
little  in  his  power?  if  the  shield  I  have  pre-
sented lack  that  which  you  would  have,  and
I  as  much  wish,  it  is  only  to  continue  it  in
resemblance  to  him  that  liath  borne  it  many
a  day  with  grief,  but  never  an  hour  of  joy
or  gladness.  Yet  have  I  seen  the  time,  Í
could  liave  presented  you  a  picture  which
could  have  enforced  you  to  a  great  marvel,
and  myself  little  to  esteem  of  your  might.
Times  have  changed,  and  now  1  can  present


í262

you  with  noiliing,  but  these  sad  colours
with  which  you  see  it  covered.  Í  beseech
you  let  this  excuse  be  accepted,  for  For-
tune hath  left  me  nothing  more;  and  from
him  Avho  cannot  what  he  would,  more  than
he  can  should  not  be  required.

Sir  knight,  answered  Albayzar,  the  picture
wherewith  you  threaten  me,  you  might  well
boast,  if  I  did  not  remind  you  that  for  my
defence  I  bear  one  which  all  may  fear  and
envy,  llie  emperor  hath  stayed  long  in  re-
garding us;  let  us  do  what  is  to  be  done:  for
by  what  I  perceive  in  you  I  am  satisfied,
and  I  frank  and  freely  permit  you  the
joust.  Then  couching  their  spears,  they
passed  the  first  course  gallantly,  but  at  the
second,  the  knight  was  sent  to  the  earth,
and  Albayzar  so  greatly  shaken  with  the
stroke,  that  he  lost  both  his  stirrups,  and
was  constrained  to  hold  by  the  mane  of  his
liorse,  or  else  himself  had  borne  hira  com-
pany. But  when  he  perceived  the  knight
ready  to  charge  him  with  his  sword,  he
leaped  from  his  horse  with  that  readiness
which   never  forsook  him  iu  time  of  need.


263

The  Black  Kniglit,  indignant  at  the  ioiî
wliicli  Ije  had  received,  came  at  him  with
u  blow  which  sheared  off  a  quarter  of"  his
shield.  Albayzar,  who  at  such  times  was
wont  to  show  what  was  in  him,  requited
it  with  another  and  others,  so  that  be-
tween them  began  a  dangerous  combat,
and  worthy  to  be  seen,  in  which  each  la-
boured to  manifest  the  worth  of  his  per-
son. The  blows  were  given  on  either  side
with  the  hand  of  a  master,  and  for  the
niost  part  to  the  hurt  of  him  who  received
them.  Ortcntimcs  they  wounded  each
otlier,  and  fought  with  such  eager  yet  such
enduring  strength,  that  for  more  than  an  hour
th(  y  held  on,  and  yet  no  sign  of  weakness
could  be  seen  in  either.  The  flesh  felt  the
blows;  and  as  there  were  few  arms  which
could  resist  the  might  of  Albayzar,  the  keen
edge  of  his  sword  cut  so  deep  upon  those
of  the  lilack  Knight  that  he  jjlainly  began
to  fail.  But  his  spirit  being  great,  and
moreover  remenibcrin;j^  th^it  whoso  adven-
tureth  life  f(jr  lionoiu,  loseth  nothing  ihougli
}ie  remain  without  ii,  ciiiieavoured  himself
more    strenuously,  and   fought   with   more


2G4

force  tluin  could  have  been  expected  from
one  ill  better  jilight.  So  being  willing  to
sell  his  life  like  one  who  did  not  fear  dt^aili,
lie  derived  strength  when  he  had  it  not,
bcarins:  in  mind  that  there  it  was  to  be  shown
where  it  was  resisted.  At  last,  when  lit
clearly  felt  that  to  continue  longer  was  to
his  own  hurt,  he  drew  back  a  little,  saying
within  himself,  I  know  rij:ht  well,  that  wea-
pons are  for  those  who  have  strength  for  toil
and  resolution  for  danger;  it  had  been  well
for  me  to  have  pa'itniy  life  witliouLfreqiieuting
them,  rather  tiian  to  abide  llie  mischance
wherein  I  remain  at  this  present.  I  have  stri-
ven with  Fortune,  thinking  at  some  time
to  vanquish  her,  but  alvvay  in  the  end  find
myself  vanquished.  1  know  well  enough,
that  he  which  keepeth  himself  from  falling  in
her  snares,  hath  little  cause  to  doubt  any  per-
verse or  froward  chance:  but  of  what  should  I
complain,  since,  if  evils  come  to  me,  I  myself
have  sought  them  ?  With  this  he  valiant-
ly assaulted  Albayzar  again,  but  with  the
force  of  his  own  blows    the  blood    srushed

O

from  his  wounds,  and  Albayzar  seeing  him
thus  weak,  and  that  these  were  hÍ5  last  ef-


îl65

tort--,  and  being  laimself  enraged   and  me-
lancholick-,   treated  him  so    hardly,  that  in
short    time    his    blood   failed  him,  and   he
I'ell  senseless  at  his  feet.     Then   being   un-
armed, he  was  found   to  be  prince    Flora-
man,  which  made  the  emperor  full  discon-
tented,  fearing   that   Albayzar   would  van-
quish   ;iU  the  knights  of  his    court.     Then
>vas     Floraman     carried     into    the    palace,
the   ladies    greatly  lamenting   for  him,  be-
cause   of  his   inviolate    and    faithful    con-
stancy;   a    thing   which   they    all  desire   in
all    their    servants,    and   never    requite    to
any.     Albayzar,  albeit  he  remained   victor,
was    sore    hurt,    and   brought    into    great
weakness    and    danger,   so   that   for  many
days    he    remained    in    his  bed,  being   in
that   time    oftentimes   visited   by   the   em-
peror, who,  though  he  grieved  to   see    his
adventure  proceed  so  far,  to  the  reproach  of
his  court,  yet  wished  for  his  recovery  :  for
it  is  the  nature  of  gentle  hearts  to  feel  com-
passion, even  for  the  hurt  of  their  enemies.


Vol.  II,  2  A


266


CHAPTER    62,


Fioraman  remained  long  time  under  cure,
for  his  wounds  were  not  only  dangerous,  but
the  grief  lie  sustain-d  for  his  mishap  was
a  cause  that  the  medicines  presented  to
him  were  bestowed  all  in  vain;  wherefore,
the  emperor  accompanied  him  divers  times,
because  not  only  was  he  a  famous  knight,
but  he  was  so  gentle  and  ol  such  good  con-
versation, as  made  every  onedesiious  to  bear
him  company.  But  ail  the  honourable  vi-
sitations, and  fiiendly  good., will  bestowed
upon  him,  had  no  power  to^  appease  his  ex-
treme grief,  for  that  he  rather  desired  the
death,  than  any  other  comfort  ;  ^o  that  no
solace  was  so  sveet  to  him,  as  the  remem-
brance and  oftei  desiring  of  death.     "When


£67

time  had  broiight  him  to  his  former  strong
estate^  the  emperor  desired  him  not  to  leave
the  court;  to  whose  will  he  would  not  shew
himself  disobedient,  staying  the  rather,  be-
cause he  hoped  Palmeriii  of  England,  or
Florendos.,  would  arrive,  by  whom  Albayzar
might  be  vanquished — for  from  any  other
lie  had  no  hope — that  so  great  malice  might
not  long   ilourish  to  the  hurt  of  so  many.

liut  Albayzar  in  his  pride  thought  the  con-
trary: for  not  contenting  himself  with  his
victories  past,  with  which  he  might  well
have  gone  ids  way  and  have  been  lauded
ill  all  parts,  he  was  no  sooner  in  disposition
to  bear  armour,  but  he  presented  himself
again  in  the  field,  persuading  himself  to  be
lord  over  all  those  that  durst  conceive  the
courage  to  deal  with  him.  For  «uch  is  the
miture  of  proud  spirits,  that  when  they  have
attained  what  the}'  desire,  it  seemcth  little,
however  great  they  accounted  it  before.
In  this  prodigal  opinion,  he  put  on  a  sin-
gular fair  armour,  of  rich  and  gallant  ap-
pearance, and  of  needftil  strength,  not  re-
garding the  mishap  that  might  chance  unto
'2  A  '2


hiiiij  though  the  variable  and  mutable  con-
dition of  Fortune  doth  always  britig  her
most  favoured  to  greatest  misery.  The  first
day  after  his  recovery  he  jousted  with  Fla-
miano,  Rocandor,  Tragonel  the  Active,  Es-
meraldo the  Fair,  Claribalte  of  Hungary,
Triisiando,and  Tragandor,  who  were  all  foil-
ed, and  the  shields  of  their  ladies  placed
among  the  conquered.  These  he  discomfitted
in  so  short  space  of  time  that  it  was  not  yet
noon.  The  emperor  went  to  dine  with
the  empress,  and  the  jousts  for  awhile  ceas-
ed. Primalcon  had  prince  Floraman  for
his  guest,  and  was  so  melancholick  to  see
the  victories  of  Albayzar,  that  he  could  not
dissemble  what  he  resented.  When  the
hour  of  dinner  was  over,  the  emperor  and
empress  returned  to  see  the  jousts,  and  Al-
bayzar took  his  station  in  the  field  as  he
was  wont  to  do.  It  was  not  long  before
Luymanes  of  Burgundy  came  to  the  gate  of
the  lists,  a  knight  of  great  accoimt,  who  de-
li vrred  to  the  judges  a  shield  with  the  picture
of  Ahnena,  whom  he  served,  and  ran  his
career  against  Albayzar.  The  encounter  was
a  good  one  ;    Albayzar  lost  a   stirrup,    but


269

Luymanes  vent  to  the  ground.     Pcscntly
came  Dridem,   the  son   of   Mayóries,  ^vho
served  Salatca  ;  and  Polinardo^  \vh),  as  yc
have  heard,  secretly  served  Polini'rda  ;  but
neither  the  favour  of  their  ladies,  nor  their
own   force,  was  such  as  to  save  them  from
falling  in  the  first  career,     xsot    to    go  on
minutely,  which  would  be  Avithoi.t  end,  suf-
fice it  so  say,  that  Albayzar  by  main  strength
overthrew  Dramiantc,  who  served  lloriana,
Ditrco's  daughter  ;    piince    Graciano,  who
i;er\ed  Clarisia,  daughter  of  king  Polendos  ;
Prancian  for  the  fair  Bernarda  ;    Belisartc,
for  Dion  sia,  daugliter  of  the  king  of  Sparta;
prince   Teroido  for    Onistalda,  daughter  of
3)rapos;  ind  at  last,  Blandidon,  and  the  brave
Pompide»  and   Platir,  with    so   great  glory
that  he  only  was   spoken    of  by  all   men.
And  thaigh   so  many    valiant  and  singular
good  kn  ghts  were  not  overthrown   without
many  peiilou.^  batiks,  and  in  many  days,  yet
Albayza:  so  well  demeaned  himself  and  dis-
played  what   was  in  him,  that  the  end  was
alway  to  his  will.

In  tliesc  days  the  bruit  of  his  fame  was  so
2  A  3


270

noised  about  the  world,  that  saving  the  feats
of  l^ilnerln,  his  appeared  worthy  of  greater
renown  than  those  of  any  other.  The
beauty  of  'I'argiana  \vas  so  far  advanced,
that  they  who  were  far  fairer  than  she  could
not  refrain  from  envying  her;  and  her  shield
was  surrounded  with  many  others  so  famous,
that  they  made  it  of  the  more  estimation.
I'here  wa»  no  one  now  in  the  court  who
dared  prove  himself  against  Albtyzar;  and
though  some  came  from  afar  with  tiat  intent,
they  dreaded  his  force:  for  the  renown  of
the  mighty  strikes  a  greater  fear  than  the
arms  of  the  weak.

Primaleon  armed  himself  divers  times  to
combat  with  him,  but  the  emperor  would
not  suffer  him  to  proceed,  because  of  the
friendship  he  had  borne  to  the  soUan  Olo-
rlque,  which  he  would  fain  have  had  con-
tinued by  their  sons.

Albayzar  continued  in  Constantinople  with-
out finding  any  to  joust  withal,  thinking  to
attain  as  great  honour  by  not  finding  any
to  deal  with  iiim,  as  he  did  in  vanquishing


Í271

those  that  came.  But  if  Pahnerin,  Floren-
dos,  and  the  giant  Dranniziando,  were  not
yet  come,  it  was  for  divers  adventures  which
they  were  constrained  to  follow;  so  tliat  their
absence  was  the  cause  Albayzar  was  so  much
esteemed.  And  in  every  prince's  court  no-
thing at  this  present  was  talked  of  but  the
expert  valiantncss  of  this  noble  Moor.  But
now  we  must  return  to  Floriau  of  the  Desert:
for  the  deeds  of  the  worthy  do  not  deserve
to  be  forgotten.


272


CHAPTER  83.


I.orií;-  time  sojourned  Floriau  in  the  Cirand
Turk's  court,  stn-viug  Targiana,  and  display-
ing liis  wortli  in  all  the  adventures  \vhich
oU'ercd;  ever  atchieving  them  with  such  ho-
nour, that  he  was  esteemed  as  something
(Hvine  among  the  Moors.  Andas  the  time
Avhieh  was  not  employed  in  arms  he  wasted
in  love,  the  conversation  which  he  held  v»ith
her  every  day  had  such  effect^  that  he  lost
himself  for  her;  a  thing  contrary  to  his  con-
dition, and  in  truth  so  great  a  thing  as  li-
berty ought  not  to  be  lost  for  women,  since
it  is  manifest  that  they  regard  nothing  but
what  suits  their  inclinations.  Targiana,  how-
ever, became  so  affected  to  his  feats,  and
SQ   enamoured   of  his  jierson,  that  .she  was


273

not  a  grain  behind  him  in  her  love.  So
being  of  one  mind,  their  wishes  came  to  such
end  that  he  obtained  what  he  desired,  and
presently  became  weary  of  her,  as  is  the
nature  of  some|  men  ;  and  she  lost  what  she
ought  to  have  prized  better,  and  could  not
regain  ;  nor  was  this  to  be  wondered  at,  for
they  who  suffer  themselves  to  be  assailed  by
loose  thoughts  must  needs  at  last  be  over-
come by  them.

At  this  time  report  blazed  the  great  victories
of  Albayzar  in  the  Turk's  court,  which  news
were  accounted  of  so  great  estimation,  that
the  behavionr  of  Florian  was  almost  forgot-
ten ;  a  thing  which  greatly  displeased  him,
though  he  dissembled  it.  Wherefore,  one
night  talking  with  Targiana,  she  began  to
think  of  the  duty  wherein  the  deeds  of  Al-
bayzar had  bound  her,  and  how  ill  she  had
fulHlled  tlic  promise  slie  made  him  at  his
departure.  Florian,  whose  passion  was  at
an  end,  thought  lit  now  to  feign  himself
more  than  ever  enamoured  ;  and  as  in  these
cases,  where  nothing  but  words  are  adven-
tured, men  ought  not  to  be  sparing  of  them.


274

be  satisfied  lier  to  his  wislij,  saying,  among
other  things,  Lady,  if,  in  your  opinion,  the
deeds  ot"  Albayzar  are  of  such  account,  that
in  thinking  on  lliein  you  forget  mine,  you
oiler  nic  an  ungentle  reward  of  great  dis-
courtesy. As  lor  the  victories  he  hath  at-
tained, they  ought  of  right  to  be  given  to
you,  seeing  ilie  noble  are  vanquished  by
your  beauty,  rather  than  by  the  courage  and
sword  oi'  Albayzar.  But  would  you  grant
inc  leave  to  go  seek  him,  and  to  fight  with
him  under  the  sovereign  favour  of  your
name,  then  should  you  see  to  which  of  «s
you  are  most  bound,  and  who  should  best
deserve  to  serve  you.

Targiana  replied,  I  desired  one  thing  long
since,and  now,  methinks,though  I  have  often-
times resolved  against  it,  my  desire  will  en-
force me  to  accomplish  the  same,  wherein
3'onr  request  ma}'  be  satisfied,  and  mine  own
will  sufficiently  contented;  and  thus  it  is;  I
mean  in  the  habit  of  a  travelUng  gentle-
woman, nccoinpanied  with  yourself,  two
damsels,  and  lour  squires,  to  journey  from
hence  to  the  court  of  the  emperor  Palmerin;


'21:,

anã  ilic  l)cticr  to  win  my  fîitlici's  consent,
I  will  desire  ot  liiin  that  I  may  go  visit  mine
aunt^  tlic  i|iieca  oi  Syria^  wtiicli  jcqucst  (
know  liC  will  not  deny  nic  ;  so  that  by  this
iiK'iUi  Í  shall  have  opportunity  to  ])iocecd
in  this,  to  content  botii  your  and  mine  own
desire.  I  have  already  sent  a  niessciiircr  to
Albayzav,  that  ho  siudl  not  depart  from  ( 'on-
siantinoplc  till  such  time  as  he  have  iurtbci
tidings  from  me.

Florian,,  w'ao  always  desired  to  escape  from
those  iniidels,  seeing  the  time  to  present  him
with  a  fit  occasion^  began  greatly  to  commend
tiic  enterprize  of  Targiana,  and  urged  her
to  pniher  device  in  execution  withont  delay>
fearing  lest  lier  desire  might  happen  to  catch
a  sudden  death.  Because  it  is  the  natural
condition  of  women  to  make. a  resolution
speedily,  and  to  forget  it  presently.  But
as  It.  is  also  their  nature  to  be  constant  in
Avhat  is  evil  and  mutable  in  what  is  good,
Targiana,  on  the  next  morning,  came  into
the  chamber  of  her  father,  and  there  \\\i\\
leigncd  tears  she  began  to  rehearse  how  she
bad  been. advertised,  that  the  queen  of  Syrian


276

her  aunt,  was  fallen  into  a  sudden  sickness;
for  which  cause  she  besought  him,  that  he
would  permit  her  to  go  and  visit  her.  The
Grand  Turk,  who  had  no  other  joy  than  his
daughter,  granted  her  request  ;  but  he  could
not  persuade  her  to  take  other  company  thau
the  two  damsels,  the  four  squires,  and  her
Christian  knight  :  for  she  excused  herself
from  going  with  such  a  train  as  he  would
have  given  her,  alledging  that  she  could
travel  thus  with  less  delay.

They  departed  on  their  journc}'  bravely  and
gallantly  appointed,  and  in  short  time  ar-
rived within  the  famous  empire  of  Constan-
tinople; where,  riding  thorow  a  pleasant  val-
ley, thick  beset  with  trees,  the  princess  de-
sired to  stay  a  while,  till  the  heat  of  the  day
was  somewhat  past.  Not  long  had  they
rested  them,  but  they  espied  four  kniglus
come  riding  towards  them,  who  seeing  the
princess  Targiana,  drew  up  their  bridles,
and  looked  at  each  other,  marvelling  to
see  her.  This  was  because  they  were  late
come  from  Constantinople,  where  the}'  had
been    vanquished   by  Albayzar,    in    whose


277

shield  was  her  picture  so  naturally  drawn,
ihat  the  knights,  her  face  being  at  this  time
uncovered,  had  been  blind  if  they  had  mis-
tiikeu  her.  One  of  them  drawing  nigh,
oliercd  her  these  salutations  :  Lady,  they
to  whom  your  beauty  hath  been  a  cause  of
great  loss  and  damage,  siiould  have  some
advantage  from  it  in  recompence  of  their
misliap.  This  you  may  grant  by  coming
witb  us,  and  appearing  before  our  ladies,
that  when  they  hear  we  have  been  con-
i|iicred,  they  may  at  the  same  time  perceive
lhe  reason,  and  see  the  great  difference  that
is  between  you  and  them  in  beauty.  This
may  be  against  the  rule  of  true  lovers,  but
to  such  beauty  as  yours  its  due  cannot  be
denied.

Flo.ian  arose  up  in  anger,  saying.  Sirs,
follow  your  way,  or  rest  if  you  be  weary;
but  seek  not  to  excuse  your  failure  to  your
ladies,  by  imputing  to  them  the  fault  of  your
weakness.  If  this  does  not  please  you,  bring
them  here  that  they  may  see  what  you  wish
them  to  behold  ;  for,  as  for  this  lady,  she  has
no  will  to  go  with  you,  nor  am  I  so  feeble

VOL.  II.  2  b


278

ns  to  be  uiuil)lc  to  j)rotcct  her.  You  an-
swer so  bravely,  said  oik-  of  the  knigbtSj  that
she  shall  go  witii  us  :  and  it"  you  dare  de-
i'end  her,  mount,  and  ue  shall  quickly  dis-
mount you.

Florian  sprung  on  horseback  prcst^ntlv,  and
lacing  his  helmet,  said,  Now,  sirs,  I  shall  try  it
your  worthiness  will  prove  according  to  your
words;  you  may  come  to  me  one  alter  an-
other, or  all  four  at  t)uce,  if  you  please.  Tush,
said  one  of  them,  one  of  us  alone  will  find,
vou  work  enough,  and  that  is  myself;  as  for
my  fellows,  I  j^idge  they  wouhl  think  it
dishonour  to  i.hem,  if  they  should  deal  with
such  a  one  as  you.  Florian  was  now  so  me-
lancholick  that  anger  choaked  his  speech,
as  is  oftentimes  the  case  with  cholerick  men:
so  fetching  their  career,  he  encountered  him
with  such  force,  full  in  the  middle  of  the
shield,  that  piercing  through  that  and  his
arms  also,  he  sent  him  to  the  ground,  having
ended  his  pride  for  ever.  The  other  ihrce,
thinking  it  not  necessary  to  try  themselves
upon  equal  terms  against  one  who  had  given
such  an  encounter  before  them,  ran  at  him


Í27.0

hll  at  once,  and  did  no  more  than  break  tlicir
lances  upon  him,  without,  shaking  hjm  in
his  seat.  He,  as  he  had  broken  his  in  the
lirst,  drew  his  sword,  and  delivered  one  of
thcni  a  back  stroke  as  he  ])ast  upon  the
arm,  which  cut  the  bone  clean  through,  and
maimed  liim  eíTectually.  The  twam  who
were  left  wheeled  round  upon  him  sword  in
hand,  to  revenge  their  companions  ;  hut  he,
who  was  greatly  incensed,  soon  laid  another
dead  at  his  feet  ;  and  the  last,  seeing  himself
wounded,  and  such  an  enemy  before  him,
clapt  spurs  to  his  horse,  thinking  he  had  no
other  remedy  for  his  life.  Florian  alighted,
and  taking  off  the  helmet  from  him  whose
arm  he  had  cut  off,  found  that  between  loss
of  blood  and  tenor,  he  had  yielded  u[)  the
■ghost,  which  little  grieved  him,  for  to  chas-
tise the  bad  is  to  serve  the  "ood.


Targianawas  as  well  contented  with  the  vic-
tory of  her  knight,  as  she  would  have  been
displeased,  if  Fortune  had  allotted  him  the
contrary.  And  seeing  lhe  night  aj)proach
fast  upon  tliem,  sIk;  commanded  the  scpiires
to  place  their  three  tents  in  the  bottom  of
'2  a  '1


280

the  valley,  near  to  a  green  bank,  whereby
there  ran  a  pleasant  little  brook  ;  thinking,
there  to  find  more  pleasure,  than  to  remain
all  night  in  company  with  the  dead  knights.
Ihere  they  passed  the  night,  reposing  as
was  needful  on  so  long  a  journey  :  for  with-
out  resting  by  night  there  is  no  traveilinij
by  day.  ^


281


CHAPTER  84.


^Vlicn  the  cltar  morning  luid  awaked  the
princesa  'Jargiaiui  and  her  company,  they
(l([>artcd  on  their  Journey^  greatly  desiring
to  be  in  the  court  of  the  emperor  Pahne-
rin.  Jn  the  afternoon  they  came  into  a
goodly  forest,  ^vhere  stood  a  fair  foimlaiu
of  alabaster,  worked  with  Roman  sculptures
of  such  excellent  cunning,  that  it  might  be
doubted  whether  they  could  have  been  bet-
ter wrought  in  wax.  It  was  reported  that
the  emperor  Marcellus  (who  in  his  time  was
tHirious  to  cause  rare  edifices  and  brave  in-
ventions to  be  framed)  had  erected  this  lair
lountain  in  the  forest.  And  this  seemed  to
be  true  for  two  causes;  the  first,  that  this
emperor  was  very  much  aflectioned  to  Uuve
!2  i}  :i


282

his  dwelling  in  solitary  places  near  to  some
pleasant  spring,  as  his*  chronicles  record,  or
some  such  rare  and  costly  fountain.  And
the  second,  because  the  name  of  Marcellus
was  engraved  upon  one  of  the  stones  of  the
fountain.  Near  unto  it  were  two  knights  lying
down,  while  their  steeds  were  grazing  in  the
forest  nigh.

Targiana  seeing  so  singular  a  fountain,  in  a
place  so  convenient  for  repose,  desired  Flo-
rian  to  pause  there  awhile,  that  they  might
pass  the  sesta  there.  So  they  alighted  at  the
foot  of  some  poplars.  Now  as  Targiana's
face  was  uncovered,  and  perfectly  resembled
its  counterfeit  upon  Albayzai's  shield,  the
two  knights,  who  were  lying  beside  the  foun-
tain, as  soon  as  they  saw  her,  affirmed  that
it  was  she  for  whom  Albayzar  maintained
his  joust.  They  determined  to  take  her  with
them  to  their  ladies  by  force  of  arms,  though
little  seemed  necessary,  thinking  thus  to  salve
the  shame  of  their  overthrow,  inasmuch  as
without  doubt  she  seemed  to  them  to  be  the
fairest  thing  in  the  world.  So  putting  their
helmets   on   they    approached  her,   saying.


283

Madam,  you  ought  not  to  blame  those,  who,
having  suffered  by  your  beauty,  seek  remedy
by  it  :  a  knight  who  combats  in  your  name,
and  hath  vanquished  all  the  world  in  ii,  hath
vanquished  us  also,  and  won  from  us  the
shields  whereon  were  figured  our  ladies,  and
hath  honoured  you  with  placing  them  at
your  feet.  To  make  amends,  it  behoveth
you  to  depart  with  us.

Methinks,  quoth  Florian,  you  want  to  make
bad  worse;  be  satisfied  with  the  little  you
have  done  to  keep  3'our  shields,  without
further  presuming  on  Fortune,  who  may
happen  to  provide  you  a  far  worse  incon-
venience. I  perceive,  said  the  knight,  this
lady's  beauty  causeth  you  to  use  your  terms
so  bluntly  ;  whether  it  will  give  you  strength
to  maintain  your  words  I  know  not.  That
shall  you  try,  quoth  Tlorian,  ajid  so  closing
his  helmet,  without  tarrying  to  mount  on
horseback,  he  charged  them  a-foot  as  he
was,  sword  in  hand,  and  protecting  himself
with  his  shield.  And  thougli  each  of  these
was  good  for  much,  yet  they  were  not
ashamed,  against  the  duty  of  knighlhooil,  to


284

assail  him  both  at  once  ;  not  so  much  for
tlio  wish  ot  ovcrpou  crinîï  him,  as  to  be  able
to  carry  oft^  tlie  lair  Targiana  at  their  plea-
sure ;  and  patting  out  all  their  strength,  they
laid  on  him  such  load  of  merciless  blows,
as  ir  he  had  long  deserved  such  hatre<l  at
their  hands.  But  Florian,  upon  whom  their
blows  were  of  little  avail,  covering  himself
well  with  his  sliield,  requited  both  the  one
and  the  other  with  so  many  and  such  mighty
strokc>,  that  they  had  soon  no  breath  tor
fight,  an:l  no  leisure  to  thinU  of  any  thing
more  than  of  saving  themselves.  He,  whose
rage  and  melancholy  nothing  could  resist,
perceiving  their  weakness,  dealt  the  one  a
blow  over  his  shield  upon  the  helmet,  which
made  way  through  and  brought  him  dead
to  the  earth.  The  other, seeing  his  comrade
slain  and  his  own  case  desperate,  thought  it
better  to  yield  in  time  than  crave  mercy
when  it  would  be  too  late.  And  because
he  feared  that  Florian  in  his  wrath  would
show  him  none,  he  went  up  to  Targiana,
saying,  Lady,  be  contented  with  my  com-
panion's death,  and  these  wounds  which  I
liave   received    in  payment  for  our  words^


285

and  order  your  knight  to  spare  my  life,  if  it
be  only  tliat  I  may  better  prepare  myself  for
death.

Targisina  beliolding  his  repentance,  and  hav-
ing pity  on  his  youth,  desired  Florian  that
he  would  he  satisfied  with  his  acknowledg-
ment of  his  fault,  and  let  him  go.  That,
replied  he,  I  will  do,  since  you,  lady,  desire
it,  though  life  ought  not  to  he  granted  to
liim  who  does  what  he  ouç-ht  not:  and  he
ordered  him  without  delay  to  depart,  and
take  with  him  the  dead  body  of  his  com-
panion. The  knight,  maltreated  as  he  was,
after  his  squire  had  bound  up  his  wounds,
had  the  dead  body  laid  athwart  the  saddle
of  his  horse,  with  a  s([uire  seated  behind  to
hold  it  on,  and  in  this  guise  departed,,  more
sorrowfully  than  he  came.

Methinks,  said  'I  argiana,  when  he  was  gone,
this  country  is  less  secure  than  I  thought.
It  never  was  so  before,  replied  Florian,  till
your  business  has  thus  disturbed  it  ;  your
picture  in  Albayzar's  shield  on  the  one  hand,
and  your  own  beauty  on  the  other,  are  such


286

that  none  avIio  see  them  can  escape  great
trouble.  Targiana,  not  permitting  him  thus
to  speak  her  praise,  wished  to  change  tlie
discourse,  and  taking  him  armed  as  he  was
by  the  hand,  said.  No  more  of  this;  let  us,
■while  the  heat  continues,  go  under  the  shade
of  yonder  ash  trees.  INJy, heart  telleth  me
that  there  we  shall  have  an  adventure  more
perilous  than  the  past.  Lady,  leplied  Flo-
rian,  if  I  were  free  from  the  dangers  in  which
your  love  places  me,  I  shoidd  have  no  fear
of  any  tiling  else.  I  can  think  nothing  of
aught  which  may  befal  me  before  you.  If
Albayzar,  having  but  your  picture,  ovcr-
conieth  the  whole  world,  \\ hat  might  I  do,
having  you  yourself.  Fain  would  I  have
some  great  adventure  beial  me  in  your  pre-
sence, that  you  might  see  what  strength  your
heautv  can  give  to  one  who  combats  i'or  it.
Kothing  now  grieves  me  so  much  as  not  to
have  occasion  to  display  this.  Thus  walk-
ing and  talking  they  came  near  the  trees,
"where,  though  Targiana  had  only  sported
Avhen  she  said  they  should  there  meet  a
great  adventure,  the  words  proved  to  be
true  indeed  :  at  the  foot  of  these  ash  tree?


CS7

ihey  espied  a  goodly  knight  laid  along,  and
110  company  with  him:  for  alway  in  soUtary
places  his  squire  was  aj-pointcd    to    depart
from  him,  that  he  might  the   letter  report
the  amorous  complaints  which  were  always
resident    in  his  pensive  mind.     This  knight
had  on  grc}-  iirmoar  with  yellow  s{.ots;  his
helmet  was  of  the  srme  colour,   which    he
had  taken  oH",  and  it  was  now  serving  under
liis  head  ihe  oiîîce  of  a  pillow,  his  face  be-
ing turned  towunl  the  ground.      He  bore  for
his    device  a   dragon    in   a  grey  field,  with
yellow  scales,  and  his  talons  dipt  in   blood.
J  Jc  was  talking  to  himself,  and  that  so  loudly,
that  Targiana  and  Florian  heard  him  at  some
distance;  but  they  drew  nearer  tlje  better  to
hear  him,  concealing  themselves   beiiind  the
trunk  of  one  of  the  trees,  that  the  sight  of
them  n:i;i,ht  not  disturb  hiiu.

But  he,  being  rapt  in  h.s  own  thoughts,  nei-
ther ronienibercd  nor  feared  that  he  might
be  overheard,  and  with  a  feeble  and  eouie-
thing  hoarse  voice  continued  to  s;«y,  Lady,
how  have  I  deserved  that  you  should  oiler
ine  so  great  ungentlencss  ?  Leavinu:  me  aUvc


288

to  wish  daily  for  death,  and  yet  you  will  not
suifer  mc  to  dic^  only  that  I  may  pass  my
life  in  greater  torment.  If  I  at  any  time
wish  fur  life,  it  is  to  do  you  service  with  it;
but  you  will  not  permit  it  to  he  employed
therein,  that  you  may  not  think  you  owe  me
any  thing.  VMiat  most  destroys  mc,  is  that
you  pass  over  all  this  with  forgetfiilness;  not
even  to  do  me  ill  do  you  remember  me,  and
yet  you  do  me  ill.  I  never  saw  atiliction
in  any  man,  but  there  was  some  set-oft'  of
good  against  it;  as  for  mine,  it  keepcth  at
one  certain  stay,  and  if  it  hath  any  change
it  is  alway  for  the  worse,  as  if  all  mishap  were
only  meant  to  me.  Other  men  sustain  their
grief  in  hope  of  a  short  end,  but  mine  hath
none.  At  times  I  think  that  my  own  un-
worthiness  is  the  cause  why  you  treat  me
thus.  I  find  that  with  you  none  can  be
deemed  worthy,  and  with  this  I  content  my-
self. But  you  should  remember,  that  good
should  be  done  to  all,  and  evil  not  even  to
him  who  hath  deserved  it  ;  and  remember-
ing this,  not  show  evil  to  me.  One  boon  I
would  fain  obtain  of  you,  in  guerdon  of  all
which  I  endure  :  it  is  that  you  would  permit


289

mv  liff  to  lind  an  cndj  since  I  know  there  is
no  end  funny  sorrows.

Mere  he  paused  with  such  deep  and  pitiful
sobs,  as  if  tliey  came  from  his  very  soul.
Florian,  who  at  that  time  was  not  in  any  such
amorous  disposition, 'had  heard  enough,  and
so  took  Targiana  by  tlie  hand  to  return;  but
;i?  slie  rose  the  knight  heiird  the  noise  which
her  silk  apparel  male.  Before  he  raised  his
eyes  he  put  his  helmet  on,  that  they  might
not  see  his  face;  then  seeing  Florian,  who  was
armed,  and  having  no  suspicion  who  he  was,
and  being  angry  to  think  that  they  had  lis-
tehed  to  him,  he  went  up  to  him,  crying  with
a  loud  voice,  Don  Cavalier,  that  you  may
use  more  manners  another  time  to  one  whom
you  have  never  seen,  draw  your  sword;  for
1  choose  that  he  who  can  report  my  words
should  have  something  to  say  of  my  deeds.
1  am  in  such  haste,  replied  Florian,  that  I
shall  not  venture  to  spend  time  in  excuses,
and  I  fear  besides  that  yon  would  not  admit
them  ;  so  do  what  you  can.  Then  drawing
their  swords  they  began  a  brave  light,  eharg-
iug  one  another  in  such  manner,  thut  Tar-
VOL.  II.  2  C


^A)0

síiiuiíi  thougliL  ihls  Laltle  lar  unlike  all  tli:i\,
she  had  seen  bctoro.  J'.aeh  liiidiiig  ihc
strength  of  his  enemy;  endeavoured  to  bhow
the  extent  of  his  own  ;  their  blows  were
laid  on  Avithont  inerey  ;  arms  could  not
resist  them,  so  that  perforce  the  fle»h  suf-
fered. Whoever  had  seen  this  battle  might
well  have  said  it  was  the  fiercest  he  had
ever  seen.


While  tliey  were  thus  auimatcd  against
one  another,  a  knight  in  green  and  white
armour  chanced  to  arrive  there  ;  in  \\\i
shield  he  bare  for  his  device  a  golden
sphere,  which  was  pierced  in  many  places,
and  well  nigh  defaced  with  blows  which
he  had  received  in  battle.  He  coming
near,  and  beholding  this  perilous  fight,
was  amazed  at  it,  and  would  fain  have
known  the  cause  why  these  two  knights  en-
dured the  combat  so  cruelly.  Wherefore  he
came  to  Targiana  to  know^  of  her  ;  but  when
he  had  beheld  her  awhile,  how  beautiful  she
was,  he  quite  forgot  what  he  should  demand  ;
and  because  he  was  one  of  the  knights  whom
Albayzar   had  vanquished,  and  bore  in  his


291

iiiiiul  the  picture  of  the  sliltld  for  wliich  lie
inul  combiited,  seeing  now  the  original  be-
fore him,  he  tooic  her  by  the  arm,  and  set  her
lip  before  one  of  his  esquires,  suyiiig,  Lady,
seeing  these  knights  are  not  able  to  bear  yoa
company,  and  as  they  seem  to  be  fighting
which  sliall  have  you,  Í  know  none  in  whose
protection  you  can  better  l)e  than  in  mine.
]á:i  not  this  oftcnd  you,  as  1  desire  nothing
more  than  to  serve  you  ;  at  least  it  may  be
that  with  you  I  may  recover  the  honour
which  on  your  account  I  have  lost  elsewhere  ;
for  I  know  not  in  what  danger  a  man  can
possibly  be,  from  which,  having  you  present,
he  could  not  save  himself,

Targiana  seeing  there  was  no  remedy,  for
Florian  maintained  the  combat  so  fiercaly
that  lie  could  not  hear  her  cry,  l)cgan  in
her  royal  heart  to  cast  about  for  what  might
be  most  for  her  honour;  and  beseeching  the
knight  to  hear  her,  said,  I  know  not,  why
you  should  wish  for  yourself  that  which  is
another's,  seeing  that  although  you  have  the
power  to  carry  me  away,  yet  my  good  will
and  allection  sluiil  always  be  estranged  to
'2C  2


292

you.  But  since  you  are  so  liitle  reasonable
that  this  avails  mc  nothing",  I  pray  you  suf-
fer uic  to  go  to  yonder  fountain,  where  mine
attendants  are,  that  1  may  take  them  with
me;  they  have  no  weapons  wherewith  to
defend  nic.  I  am  content,  said  the  kniglit,
to  satisfy  your  desire,  in  this  and  in  all
things;  then  placing  her  on  her  palfrey  he
rode  with  her  and  her  company  along  the
valley,  towards  what  seemed  to  him  the
thickest  part  of  the  forest.

riorian  and  the  knight  of  the  Valley,  mean-
time, were  so  earnest  in  their  enterprise,
the  fear  which  each  had  of  lhe  other
making  h.ira  so  intent  upon  defending
himself,  that  they  never  perceived  when
Targiana  was  carried  away  ;  but  if  they
Viad  seen  her  they  were  brought  to  such
weakness  that  they  could  not  have  rescued
her,  such  were  the  wounds  which  they
liad  received,  and  the  cruelty  with  which
they  combated,  no  weakness  appearing
on  either  side.  Great  need  had  they  of
rest,  yet  they  would  take  none,  for  the
day  was   now  far  spent,  and  they  wished  to


293

bring  tlioir  battle  to  an  end  before  It  was
quite  over.  But  now,  when  the  sua  was
gone  and  darkness  fast  gathering  round,  it
pJeascd  lù)rtnnc  so  to  ordain  as  that  Dra-
muziando,  travclhng  towards  Constantin-
ople, to  recover  the  shield  of  Miraguarda,
arrived  there  ;  a.id  seeing  the  fierceness  of
this  battle,  stood  awhile  to  behold  it,  for
he  had  never  beheld  one  which  so  greatly
amazed  him.  And  seeing  the  extremity
that  these  two  knights  were  in,  how  their
sitrengih  failed,  and  their  swords  turned  in
their  hands,  and  knowing  by  his  arms  the
knight  of  the  Dragon,  he  was  yet  more
astonished  to  sec  the  other  equal  to  him  ;
so  he  gave  his  horse  the  spurs,  and  came
between  them  with  these  words  :

Sirs,  I  beseech  you,  if  the  cause  of  this  battle
be  such  that  ye  may  be  excused  from  pur-
suing it  to  the  extremity,  that  ye  end  your
debate,  for  your  condition  rather  recjuireth
rest  than  labour.  At  least  you,  sir  I'alnie-
rin,  speaking  to  the  knight  of  the  Dragon,
you  should  not  refuse  to  grant  my  desire;
for  this  other  knight,  though  1  know  him  not,
2  e  S


294

iheiT  may  romc  a  time,  wljcn  I  t^ball  requite
hhu  for  tlie  favour  he  would  confer  upon
Die  now.  ^\  hen  Florian  heard  the  name
of  Pahncrin,  it  made  a  deeper  wound  in  his
licarfj  than  all  the  wounds  which  he  had
received  from  him  ;  he  dropt  ])is  sword,  and
fell  after  it,  saying.  If  1  liave  sinned  in
raising  my  hand  against  him  on  whom  I
ought  not  to  have  raised  it,  I  am  contented,
to  atone  for  it  with  my  life;  and  with  these
Avords  he  fainted.  Palmerin, seeing  this  weak-
ness in  him  that  he  had  found  so  valiant,
knew  not  what  to  think,  and  commanded
Selviam  to  unloose  his  helmet,  that  he  might
îeceive  the  air.  But  when  he  knew  that
it  was  riorian  of  the  Desert,  his  brother,
he  was  ready  to  fall  into  greater  danger
himself.  Dramuziando  who  had  already
alighted,  fearing  some  disaster,  comforted
him  with  words  proceeding  from  his  own
good  heart,  and  with  all  diligence  bound
up  the  w  ounds  of  both,  knowing  that  it  did
not  beiit  him  to  be  remiss  in  time  of  dan-
ger. Florian,  as  soon  as  his  hehnet  was
taken  off,  and  the  air  came  to  him,  recover-
ed, and   seeing  his  brother  as   maltreated


2.95

as  himself,  said.  Certes,  I  know  not  what
lecon) ponce  my  fault  deserveth,  unless  it  be
to  die  with  these  wouiuls,  since  my  judg-
ment was  so  little,  as  not  to  icnow  by  the
blows,  who  gave  them!  Sir  brother,  Palme-
rin  replied,  why  do  you  complain  of  the
disasters  of  Fortune,  since  they  are  so  com-
mon that  they  come  daily  to  those  \\iio
strive  to  avoid  them — how  much  more  to
liini  who  seeks  them  r  Kather  let  us  bethink
liow  to  require  the  courtesy  we  have  found
in  sir  Dramuziaudo  at  such  a  time;  for  the
rest  may  be  excused.

Florian,  though  somewhat  contented  with
his  brother's  answer,  when  he  missed  Tin-
giana,  was  overcharged  with  grief  beyonfl
all  measure.  In  this  great  heaviness,  he  de-
termined ty  make  pursuit  after  her  even
in  his  present  plight.  But  Palmerin  and
Dramuziando  shewed  him  the  danger  where-
in he  was  at  that  present,  the  latter  making
him  faithful  promise,  that  so  soon  as  he
had  placed  them  where  their  wounds  ct>uld
be  healed,  himself  would  undertake  the  tra-
vel in  her  quest,  as  earnestly  as  lie  did  thai


296

of  the  shield  of  Miraguarda.  Yet  for  all
tliis,  the  wrath  of  Florian  was  so  great,  that
neither  counsel  nor  friendly  intreaty  could
abate  it.  Dramuziando  having  set  them
on  horseback,  departed  with  them  from
out  of  the  forest  ;  when  Florian  casting
his  eyes  towards  the  fountain,  and  think-
iiîg  on  her  he  had  lost  by  sncli  niistur-
tunc,  the  tears  standing  in  his  eyes,  he
exclaimed  :

Thou  valley,  whose  entrance  seemed  so  plea-
sant to  me,  how  dear  has  the  issue  cost  mc  !
but  in  payment  for  keeping  so  ill  what  I
ought  to  have  kept  better,  never  will  I  cease
to  travel,  till  I  have  found  what  1  have  lost,
which  by  no  means  I  know  I  can  ever  forget.
When  they  departed  the  forest,  they  came
to  a  monastery,  where  their  wounds  were
cured  with  great  diligence:  for  there  were
those  in  that  house  who  were  skilful  in  such
things.  DramuzicUido  then  took  his  leave,
purposing  to  fulfil  that  he  had  promised  to
Florian.  And  here  the  history  leaveth  these
three  knights,  returning  to  him  that  had
carried  Targiana  away,  persuading  himself


^97

ill  her  company  to  attain  ihe  honour  which
he  desired;  not  remembering  that  honour
which  is  gained  by  evil  means  becomcá  in-
famy.


208


CHAPTER    8.5.


'j'hc  history  saltb,how  the  king  of  Denmark
had  three  sons,  all  of  them  especial  knights  ;
the  eldest,  uho  was  called  Albanis  of  Frisa,
V.  as  so  much  so  that  there  was  no  better  in
all  his  father's  kingdom.  He  being  come  to
the  age  of  five  and  twenty  3'cars,  and  hearing
the  report  of  the  great  adventures  performed
at  the  castle  of  Almourol,  concerning  the
shield  of  Miraguarda,  he  became  enamoured
of  her  by  fame,  and  leaving  his  father's
court,  set  out  for  the  castle  of  Almourol,
meaning  to  do  battle  with  the  keeper  tliere-
of,  and  having  conquered  him,  to  defend  the
shield  himself  in  her  service.  So  accom-
plishing many  notable  deeds  by  the  way,
he  arrived  there  at  such  time  as  Albavzar


'299

luid  canletî  ilie  shield  from  tbcnco.  "When
lie  saw  his  will  thus  baffled  he  stayed  till
rortunc  would  sufler  him  to  see  Mifa-
giuirda,  tlie  which  he  afterwards  repented  ;
for  if  he  came  there  free,  he  departed  other-
wise, being  minded  to  search  the  whole
world  through,  to  see  if  by  foice  of  arms
he  could  briusr  lier  shield  as:ain,  thinkins^r
thus  to  make  her  beholden  to  him  :  but  she
was  of  such  a  i'leis  condition,  that  iliough
she  rejoiced  in  receiving  services,  she  never
requited  them.

Albanis  prevailing  in  divers  adventure^,
came  to  the  city  of  Constantinople,  at  such
time  as  Albayzar  could  find  none  to  enter
the  lists  against  him,  where,  seeing  the  num-
ber of  shields  this  valiant  Moor  had  won,
and  the  veneration  in  which  he  was  held
in  that  eouit,  he  was  the  more  desirous  to
uiiinifeit  his  courage  agaiiist  him.  But  al-
beit his  worthiness  was  great,  and  that  he
brake  three  spears  on  Alb  ivzar,  yet  wa;
Torlune  so  mucli  against  him  that  he  re-
ceived the  foil  in  the  fourth  career,  being
driven  to  the  ground   vviili  his  saddle    be-


300

tweeu  his  legs;  Albayzar,  though  he  lost  his
stirrups,  keeping  his  seat.  So  as  he  carried
no  shield,  he  left  in  its  stead  a  part  of  his
armour,  which  was  placed  among  the  shields
of  the  conf|Ucred  knights.

Being  departed  froÀi  thence,  out  of  opinion
ever  after  to  serve  ]Miraguarda,  he  arrived  in
the  Valley  of  the  Tountaiii,  where  Fiorian
and  Palincrin  fought;  where  beholding  Tar-
giana,  he  estecined  her  the  fairest  creature
that  ever  he  had  seen,  and  knew  it  w^as  she
on  whose  behalf  Albayzar  sped  so  happil}'.
Whereupon,  he  concluded  to  bring  her  with
him  to  Constantinople,  thinking  that  For-
tune would  favour  him  better  against  Albay-
zar, having  her  in  his  presence.  And  he
offered  her  such  honour  an.d  courtesy  as
were  fitting  ;  and  though  at  first  he  tried
whether  by  words  he  cotild  win  her  good
will,  finding  her  firm,  he  desisted  from
this.

Well,  on  they  rid  towards  Constantinople,
and  on  the  second  day  about  vespers,  pass-
ing through   a  forest  which  was  fai"  from


301

all  haLitatlons^  llicy  iiiet   a  kiiij^lit  in    black
armoni;,  riding  upon   a   strung  and  goodly
liorsf,  wliich  was  of   mulberry-colour,  but
so    sorrowful,    and  with    sucii  carelessness,
that  he  neither  held  the  reins,  nor  sate  up-
right hi  the  saddle.     Albanis  of  Frisa  greet-
ed hi  ni  courteously,  as  was  his  custom;  the
other  past  him  without  re[)ly,  which  was  his
custom  also  in  these   moody  iits,    whereat
Albanis  was  somewhat  displeased  ;  and  de-
sirous to   shew    some  courage    before  Tar-
giana,  he  turned  to  him,  saying,  Sir,  albeit
m}'  words  are  so  little  esteemed  of  you  that
you  have  made  no  shew  of  a  courteous  an-
swer, at  least  you   should  liave   used   more
courtesy  to  this  iady.      A\'hereto  the  Black
Knight   made    this    re))ly.     If    1  have    of-
i'ended   towards  this  lad},   I    am    ready    to
rit;ompen(;e  the  same  in  wliat  she  shall  ci.)m-
jnand;  and  if  you  complain   that  I  did   not
salulc  you,  you  have  no  reason  so  to  do,  for  I
am  in    such   condition   that   1   neither  hear
what  is  said  to  me,  nor  see   who   passes;  a
grief  which  I  bear  with  ine  making  me  lieed-
less  t)f  all  other  things.
VOL.  11.  <»  n


302

I  would  fain  know,  said  Albania,  what  that
grief  is,  to  see  if  it  be  sufficient  to  excuse
your  uncivil  behaviour.  Sir  knight,  quolh
he  of  the  VuHey,  keep  on  in  your  journey,
and  leave  me  with  my  thoughts  :  for  you
would  gain  little  in  hearing,  aticl  1  should  lose
much  in  revealing  them.  But  Albanis  per-
sisting in  his  desire  to  know  what  he  had
demanded,  such  words  arose,  that  fetching
their  career,  with  shields  advanced  before
them,  and  spears  in  rest,  they  encountered  ;
their  lances  brake,  and  they  met  body
against  body  with  such  force,  that  the  horse
of  Albanis  had  his  shoulder  broke,  and  fell
upon  the  right  leg  of  the  rider  ;  and  before
he  could  recover  himself,  the  Bkick  Knight
leaping  off,  with  more  life  than  had  appear-
ed in  him  when  he  came  riding  through  the
the  forest,  made  him  yield  himself  van-
quished.


This  done,  he  was  riding  away  ;  but  Tar-
giana  came,  and  taking  him  by  the  sleeve  of
his  mail,  said.  Sir  knight,  I  beseech  you,
even  as  you   show  courage  in  danger,  and


503

magnanimity  in  sorrow,  that  3-011  \vill  not
abandon  those  who  are  in  affliction.  And
it"  so  be  yon  travel  to  the  emperor's  court,
suffer  me  to  be  a  partner  in  your  journey,
for  that  my  business  lieth  in  that  place,  to
expect  a  knight,  who  conducted  me  in  my
way  thither.  Lady,  answered  the  Black
Knight,  I  thought  this  knight  was  conduct-
ing you;  but  perceiving  the  contrary,  and
that  you  are  minded  to  go  thither,  where
ol  force  I  must  be,  I  y»i11  serve  you  in
what  I  can,  and  if  1  fail  according  to  your
deserts,  let  my  will  make  amends  for  my
actions.

Thus  they  departed,  leaving  Albanis  more
sorrow  tul  than  ever  he  thought  to  be.  Tiie
]>lack  Knight  went  his  way  without  meeting
adventure  10  delay  him,  till  he  reached  Con-
stantinople; sometimes  beguiling  the  weari-
ness of  the  road  by  enquiring  of  Targiana
who  she  was,  and  why  she  was  in  that
knight's  company.  She  perceiving  him  to
be  a  person  irom  whom  nothing  ought  to
be  concealed,  gave  him  a  full  account  of  all
her  fortunes  ;  wherefore  the  knight  from
2  D  2


^04

thenceforth  treated  her  with  greater  respect,
thou'^U  he  knew  it  was  she  tor  whose  sake
Albayzar  had  stolen  the  shield  of  Mira-
^uarda;  not  now  blaming  him  .so  uiueh,  for
that  the  beaiitv  ot  Tari^iana  would  liavc
urged  men  to  any  error.

They  arrived  at  Constantinople,  when  Albay-
zar,  weary  of  waiting  when  none  appeared
against  him,  had  resolved  the  next  day  to
depart,  and  to  carry  the  shields  away  with
hiin  ;  which  made  the  emperor  greatly
aG:2;rieved,  esteeminfj;  this  the  «-reatest  shame
that  ever  happened  in  his  court.  Primaleon
was  so  chafed,  tîîut  none  dared  speak  to  him,
nor  would  he  see  any  one  ;  and  because  his
father  would  not  grant  him  to  combat  with
Alba3'zar,  he  was  minded  to  stay  his  coming
three  or  four  leagues  without  the  city,  and
to  bear  in  his  shield  the  image  of  Gridonia,
which  lie  had  secretly  caused  to  be  made,  to
see  if  he  might  vanquish  Albayzar,  and
bring  back  the  shields  to  those  tliat  had
lost  thein.  But  this  purpose  took  not
effect,  nor  did  the  fortune  of  -Vlbayzar  pro-
ceed  so  far   as  to  make  it  necessary.   This


305

is  not  to  bç  wondered  at  ;  it  is  the  way
of  Fortune  never  greatly  to  elevate  any
one,  unless  it  be  to  give  him  the  greater
fall


«  n  S


306


CILiPTER  80\


The  Black  Knight  lodged  that  night  with-
out the  city,  in  the  house  of  an  ancient
gentleman  :  tor  the  day  was  far  s[)ent  when
he  arrived,  and  there  was  no  time  for  bat-
tle. His  host  entertained  him  well,  giving
Targiana  and  her  damsels  an  apartment
for  themselves,  and  lodging  the  men
another  part.  And  because  the  Blac
Knight  was  well  known  in  those  parts,  1.
did  all  he  could  to  conceal  himself  from
every  one.  Early  on  the  morrow  he  heard
mass,  being  compleatly  armed,  in  a  chapel
which  was  without  the  Avails.  The  sun
being  risen,  Targiana  rose,  and  attired
hrrseh"  in  the  riciiest  and  most  o;or2;cous
habiliments  winch  she  had  brought,  making


307

her  damsels  also  adorn  themselves,  \vho_,
besides  that  they  v.ere  right  fair,  ^vere  as
brave  in  apparel  that  day,  as  if  it  had  been
their  lady's  wedding  day.  Targiana  attired
herself  in  a  full  robe  of  the  Turkish  fashion,
of  black  salin,  adorned  with  billaments  of
gold,  and  tassels  where  they  could  give  most
lustre,  and  bordered  every  where  with  a
wreath  of  beaten  gold,  interspersed  with
rubies  and  diamonds.  Over  her  shoulders
she  iiad  carkanct  of  jewels  of  such  value
as  to  be  above  all  price.  She  wore  nothing
on  her  head,  for  her  hair  was  such  as  de-
served to  have  nothing  on  it,  only  it  was
tied  behind  with  a  thread  of  black  and  gold,
and  so  phitted  as  to  give  much  grace  to
her  countenance.  She  rode  a  fair  palfrey,
spotted  with  black  and  white,  whose  capa-
risons were  adorned  with  beaten  gold  and
jewels.  In  this  manner  she  came  into  the
citv,  accompanied  wiih  the  Black  Knight,
and  rode  towards  the  palace.  They  reach-
ed the  jousting  place,  when  Albayzar  had
even  then  cotunicrcd  an  English  knight,
by  name  Estrope  do  Bcltran,  and  placed
his    shield    among  the    others.     The    cm-


308

pcror  \vith  all  his  courtly  company,  were
beholding  the  jousts,  and  the  place  was
full  of"  people,  it  being  Sunday;  and  when
they  saw  the  Black  Knight,  with  the
noble  company  he  brought  with  him,  they
expected  great  things  iVoni  him,  for  his
appearance  bore  testimony  to  liis  prowess.
'I'hc  stir  which  his  entrance  excited  made
the  ladies  and  knights  throng  to  the  be.-r
places  OÍ"  sight,  because  now  they  looketl
ior  some  notable  exploit.  But  that  which
caused  the  greatest  amazeuicnt  was  the
beauty  of  the  princess  Targiana,  with  the
rich  and  sumi)tuous  show  of  her  apparel,
which  made  the  people  run  on  heaps  to
behold  her,  a>  a  thing  fiiUen  from  Heaven.
/Mbayzar  liearing  so  great  and  unwonted
u[)roar  among  the  people,  cast  his  eyes
among  them,  and  seeing  Targiana,  he  could
liardW  sustain  himself  from  falling  to  the
ground;  not  that  he  immediately  recog-
nized her,  biit  because  any  thing  moves
an  enamoured  heart.

'Jhe  knight  of  the  Black  Arms  having  reach-
ed lhe  palisade  of  the  hstSj  stayed  a  while  be-


soy

Iiokliíig  the  shields  whieh  Albayz.ir  had  cun-
<|i!ered  ;  hut  when  he  saw  that  of  Miraguurda
among  them,  his  eyes  filled  with  tears,  and
he  said  within  himself,  How  is  it  possible,
l;u!y,  that  the  thing  wherein  nature  hath
shown  all  her  skill  to  make  it  snrpassing
iair,  shoidd  he  in  the  power  of  him,  that
«light  be  glad  to  be  vanquished  by  it  ?  I  re-
joiee  to  be  so  fortunate  at  this  present,
that  I  shall  eitlicr  die  to  maintain  the
truth,  or  the  lie  of  Albayzar  come  to  the
end  which  he  hath  justly  deserved.  Alba}'-
/.ar  on  his  part  had  no  less  subject  for
thought,  seeing  before  him  Targiana,  in
whose  name  lie  attained  such  estimation  of
honour  ;  and  fixing  his  eyes  upon  her,  he
knew  not  wliat  to  believe.  W^ithout  doubt
it  seemed  to  be  she,  her  very  self;  still  he
doubted  ;  desire  incited  him  to  ask,  fear
uithlichl  him,  and  between  both  he  could
deterniiac  neither  way.  The  JMaek  Knight
having  eiuled  his  s('er<t  address  to  the  shiclfj
of  Miragiiarda,  and  seeing  Albayzar  so  far
distracted,  put  himself  a  little  nearer,  and
awaked  liini  with  these  words:  Albayzar.
"whtreon    doest    thou     use     tliv     mind     >o


310

mulely?  This  is  the  lady  Targiiinn,  who
comes  from  afar  to  behold  thy  deeds,  as  thy
renown  is  deserving  of  every  thing.  Albay-
zur,  before  he  ansucrcd,  or  did  aught  else,
hearing  the  name  of  his  lady,  who  had
plaeed  iiim  in  so  many  dangers,  and  brought
him  safely  through  all_,  alighted  from  his
horse,  and  having  taken  otf  his  helmet,  he
came  and  kissed  her  hand,  saying.  Lady,  I
know  not  how  to  believe  so  great  a  good,
my  deserts  not  being  worthy  of  it.  Tar-
giana  received  him  very  graciously,  giving
him  hearty  thanks  for  liis  nobie  service,
the  worth  of  which  she  now  better  under-
stood, seeing  the  multitude  of  shields  which
he  had  won  ;  and  hereof  she  made  such
estimation,  that  Flcrian  was  presently  for-
gotten, yea,  so  far  banished  out  of  memory,
as  though  she  had  never  seen  him  in  all
her  life;  manifesting  rightly  the  inconstancy
of  her  scx',  who  are  as  ready  to  change  for
had  as  for  good,  in  nothing  constant;. for
little  inclination  they  forget  past  services,
how  great  soever,  and  we,  knowing  all  this,
use  Jiot  our  knowledge  to  guard  against
rliciu.     TÍJÍ3   proceeds    from    the   weakness


311

of  the  ílcsli,  which  bchig  weak  in  all  things,
is  llie  weakest  towards  them  ;  since  knowing
what  they  arc,  they  conquer  us  l>y  wluit
they  sccni  ;  knowing  their  tleceiriuhiess  we
sutîtr  ourselvís  to  be  deceived,  tliough  we
arc  sure  th:'.i,  in  fine,  lor  a  shglit  offence
tliey  will  forget  great  services;  that  to  great
d(vseivings  they  give  small  guerdon,  and
grant  th(  ir  lavours  to  those  who  deserve
tliem  least,  and  requite  ihem  woist.

J'lit  to  return,  Albuy/ar  having  done  his
duty  to  'I'argiana,  aiouiilcd  on  hoisebaek,
as  griily  and  gallantly  as  one  who  had  re-
ceived new  strength  ;  and  lacing  on  his  hcj-
w.v.t  again,  he  said  to  Úu:  lilaek  Knight,
ISow,  Don  Cavalier^  1  would  fain  know  by
what  means  the  lady  Turgianu  comes  in
vour  c(jiupany;  afterwards,  if  you  chuse  to
joust  with  me,  present  your  shield  and  you
juay  enter  the  lists.  How  it  happens  that
1  bring  I'argiana,  replied  the  Black  Knight,
alter  our  contest  is  ended,  she  will  tell  vou
b(.'tter  than  I.  Tlie  shield,  which  you  say
I  must  present,  to  be  allowed  the  joust,  I
do  not  bring,  for  that  which  I  should  have


312

brought  thou  hast  stolen.  Here  there-
fore I  present  this  body  ;  if  thou  shouldst
conquer  me  revenge  thyself  upon  it,  as  on
thy  greatest  enemy  ;  but  if  I  vanijuish  thee,
I  desire  no  greater  victory,  than  to  carry
back  the  shield  of  Miraguarda  to  its  place.
Since  thou  prizest  thyself  so  niucii,  re-
plied Albayzar,  our  battle  shall  Uc  after  this
manner.  If  thou  conquerest  nic,  thou  shall
not  only  win  this  shield  and  all  the  others,
but  also  carry  me  to  Miraguarda,  atid  she
shall  ordaui  for  my  life  as  plcascth  her;
and  the  hke  shall  my  lady  Targiana  dciil
%vith  thee,  if  mine  accustomed  good  hap  re-
turn me  the  victory.  So  greatly  to  my
content  are  these  conditions,  answered  the
Black  Knight,  that  if  it  were  lilting  to  trivc
thanks  to  an  enemy,  I  would  sliow  you  how
greatly  1  am  indebted  to  you  on  tliis  ac-
count. I  accept  them  to  your  wish,  and
expect  that  the  issue  of  this  battle  will  be
to  your  deserts.

The  emperor  with  all  the  company  heard
these  words,  and  they  sunk  deeper  in  IMma-
leon  than  in  any  other,  for  by  tliem  he  sus-


313

pecLod  V,  ho  It  \vas  that  uttered  them.  The
judges  now  ]jlaced  "the  Black  Knight  with-
in the  lists,  and  Targiana  also,  lor  so  Albay-
zur  re([iu'sU'd.  Tiiey  divided  the  sunshine
butwccM  iheni,  and  eacli  placing  his  eyes
upon  that  which  gave  him  courage,  at  the
sound  ot"  the  trumpet,  with  their  spears  in
rest,  and  covered  with  their  shields,  they
run  at  each  other  with  all  the  force  which
the  cause  ot"  their  quarrel  could  ins[)iie.
'J'he  attaint  was  so  well  directed  and  well
given,  that  both  came  to  the  ground,  Albayzar
over  the  cru|)per,  and  the  Black  Knight
with  his  saddle  between  his  legs,  because
the  girts  burst.  At  this  encounitr  tin-  ein-
pcrcjj-  conceived  good  ho[)e  that  Albayzar
should  not  depart  tVom  his  court  with  such  ho-
nour as  had  been  feared.  'I'hcy  were  presently
on  foot,  and  drawing  their  swords,  being
nielancholick  to  (iud  themselves  overthrown,
began  so  fierce  and  obstinate  a  battle,  that
theirs  being  the  hurl,  lhe  lear  extended  to
the  beholders.  Albayzar  well  perceived
that  the  strength  of  ihis  man  was  lar  un-
like that  uf  ail  others  wilh  whom  he  had
ever  conibatcJ,aud  he  therefore  shewed  a  dil-
VOL.   J  I.  2   E


3:4

forencc  in  liis  blows.  Botli  laid  them  on
so  tliick  and  last,  and  without  mercy,  that
not  only  were  the  helmets  dinted,  but  troui
time  to  time  sparks  oi'  iire  flew,  as  from  a
Inrnacc.  Their  shields  did  not  hang  long
upon  their  arms,  but  went  to  the  ground  in
splinters,  and  that  in  so  short  time  that  the
emperor  blest  himself,  thinking  this  the
most  notable  battle  that  ever  he  had  seen.
Certes,  quoth  he,  the  high  worth  of  Albay-
zar  none  can  deny;  but  this  other  methinks
is  nothing  behind  iiim.  Sir,  said  Gracianf),
setting  aside  the  battle  between  your  grand-
sons Palmerin  and  Flori  an  in  England,
"which  was  the  greatest  that  I,  or  any  one
else  ever  saw  between  two  knights,  this  ap-
pears to  me  worthy  of  greater  remem-
brance than  any  which  hath  chanced  in  our
times.

Albayzar,  who  saw  the  fair  Targiana  before
him,  and  held  it  as  dishonour  that  any  one
should  so  long  have  withstood  him,  display-
ed now  far  greater  strength  and  force  than
Nature  had  given  him.  The  Black  Knight
also  having  that  bei'ore  his  eyes  which  bound


315

îuin  lo  the  like  duty,  did  inirriclcs.  In  this
manner  they  endured  so  long  in  hattle  that
they  uho  were  looking  on  were  wearied,
and  yet  in  thcni  was  there  no  weariness.
Jiy  this  time  their  boches  beii;an  to  be  seen
ihrouLih  tbeir  armour,  and  the  hard  edge  of
the  svvord  iieshed  itseh  in  many  places.  Tar-
giuna  so  highly  esteemed  ttje  valour  of
Aibayzar,  that  she  tiiougiit  none  other
could  equal  it;  and  desired  to  see  him  end
this  battle  with  victory  over  his  enemy,  be-
cause in  that  she  deemed  was  the  consum-
mation of  all  the  con(.|uesl  and  glory  of  his
undertaking.  So  strenuously  they  en-
deavoured themselves,  so  long  they  fought,
so  cruelly  they  handled  eaeti  other,  that
at  last  perforce  they  drew  asunder,  to  take
breath,  which  now  utterly  failed  them.

Albnyzar  seeing  his  armour  so  broken,  and
the  Held  bedewed  with  his  blood,  and  look-
ing at  her  who  had  brouglit  him  into  such
evtrcmity,  he  saw  her  sad  and  something
di^uiayed,  when-at  he  said  to  her,  What  do
the  noble  vieiorios  whirh  1  have  attained
aviiil  nie  no.v  if  1  must  lose  all  the  glory  I
'2  i:  'Z


S\6

llave  gotten Í  Oh  iiiy  l;u]y  Targiaiia,  it'  I
have  had  the  power  to  vanc|uish  the  whole
world  ill  your  absence,  why  suiVer  you  one
knight  to  prevail  against  me  in  your  pre-
sence: Either  you  forget  me,  or  you  remem-
ber another  more  than  you  do  me  ;  for  as
i'ov  all  other  reasons,  none  can  have  better
to  carry  on  victory  to  the  end.  W  hat
princess  is  there  in  all  the  world,  more  brave
in  bounty,  beyond  you  in  beauty,  or  who
better  deserveth  the  title  above  all  titles  than
j'ou  ?  truly,  I  ma}'  lose  the  victory  througli
defect  of  my  weakness,  but  not  by  any  fault
that  is  in  your  excellency,  nor  because  any
one  deserves  it  more  than  you.

The  Black  Knight,  on  the  other  side,  did
not  pass  the  time  in  vain,  but  seeing  his
dangerous  estate,  silently  to  Miraguarda  he
entered  into  these  speeches  :  Since  in  things
which  relate  to  myself  I  have  aiway  re-
membered you,  in  this  which  is  so  much
your  own  you  ought  not  to  forget  me.  Ai-
bayzar,  if  hitherto  he  hath  conquered  so
many,  had  reason  to  conquer  them  all,  for
Targiana  is    fairer  than   all    who    are    here


<5  1  ri
»JJ  /

pourtraycfl  upon  tliclr  shields  ;  but  against
you  what  reason  can  there  be  that  he  who
combats  for  you  should  not  concjuer  the
whole  world  ?  It"  my  love  avail  not  either
to  remember  me,  or  to  perceive  the  ill  you
do  me.  yet,  profit  by  it  now  to  win  the  victory
from  one  who  deserves  not  to  win  it  from
you,  and  then  if  you  wish  il,  kill  me;  so  shall
we  both  be  contented.

After  these  words  which  eacli  had  said  with-
in himself,  they  fell  to  the  combat  afresh,
and  as  their  armour  now  gave  them  no  pro-
tection, they  maltreated  each  other  so  cruel-
ly lliaL  the  emperor  supposed  this  fight  would
l)e  the  last  of  l)olh.  Primaleon,  as  one  whose
blood  revealed  something  to  him,  was  as  sor-
rowful to  see  the  v.ounds  of  the  Black
Knight,  as  though  he  had  felt  them  uj)oa
bis  own  bod}',  though  none  could  read  it
in  his  countenance  :  for  great  hearts  should
feel  for  others  and  yet  let  none  perceive  it.
The  empress  and  Gridonia  departed  from
the  window,  that  they  might  not  see  the
end  of  the  battle.  .Sometimes  they  ceased
i)triking,  and  grappled,  each  putting  forth
2  E  3


318

all  his  strength  to  overthrow  the  othcr^  all
to  their  greater  hurt  ;  for  this  made  the
blood  burst  from  their  wounds  in  such
profusion,  that  it  seemed  as  if  none  could
be  left  in  their  bodies.  At  other  times  they
pummelled  each  other  with  the  sword-hilts,
with  which  they  knocked  the  helmets  about  ;
but  as  both  were  now  exceedinpj  weak,  they
fought  less  furiously  than  in  the  beginninix.
Albayzar,  who  had  long  time  borne  up  in  the
sight  of  Targiana,  wearied  with  his  arms, faint
of  spirit,  and  failing  of  strength,  fell  irt  length
senseless  to  the  ground;  whereat  the  Jilack
Knight  gave  thanks  to  his  lady,  as  one  who
was  well  nigh  about  to  do  tlie  same.  And
taking  oft' Albayzar's  helmet,  he  went  to  him
to  cut  off  his  head,  but  the  emperor  called
to  him  to  forbear;  yet  he  making  as  though
he  heard  not,  Targiana  threw  herself  from
her  palfrey  upon  Albayzar,  saying,  I  beseech
you,  sir,  kill  me  first,  and  then  do  with  iiim
v.hat  you  please  ;  at  least  let  me  not  see  his
death,  since  I  am  the  cause  of  it.  Then  the
Black  Knight  left  him,  praising  this  huma-
nity of  Targiana  towards  her  servant,  and
believing  that   if  his   lady  had  seen  him  ia


319

the  like  stead,  slie  would  have  set  too  little
by  his  life  to  have  asked  it  of  any  one.
Then  the  judges  came  into  the  field,  to
awaitl  liiin  tlie  victory,  and  they  would  have
led  him  out  ;  but  he  would  not  leave  the  lists
•without  Targiana,  for  he  feared^  least  they
siiould  treat  her  with  less  respect  than  was
her  due,  not  knowing  who  she  was.  The
shield  of  Miraguarda  was  then  placed  in  its
rightful  [)lace,  v»hieh  was  where  that  of  Tar-
giana  was  wont  to  be;  and  Targiana's  taken
down  and  placed  where  the  other  with  less
reason  had  been  hung.

P>y  this  time  the  emperor  and  all  his  court
were  down  in  the  square  to  receive  the  Black
Js.niglit,  and  see  who  he  was,  and  to  order
Albayzar  to  be  taken  care  of.  He,  taking
olf  his  helmet  to  kiss  the  emperor's  hand,
said,  First,  sir,  give  orders  that  this  fair  lady
be  welcomed  ;  for  us  anything  will  suffice,
\\'lun  the  emperor  knew  that  the  Black
Knight  was  his  grandson  Florcndos,  his  heart
was  surprised  with  an  unspeakable  joy,  which
he  could  ill  converti.   Priiualeon,  who  was  of


320

robustcT  hearty  better  commanded  his.  Kot
to  waste  words  in  describing  words  and  wcl-
comings,  Albayzar  \vas  carried  unto  the
emperor's  apartments,  andTargiana,  it  being
luiown  who  she  was,  given,  at  Pohnarda's
desire,  to  be  her  guest,  where  she  wa=;  as  ho-»
iiourably  served  as  had  she  been  in  the  court
of  the  Great  Turk  her  lather.

So  many  lords  and  knights  croudcd  to  see
TJorendos,  that  they  neither  let  him  have  his
Avounds  drest,  nor  go  up  the  steps  of  the  palace.
The  empress  and  Ciidonia,  when  they  had
gotten  him  apart,  shedding  many  tears,  were
themselves  present  when  his  wounds  were
examined,  not  feeling  less  pain  when  they
"were  sewn  up  than  if  they  had  been  their
own.  Presently  he  was  laid  in  bed,  as  was
needful.  The  emperor  had  Albayzar  attend-
ed with  all  diligence,  and  being  certified  by
the  master  that  the  wounds  w  ere  not  mortal,
■was  more  contented  with  the  victory  than
before.  The  shields  remained  in  the  field,
for  the  emperor  would  have  it  so,  till  Flo-
rendos  should  be  recovered  ;  that  of  Mira-


321

giiiuda  ill  the  place  of  victory,  wlilch  was
above  tlie  rest:  and  this  was  as  it  should
be,  for  nothing  is  more  unreasonable  in
this  world  than  to  deprive  any  one  of
his  due.


CHAPTER  87.


Some  days  past  before  riorendos  and  Albay-
zar  were  whole  of  their  wounds.  The  em-
peror wiih  the  glory  of  this  victory  remain-»
ed  so  joyful  andccnteiitcd,  that  he  had  never
at  any  time  been  more  so.  The  empress
and  Gridonia  passed  their  time  beside  the
bed  ot  FJorendos,  employing  themselves  for.
the  most  part  in  praising  the  beauty  of  Mi-
rairuarda,  which  talk  wrought  as  much  for
his  health  as  the  medicines  that  were  ap-
plied to  his  wounds.  Thç  emperor  and  Pri-
maleon  accompaniedAlbayzar,u^ing  comfort-
able speeches,  whereby  he  might  Ibrget  the
grief  he  sustained  because  he  was  vanquished:
but  Albayzar,  though  he  seemed  to  thank
them  lor  their  good  will,  bore  a  malicious


323

one  within  himself  to  work  them  all  the
evil  h«  possibly  could,  which  afterward  lie
did.

The  infanta  Polinarda  also  did  all  she  could
to  entertain  Targiana,  and  though  Targiana
fell  and  Wiii  thankful  for  this  courtesy,  yet
was    she    so    discontented    at   the    vantage
which  Polinarda   liad   over  her   in    heauty,
ihat   this    disgust    would    not  allow  her  to
enjoy  the  delights  of  that  court.     All  her
desire  was    to  sec  Albayzar  recovered,  that
she  might  depart.     At    this  time  Constan-
tinople was  stored  with  the  most  renowned
knights,  and  ladies  of  incomparable  beauty,
the    llower    of  the    whole    world  ;    so    tliat
there    wanted    no    other  thing    there     tbau
the  two  brethren  ;  and  though  the  emperor
was  in  those  days  so  jc^yful  and  full  of  con-
tentment, yet  nevertheless  he   had  not  lost
the  desire  of  seeing  his  grandsons  Pulmeriii
and  Florian,   whose  works  he  knew   would
make  those  of  other  men  be  forgotten.

While  the  court  was  in  this  state,  the  (.m-
perjr  having   dined  one    d»y  with  th    citi-


324

j)ress  and  lier  dawghtei-in-hiw  ;  and  Poli-
iiarda  and  the  princess  Targiana,  in  the  gar-
den of  Florida  (which  always  retained  thai
name*)  were  silting  accompanied  with  many
knights  and  dames,  all  gaily  apparelled,
under  the  shade  of  some  laurels  which  grew
round  a  fair  fountain,  when  there  came  into
the  garden  a  damsel  of  such  huge  stature
that  slie  seemed  to  be  a  giantess  :  and
though  the  manner  of  her  face  was  some-
thing ugly,  yet  gave  she  so  great  a  grace
to  what  she  wore,  that  in  the  opinion  of  all
she  was  judged  handsome.  She  wore  over
a  tunic  of  white  satin  and  silver,  which
reached  the  ground,  a  blue  robe  with  bar-^
of  beaten  gold  fastened  on  with  precious
stones  ;  and  on  the  long  lappets  of  her  sleeves,
a  gold  embroidery  four  Hngers  deep,  which
represented  the  chace  of  wild  boars,  and
also  of  birds,  so  cunningly  wrought  that  the
eye  could  never  be  wearied,  beliolding  a
thins:    of  such   inestimable  value.     On  her


*  The  garden  of  Flerida  is  the  scene  of  love  in  Primaleon,
where  Don  Duardos,  disguised  as  a  gardener,  wins  the  afTcc-
tions  of  the  princess.


ses

head  iilie  wore  over  a  tire  iii  which  her
hair  was  gatliercd,  a  hat  of  blue  plush,  set
un  oau  side  so  çraccfullv,  that  it  could
not  have  been  painted  more  so.  Two
squires  came  with  lier,  and  when  they  came
betoie  the  emperor,  one  of  them  took  from
under  his  cloak  a  square  casket  of  ivoïv,
graven  with  iioman  work;  where  the  pieces
of  ivory  were  joined  they  were  fastened  \\itli
rivets  of  gold,  and  adorned  with  jewels  of
Mich  price,  that  they  made  it  not  less  pre-
cious than  it  was  beautiful.

'{'he  damsel  took  it  in  her  hand,  and  open-
ing it  with  a  golden  key  which  hung  from
her  neck  by  a  black  string,  she  took  out
a  cup  of  the  same  size  a=  the  casket,  made
octagonal  after  a  new  and  fair  invention  ;
the  material  of  which  it  was  made  none
could  say  what  it  was.  It  was  garnished
with  rare  jeu  dry,  but  this  too  so  ob-
scured that  none  could  tell  the  name  of
any  of  the  stones.  The  cup  was  so  artifi-
cially composed,  that  beholding  the  outside
it  might  be  easily  discerned  what  was  with-
in, which  was  nothing  but  a  little  water,  so
Vol.  II.  •2  I-


solul  and  hard  that  It  was  impossible  to
move  it,  however  much  tlie  cup  was  shaken.
Af'ier  she  had  taken  it  in  her  hand,  ;h('  de-
hvercd  the  coifer  again  to  the  squire,  and
looking  round,  bciran  to  óay  ia  a  loud
Yoice  :

Now,  high  and  mighty  emperor,  shah  I  sec
what  your  knights  will  do  in  the  adventure
of  this  en  p.     Weary  of  travelling  through
the    courts   of  other   princes,  where    many
have    tried   and   none  ended   it,  1  come  to
yours,  which     is    the    most  honoured    and
esteemed  upon    the    whole  earth,  believing
that  here  remedy  will  alway    be  lound  when
it  fails  elsewhere.     But  lirst,  before  the  trial
he  attempted,  I  will  discourse  the  mystery
©f  this  rare  adventure,  that  each  one  may
te  better  affectioned  to  show  his  own  worth,
and  the  truth  of  his  love.     There  was  not
long  since  ruling  in  Thrace,  a  king  named
Sarmadante,   so  excellent  well  seen  in  the
art   of  magic,  that   he  surpassed   all  other
living  in  his  time.     This  king  had  a  daugh-
ter,   of    no    less    beauty   than   court!}-   be-
haviour, who   was  greatly   beloved  of  two


kniiílits,  the  one  called  Brandimar,  ilic  other
Arti  bel,  both  vassals  of  her  father,  and  great
friends  ;  but  they  kept  close  their  secret
love  from  each  other,  till  rortune,  the  ene-
my to  their  good  hap,  discovered  it,  to  the
evil  of  both.  So  it  chanced,  that  as  for
many  years  they  served  this  princess  Bran-
disia,  she  was  so  well  pleased  with  Artibel,
either  for  his  desert,  or  lier  liking,  that  she
wholly  yielded  herself  to  his  love  ;  they  be-
ing so  entirely  aflectioned  to  each  other  that
it  may  be  doubted  whether  before  or  since
two  persons  ever  so  entirely  loved.  Now
though  the  princess  was  stricth'  watched
and  guarded,  love,  who  in  these  cases  al-
ways finds  way  to  his  desire,  taught  Artibel
liow  to  come  to  her  by  a  certain  tower,  of
which  there  was  no  suspicion  ;  and  in  the
course  of  their  intercourse,  she  conceived  of
him  a  daughter,  who  in  beauty  and  all  other
natural  graces  is  nothing  inferior  to  her
mother.  Brandimar,  as  in  these  days  love
would  not  let  him  rest,  past  all  his  time  in
the  palace,  waiting  wherever  he  might  get
a  sight  of  Brandisia;  and  at  night  loitered
idjout  her   apartments,  satisfying   his  heart

<>   I.-  c)


with  seeing  ilic  walls  wiiicli  incloscrl  lior.
One  night  it  chanced  that  wlicn  Artibel  was
descending  by  a  rope  from  the  tower.  Bran-
(limar  saw  him  ;  and  though  Vie  knew  him,
his  passion  was  so  great  that,  forgetting  the
amity  betwixt  them,  he  set  upon  him,  when,
with  their  cloaks  wrapped  about  their  arms,
and  their  rapiers  drawn,  after  a  few  words  they
fell  to  strokes,  which  by  fortune  the  king
heard,  for  it  was  before  the  chamber  where
he  slept;  and  coming  thither  with  his  guard,
he  found  Brandimar  almost  dead.  Artibel
•was  taken,  and  Brandimar  having  declared
all  to  the  king,  shortly  after  yielded  his  life.
The  king,  knowing  by  his  art  that  his  daugh-
ter was  conceived  with  child,  kept  Artibel  in
prison  till  time  of  her  deliverance,  after
■which  he  put  him  to  death,  and  taking  out
his  heart,  he  placed  it  in  this  cup  and  sent  it
to  her,  declaring  to  her  the  truth  of  his
death.  The  princess  perceiving  the  cruel
revenge  of  her  father,  and  desirous  to  accom-
pany her  dear  friend  in  death,  took  the  cup.
and  making  lamentation  over  the  heart  of
Artibel,  she  continued  mourning  <:o  long,  till
she  had  filled  it  with  her  tears.     Afterward.


529

resolving  to  manifest  by  her  deeds  tlie  faith-
ful love,  she  bare  him,  she  took  the  heart
out,  and  sent  the  cup  v.ith  the  tears  in  it  to
her  father,  uttering  to  the  messenger  these
speeches:  Tell  the  king  that  these  are  the
last  spoils  of  m\'  life,  and  let  it  requite  him.
for  the  cruelty  he  hath  shown  toward  me.
For  nie  there  remains  the  heart  of  Artibel,
whom  since  I  loved  in  life,  I  will  not  forsake
in  deatii.  So  sending  him  the  cup,  she
tricked  uj)  hei'self  in  her  bravest  apparel,  as
though  she  were  attiring  herself  royally
lor  some  feast,  and  putting  the  heart  of
Artibel  between  her  breasts,  with  these
words,  O  Artibel,  receive  thine  own  Bran-
disia,  siie  cast  herself  headlong  from  the
tower  by  which  he  used  to  enter.  The  king
seeing  his  daughter  dead,  solemnized  her
funeral,  and  taking  the  child,  whom  lie
named  Lionarda,  he  put  her  in  the  selfsame
tower,  accompanied  with  ladies  and  gentle->
women,  where  she  was  nourished  lor  the
space  of  four  years.  At  the  end  whereof
he  made  an  enchantment  half  a  mile  from
the  city,  in  a  valley,  wherein  he  likewise
enchanted  the  young  princess,  which  cn-
«e  F  3


330

chantaient  bo  had  used  in  such  order,  that
none  might  see  her,  nor  yet  come  near  unto
her  ;  for  afar  off  might  be  discerned  towers
and  goodly  edifice?,  but  when  any  endea-
voured to  come  near  them  they  vanished
away,  and  nothing  could  be  seen.  When
he  had  so  done,  he  took  the  cup  wherein
his  daughter  had  wept,  which  is  this,  and
making  it  by  his  art  lose  its  natural  colour,
congealed  the  tears  in  it,  even  after  the
manner  which  you  now  behold.  And  at
the  hour  of  his  death,  seeing  his  kingdom
remain  destitute  of  an  heir  to  succeed  him,
he  commanded  this  cup  should  be  carried
into  all  princes'  courts  in  the  world,  to  pass
the  hands  of  many  noble  knights,  until  the
tears  came  to  their  first  condition.  So
should  the  knight  be  found,  that  surpasseth
all  other  in  worthiness  and  constancy  of
love,  and  he  shall  end  the  enehantiuent  of
the  princess  Lionarda,  and  joining  mar-
riage with  her,  shall  govern  the  sceptre
and  diadem  of  Thrace.  But  if  so  be,  the
knight,  who  hath  the  power  to  accomplish
this  adventure,  shall  have  vowed  his  faith
to  some  other,  then  shall  Lionarda  receive


331

from  his  hand   the  husband  whom  he  may
chusc  tor  her.

And  one  thing  more  you  shall  understand,
that  if  any  knight  equal  in  faith  and  loyalty
him  that  is  ro  disenchant  the  cup,  he  when
he  takes  it  in  his  hand  shall  make  the  cup
clear,  and  the  tears  as  they  were  at  first  ;  but
when  he  leaves  it  and  another  takes  it  who  is
less  enamoured,  it  shall  be  changed  again
and  resume  its  present  state.  But  the  en-
chantment can  only  be  ended  by  him  who
hath  both  qualities  ;  and  if  any  one  who  is
excellent  as  a  knii;ht  but  fails  as  an  inna-
morato  should  take  the  cup,  the  tears  shall
remain  as  dark  as  you  see  them  at  this  pre-
sent. Likewise,  after  the  enchantment  shall
be  fully  finished,  any  lady  or  knight,  looking
in  the  tears,  shall  see  in  them  the  perfect
form  of  their  dearest  friend,  sorrowful  or
joyful,  according  to  their  love.  And  if,
after  the  cup  is  disenchanted,  any  would  know
those  thatare  least  in  favour  with  their  ladies,
upon  the  taking  of  this  cup,  they  shall  feel  a
heat  so  strong,  that  they  shall  hardly  be  able
to  endure  it;  and  he  that  is  most  disfavoured


332

sliall  cause  greater  wonders  in  the  cup.  Now,
sire,  give  command  that  your  knights  may
try  this  adventure,  and  make  yourself  the
first  attempt,  that  it  may  be  seen  \Yhether
the  love  you  yet  bear  lo  the  empress  is  as
Hrm  as  it  was  in  times  past;  and  the  hidics  oi
your  court  jnay  see  Avliac  truth  there  is  in
their  servants.

A  pretty  proof  you  would  put  me  to  (quoth
the  eiiiperor.)  Nevertheless,  I  will  hazard  it,
to  please  them  that  cannot  finish  it,  as  will  be
my  case.  For  the  like  matter  have  1  cnter-
prised  with  the  glass  of  kingTarnaes,  which
Don  Duardos  *  disenchanted,  But  I  know
the  empress  will  not  impute  the  fault  to  me,
but  to  my  time  of  life  :  for  I  am  not  of  an
age  to  atchieve  these  adventures.  Then
arose  a  great  stir  among  the  knights  and
ladies  ;  and  this  was  not  to  be  wondered  at,
for  novelties  a^e  in  their  nature  pleasant.


•  Primaleon,.  B.  2.  C.  09.


33i


CHAPTER    88.


Then  at  ilic  request,  of  those  who  were  pre-
sent, the  emperor  was  pleased  that  the  trial
of  the  cup  should  iucontincntly  begin,  he
himself  being  the  first.  Wherefore  reeciving
it  at  the  hands  of  tiie  damsel,  he  turned  him
toward  the  empress,  and  said.  Certes,  lady,
if  it  be  true,  that  faithful  love  may  convert
these  tears,  others  may  be  excused  from  the
proof,  for  I  shall  accomplish  it.  So  holding
the  cup  a  while,  and  perceiving  no  change,
he  was  somewhat  ofi'ended  ;  the  damsel  took
it  IVom  him,  saying.  It  will  appear,  sir,  that
all  things  pass  away;  if  you  had  taken  this
cup  whí^n  time  was,  it  would  have  remained
thus  or  it  would  not.  Primaleon  then  came
and   took   the   cup,  but  his  forluut^  was    nc»


33-i

jnorc  favoured  than  the  emperor  hi^  tatlicr,
which  urged  him  to  more  displeasure,  tor  he
perceived  thai  Gridonia  was  troubled  at  sec-
iti£>-  him  cfTect  so  little.  Tlien  prince  Ver-
iiao  of  Germany,  the  husband  of  Basilia,
arose,  and  in  hi>  hand  the  cup  received  a  lit-
tle brightness:  for  in  these  days  his  love  de-
served not  to  produce  more.  Then  all  believed
that  there  was  of  a  truth  that  mystery  in  the
cup  which  the  damsel  had  reported,  for  they
had  doubted  it  till  now,  seeing  no  sign  pro-
duced by  those  princes  who  had  been  so  ena-
moured in  their  time,  and  Primaleon  was
lie  who  inaintained  most  earnestly  that  all
was  mere  mockery.  After  Vemao,  came
king  Polendos,  and  in  his  hand  the  cup
became  as  dark  as  ever  it  was  ;  whereat
the  ladies  began  to  laugh,  and  the  dam-
sel said  to  him.  Sir  Polendos,  if  you
have  no  other  claims  upon  your  lady  than
for  your  love,  I  judge  she  hath  cause  to  be
but  little  beholden  to  vou.  Ladv,  answered
Polendos,  it  is  so  long  time  since  amorous
thoughts  have  left  me,  that  it  is  no  marvel  if
it  should  now  be  made  manifest.  Then  arose
Graciano,  thinking  to  end  the  adventure,  by


S33

îhe  iuiilit'ul  love  he  bare  to  Clarisia,  and  in
Ilia  Ijaiid  tlie  cup  received  more  brightnci^s
than  it  did  when  prince  Vernao  had  it,
v.hcrcat  hiá  heart  was  iilkd  with  joy;  and
giving  the  cup  to  liis  brother  Goarim,  it  be-
came as  black  as  ever  it  was.  The  ladies
greatly  delighted  to  sec  the  variable  quality
contained  in  the  cup,  for  so  they  had  au
assured  mean  to  prove  their  knights  in  loy-
alty of  love.  Beroldo  prince  ot"  Spain,  the
only  beloved  of  tlu;  fair  Onistalda^  daughter
of  duke  Drapos  of  ÎSormandy,  advanced
himself  to  take  the  cup^  using  this  silent
meditation,  I^ady,  1  have  ever  desired  your
help  in  all  mine  alfairSj  but  at  this  present
I  crave  no  succour  at  your  hands,  for  my
c(nisiancy  proaiiscth  me  a  large  title  in  tliis
honourable  adventure.  Then  taking  the
cup,  it  seemed  brighter  than  ever  it  had  been,
and  the  frozen  tears  began  somewhat  to  melt,
which  moved  Onistalda  to  so  great  pleasure
that  she  could  not  conceal  it.  After  him
came  l^latir,  who  in  those  days  served  Sidela,
daughter  to  king  Tarnacs;  but  albeit  lie
kncd  her  truly  and  with  great  love,  the  cup
became  less  clear  in  his   hand  than  it  wa*


336

wlion  he  received  it  t'iDui  Bcioldo.  Belisaite,
\vh()  served  JJionisia,  would  then  try  liis  for-
tune, but  he  made  it  darker  than  PJatir.
Dramiante,  who  served  Floriana,  came  next,
and  as  he  found  the  cup,  even  sodidho  leave
it,  making  no  alteration.  Prince  Francian,
who  served  Bernarda,  took  his  turn  next,
but  he  sped  so  ill  that  he  wished  himself  out
of  the  place;  for  in  his  hand  tlie  cup  lost  all
the  brightness  that  the  otlicr  knights  liad
brought  it  into,  whereat  he  was  greatly
aggrieved,  and  the  emperor  his  grandfather
laughing  agood  at  him,  said.  Son  Francian,
you  may  commend  your  fortune  to  be  in  such
liberty'  ;  for  the  ladies  will  have  no  hold  upon
you,  nor  you  any  hope  irom  them.  After
him  came  Frisol,  Onistaldo,  Estrelante,  Te-
nebror,  Luymanes  of  Burgundy,  Pompides,
Blandidon,  Germam  of  Orleans,  Dridem,
Polinardo,  Tremoran,  Roramonte,  and  Al-
banis  of  Frisa,  who  was  there  that  day  ;  and
though  some  of  these  produced  in  the  cup
some  token  of  their  love,  with  most  of  the
others  it  lost  what  brightness  they  had  given
it.  I'hey  who  gained  most  honour  among  them
were  Fohnardo,  Roramonte,  and  Germam


337


of  Orleans  ;   yet   none    of  them   mi^lit  be
compared  to  prinee  iicroldo.     'llie  cUunsei
was    ill    dc.-pair,    iliinking     ilie    ULlvciiliire
>vould  not  be  ended,  as  there  were  no  more
to  essay  it,  wheutlie  emperor  bethoiiglithim
of  I'ioraman  ;    and  seeinjji,-  that  he  was  iving
under  a  tree  at  some  chsianee,  as  one  who
remembered  tijat  she  who  might  have   en-
gai^ed  him  in  sueh  hopes  and  leurs  was  gone,
sent  a  page   to  eall  hin),    reipiesting  him  to
try  himself  like  the  rest.     I'ioraman  replied.
What  hope  of  good  sueeess,  sir,  ean  he  have,
who  meets  with  ill  in  every  thing  '1  I  w ill  do
what  your  highness  commands,  and  my  fur-
tune  may  do  what  it  v.  ill  ;  it  cannot  make  me
more  sorrowful  than  1  have  long  been.  Then
taking  the  cop,  he  said.  Lady,  if  the  remem-
brance of  me  can  reach  you  w  here  you  now
are,  regard  the  danger  wherein  you  see  me,
and  deliver  rne.     A\' ith  these  words,  the  cup
received  sueh  a  marvellous  briglitiicss,  and
the    congealed   tears    melted    so    suddenly,
that  the  whole  assembly  thought  the  adven-
ture to  be  fully  finished,  except  the  damsel,
who  knew  what  yet  was  wanting  to  its  ac-
complishment.    The  emperor  went  to  him..


VOL.  II.


'i  G


saytng,  í  kneu-  uelJ,  sir  Floraman,  that  t\a.
atlvcntm-o  wa.  reserved  for  yon,  and  in  truth,
noiiiing  more  was  necessary  to  make  me  be-
lieve this,  than  tlje  faiiU  Í  have  in  you.  Í
aui  glad  it  is  so  fallen  out,  beeause  now,  all
other  will  hold  you  in  the  estimation  thai
myself  of  long  time  reposed  in  vou.  The
ladies,  who  ever  bare  good  atlcctíon  to  FJo
i-aman,  were  now  a  good  deal  wore  urged
towards  him  ;  wliich  th<i  damsel  pt^rceivUig,
and  that  every  one  supposed  the  adventure
to  be  ended,  said  aloii.l,  Sir,  be  seated,  and
be  ye  still,  for  though  this  knight,  as  ye  hare
seen,  hath  done  uîuch,  much  remains  to  be
done.  I  knew,  said  Floraman,  that  fortuac
is  wont  to  cause  me  to  begin  every  entea-pme
with  joy,  that  at  the  conclusiuu  she  iiiaj
destroy  me.  The  emperor  am]  empress ugaia
took  their  seats,  and  as  it  was  yet  eîirly
waited  to  see  if  any  other  would  come,  "it
was  not  long  before  Don  Rosuel  appeared,
and  though  he  was  greatly  enamoured  of  the
fair  Dramaciana,  yet  in  his  hands  the  cwp
lost  much  of  the  lively  brightness  wjth  which
Floraman  had  left  it.  Odier  knights  came
after  him,  wljose  names  are  no;  heie  leiaied.


3^59

because  what  they  did  tta>  even  as  nothJrf^-,
At  last,  ^vhcrl  the  whole  company  were  about
to  retire^,  n  knight  of  great  stature,  after  lhe
manner  of  a  giant,  entered  tlie  garden  gate.
He  was  armed  in  green  arms  bordered  with
white,  so  gallant  and  fearful  to  behold,  that
Iiis  bare  appearance  occasioned  dismay.  All
looked  on  him,  but  only  Primalecn  knew
that  it  was  the  giant  Dramuziando  ;  whcre-
iorc  he  desired  the  emperor  to  take  his  scat
again,  and  went  to  meet  him  something  be^
yond  the  estrado,  then  embracing  him  and
taking  him  by  the  hand.  When  he  had  taken-
off  his  helmet,  Primalecn  brought  him  be-
fore the  emperor,  where  humbly  upon  hi^
knee,  he  said,  Sire,  you  see  here  the  noblest
nud  best  knight  in  the  world  :  do  him  great
honour,  for  all  honour  would  not  be  ill  bo-
stowed  upon  him.  'ilie  emperor  asked  wha
it  was,  and  being  told, embraced  him,  sayings
Certes,  Dramuziando,  albeit  your  dealing
«hd  long  tinjc  detain  my  life  in  danger,  yet
the  qualities  of  your  person  make  me  forget
all.  1  am  your  iVi'.ndj  and  I  beseech  you
hold  rue  in  the  account  of  such,  for  none
can  be  more  so.     l>ramuziando  would   have


340

kissed  his  hands  lor  so  great  favour;  hut
he  would  not  give  tlicm,  but  made  him  rise.
Primaleon  presented  him  to  the  empress  and
(jridonia^  who,  albeit  they  made  a  shew  of
friendly  welcome,  yet  bore  they  a  secret
haired  towards  him,  because  of  the  sorrow
he  had  caused  them,  tor  it  is  the  nature  of
women  not  to  forget  injuries,  and  not  to  re-
member services.  After  Dramuziando  had
done  his  devoir  here  he  approached  Poli-
jiarda,  and  forthwith  became  in  such  state
that  he  could  not  determine  whether  she  or
IMiraguarda  w;cre  the  more  worthy  to  be
íícrved  ;  and  this  doubt  prevented  him  from
making  greater  proof  of  the  cup  than  all  be-
fore him.  The  emperor  now  reported  to  him
how  they  were  gathered  together,  to  see  who
rould  finish  this  adventure,  telling  him  all
that  had  been  done,  and  requesting  him  also
to  put  his  loyalty  to  the  proof,  and  shew  in
\vhat  obligation  love  stood  to  him.  I  stand
in  much  to  love,  said  Dramuziando,  for  the
day  in  which  he  presented  to  mc  her  who
destroys  me,  he  gave  me  full  guerdon  for  all
my  troubles,  the  cause  being  such  as  to  make
amends   for  all  sorrow.      X   shall  do  what


S41

f>îea3c  th  your  grace  to  comma,nd  in?:  i''  Ï
prevail  it  will  be  because  love  deals  truly
^ith  me  ;  if  not,  it  will  not  be  the  first  lie  in
wliich  I  have  found  him.  So  receiving  the
cup  from  the  dauisel,  which  was  now  in  the
same  state  as  when  she  fust  took  it  out  of
the  casket,  it  became  almcst  as  clear  as  it
did  in  the  hand  of  Ploraman,  though  he  stiH
remained  with  the  glory  of  the  tïial  as  yet.
The  emperor  seeing  the  proof  of  love  in
Dramnzinndo,  held  him  in  greater  account
than  bel'orc,  and  rejoiced  to  ?ee  how  lovingly
those  princes  who  had  been  his  prisoners
w  elcomcd  him.  The  day  bcinn  now  far  spci,t,
they  all  returned  to  the  paloecj  the  emperor
having  first  taken  a  promise  fr<jm  the  damsel
not  to  depart  without  his  have,  because  he
would  have  Albayzar  and  Tlorcndos  make
their  trial  likewise  :  for  he  verily  thought  that
riorendos  was  he  who  should  end  it.  Then
ordered  he  Dramuziando  to  be  lodged  in
the  palace,  where  lie  was  visited  by  all
those  princes  and  knights  who  had  formerly
been  his  captives,  and  were  now  greatlv  his
IViends^  truly  feeling  the  grc:it  houoitr
C  G  3


they  had  received  at  his  liands,  and  not
chusing  to  be  ungrateful  for  it,  remem-
bering how  sorely  ingratitude  troubles  a
generous  breast.


H^


CHAPTER  89.


Dramu/iando,  as  the  liistory  ropnrtcth^  ha-
ving left  Pahnerin  and  Dorian  in  the  mo-
nastery having  their  wounds  eured,  to  follow
the  pnneess  Targianaj  was  advertised^  that
the  knight  who  Jiad  stolen  her  had  been
conquered  ])y  one,  \\\\o  conducted  her  with
him  to  Constantinople;  and  bending  his
course  thitlier^  he  met  a  dam»el  who  told
liim  that  this  knight  was  Florcndos,  who
hkcwise  had  conquered  Alhay/.ar,  and  won
the  shield  of  Miraguarda;  whereat  he  was
greatly  displeased,  because  he  would  faia
have  iiad  none  other  than  himself  carry
back  that  shield  to  the  castle  of  Ahnourol,
holding  his  own  honour  impeached  in  that.
another  had  taken  vengeance  upon  him  who
had  stolen  the  shield  and  done  him  so  iireat


344

%vron!í.  llowbclt,  seciuír  there  was  no  re-
Diecly  hc  dissembled  his  grief"  the  best  he
could,  and  staid  not  till  he  came  to  Con-
staiitinoplcj  as  1  have  declared  already.

P.ilmcrin  and  Tlorianhis  brother, staid  twen-
ty days  iu  the  monastery  ;  and  being  then
Avcll  healed;,  and  appointed  with  new  armour,
ihcy  departed  thence,  thanking  the  religi-
ous lor  the  good  diligence  they  had  used  to
them  in  their  weakness.  In  lew  da3's  they
came  in  sight  of  Constantinople,  from  a  hill
wherefrorn  tlie  whole  of  that  famous  city
could  be  seen.  Who  can  tell  the  perturba-
tion which  Palmerin  then  felt  in  his  heart  !
and  because  it  was  still  early,  they  took  the
bridles  off  their  horses  and  let  them  feed.
Florian,  who  had  no  amorous  cares  to  trou-
ble him,  laid  hin\  down  under  a  tree,  and
there  rested  himself.  Palmerin  going  aj.art,
ascended  the  summit  of  the  hill,  and  then
Avith  many  a  long  look  towards  city,  behold-
ing its  populous  buildings  and  lofty  towers,
recalled  to  mind  Ids  fosterage  in  the  cm-
])eror's  house,  the  bounties  conferred  upon
tpim  there,  when  hc  was  unknown,  the  grief


'J4-S)

in  which  he  had  forsaken  it,  under  the  anger
of  his  lady  Polinarda,  and  the  jn'oliibition
which  she  had  laid  upon  him.  Many  time?
was  lie  moved  to  turn  back,  and  certes  this
he  would  have  done  had  not  Selviam  used
persuasions  to  the  contrary,  so  forcibly
tliat  he  could  lliid  no  reply  to  them.

By  this  time  I'lorian  roused  liimself;  they
bridled  their  horses  and  took  their  way,  be-
ing armed  in  new  arms,  and  with  their  hel-
mets laced  that  they  might  not  be  known:
in   this  uiunnCr  they  entered  the  city  and

rode    towards    the    court.     And    thouofh   in

o

those  days,  all  the  most  renowned  knights
in  the  world,  as  ye  have  heard,  were  there
assend)led,  they  made  their  entry  so  gallant-
ly and  sceml}'  to  behold,  being  so  well  made
and  in  such  rich  armour,  that  the  people
flocked  t(i  see  them  as  something  new  ;  and
this  the  more  when  they  ])crceived  the  dra-
gon upon  ralmrrin'>  shield,  knowing  that
this  was  t'ne  knight  of  whom  the  fame  went.
'J  hey  reached  the  palare  at  suili  time  as
the  emjieror  was  risfu  iVom  dinner,  and  thr
empress  ^^itll  lu  r  ladies  cauic  into  thr  great


346

i^all,  lo  sec  a  farther  trial  of  ilio  cup  hy
Florcndos  and  Albayzar,  who,  though  they
were  not  perfectly  healed,  came  forth  of
tlieir  chambers  upon  lliiá  occasluii.

Pahnerui  and  Floriaii  went  up  Into  the  great
hall,  armed  as  tliev  were  and  with  their  bea-
vers  closed,  leaving  Selviam  at  the  court  gate,
Jeast  they  should  be  known  ;  and  when  they
saw  so  many  knights  assembled,  they  mar-
velled ;  nor  though  they  knew  them  all,
were  they  themselves  known  of  any.  And
because  when  they  approached  the  estrado
Albayzav  was  about  to  take  the  cup  in  liis
hand,  they  stopt,  without  doing  reverence
ÍO  the  emperor,  that  they  might  not  inter-
rupt the  adventure.  Albayzar,  who  saw  that
they  were  regarding  him,  leaning  upon  a
stalf,  sallow  and  feeble,  fixed  iiis  eyes  upon
liis  lady  Targiana,  and  took  the  cup  confi-
dently, when  it  became  as  clear  as  when
prince  Floraman  held  il  ;  whereat  Targiana
received  great  pleasure,  thinking  that  no
guerdon  could  be  too  great  for  love  so  true  :
but  he  was  not  satisfied,  bceau.se  he  saw  the
adventure  v,as  not  concluded.


347

The  kuight  of  the  Dragon,  and  his  brothfr,
ireing  the  cuj)  ihac  was  so  black,  changed
into  such  biightncss  ip  the  iiand  otiVlhay-
zav,  a.nd  after  bcconie  (hirk  again  when  it
was  held  by  utlif  rs^  looked  at  each  oihi-r  in
Wonder.

The  emperor  beholding  thcni  as  strangers,
and  judging  that  they  vvt.rc  persons  ol  great
authority,  made  signs  to  give  them  place,
and  let  them  come  near  hi  in  ;  and  as  he  saw
they  were  unacquainted  with  ilie  nature  of
of  the  adventure,  gave  ihcni  full  account
thereof  :  fior  are  you  to  marvel  at  this,  fur
it  is  writti'ii  of  this  emperor  that  lie  was  the
most  courteous  and  aflable  prince  in  tiie
world.  They  both  knelt  down  to  kiss  his
IuukIs,  greatly  esteeming  this  so  singular
a  favour  ;  and  thongh  he  wished  tluMu  to
take  olf  their  helmets,  they  excused  them-
selves so  honourably,  tiiat  the  emperor  held
himself  contented.  And  now  Florcndos,  v^ho
by  reason  of  his  weakness  was  leaning  oil
the  lap  of  his  sister  Pohnarda,  arose,  and
musing  on  the  beautv  of  ]\lirau;uarda,  ho
began  in  Ids  mind  to  use  these  speeches  :


348

íi.idy,  now  would  1  that  you  might  sec  what
reason  you  have  to  treat  lue  according  to
your  humour.  So  taking  the  cup  of  the
damsel,  it  received  a  tar  more  brightness
than  ever  it  had  before  ;  so  much  beyond
what  Albayzar  and  Floramaii  had  given  it
ui  if  it  were  now  in  its  whole  perfection
and  true  state,  the  tears  becoming  clear
and  without  spot.  l"\ill  joyful  were  the
emperor  and  l*rimaleon  to  see  such  perfect
proof  which  riorendos,  as  an  innamoratij,
had  exhibited  above  ail  others,  and  they
asked  of  lhe  damsel,  if  the  adventure  were
ended.

Sir,  quoth  she,  the  cup  and  tears  are  in
their  full  perfection  ;  but  command  others
to  make  the  proof,  and  then,  if  the  cup
receive  no  change,  esteem  this  to  be  the
best  knight  and  faithfuUest  lover  in  the
world.  But  if  the  cup  do  alter,  believe
assuredly,  that  there  is  yet  one  who  exceeds
him  in  arms  ;  in  love  it  cannot  be.

The  emperor,  seeing  that  all  his  knights
had  essayed  the  cup,  desired  the  knight  of


349

îlu'  Dragon  and  his  Allow  to  make  trial
also.  Palinerin  was  so  busy  in  beholding  her
who  had  oceasioned  him  such  sorrow,  that
he  heard  not  tiic  emperor's  words  ;  where-
Jnie  Murian,  who  was  free  from  a  lover's
passions,  advanced,  and  placing  his  eyes
upon  'IVirgiana,  Avho  had  fixed  liers  also
upon  him  and  knew  him  well,  he  began  to
say,  Lady,  favour  me  in  this  danger,  and
Ibrsake  me  in  all  other,  only  let  me  enjoy
this  in  recompenee  of  my  desert;  and  lor
favours  of  greater  estimation,  reserve  them
lor  him,  to  whom  yon  are  in  greater  af-
leciioii.  Ikit  as  tliese  words  were  far  dis-
tant frinu  his  deeds,  so  did  his  holding  of
thi.'  eu[)  manifest  the  same  ;  for  taking  it
in  that  rare  state  of  brightness  to  which  the
truekn'e  ol  I'lorendos  had  restored  it,  it  be-
citme  even  darker  and  blacker  than  ever  it
had  bee  n  ;  at  which  Targiana  received  su
great  a  displeasure  that  she  eoukl  not  con-
ceal it,  but  feigning  herself  to  be  sick  re-
tired to  her  chamber  ;  and  throwing  herself
upon  a  cushion  with  her  face  downwards,
began  to  repent  that  ever  she  had  bestowed
her  love  on  him,  who  was  of  so  small  iidc-

VOL.    II.  2  li


3Ò0

îity.  The  dainsel  receiving  lhe  cup  again
ol  rioriun,  said,  Sir  knight,  it  you  have  no
better  desert  in  arms  ilian  in  love,  I  coun-
sel you  never  hereai'ier  lo  pursue  advcu-
lures.

Lady,  answered  Tlorian,  if  you  recompenced
your  servants  according  to  desert,  it  woidd
grieve  me  to  fail  inti;  this  mishap  ;  but  your
actions  are  so  out  of  all  order,  reason,  rule,
and  measure,  tliat  I  am  content  with  my
own  degree  oi"  love  ;  were  it  greater  my  lite
•would  be  worse,  and  my  success  less  cer-
tain. Though  this  reply  seemed  good  to
many,  it  was  not  approved  by  the  ladies,
for  it  is  their  quality  to  chuse  that  the  life
of  men  should  be  at  their  pleasure,  and
their  recompence  to  the  reverse  of  their
deserts.

The  damsel  having  taken  the  cup,  came  to
the  knight  of  the  Dragon,  no  other  now
remaining  to  try  it.  Sir  knight,  said  she,
whom  these  gay  arms  beseem  so  well,  take
this  cup,  and  do  with  it  as  your  companion
has  done.     It  is  to  be  expected  that  men  so


liki!  ill  appearance  will  be  like  in  inclinatioaf
Palnierin,  seeing:  the  matter  brouy,lit  to  thi>;
rxtremily,  cast  his  eye  on  the  damsel,  and
his  heart  on  her  who  destroyed  him.  It,
said  he,  this  adventure  be  ot"  a  truth,  then
may  farther  trial  from  henceforth  be  ex-
cused, for  I  know  none  who  hath  will  so
entirely  snrrendered,  liberty  so  lost,  and
hope  so  distant.  So  receiving  the  cup,
instantly  it  became  as  bright  as  it  did  in
the  hand  of  Florendos  ;  brighter  it  could
ncjt  be.

The  emperor  being  greatly  surprized  at  this,
took  the  cup,  and  in  the  tears,  he  beheld
the  empr<is$  figured,  chearful  and  content-?
ed,  as  one  who  never  carried  other  coun-
tenance towards  him.  Then  thought  he
that  the  adventure  was  ended,  and  asked
of  the  damsel,  if  it  were  not  so?  whereto
the  damsel  answered.  It  must  still  be  tried
if  it  will  turn  again  to  the  former  blackness.
If  all  v.ho  are  here  have  made  the  trial,  let
one  take  it  again,  and  the  same  effect  will
still  be  occasioned  if  the  adventure  is  not
accomplished  ;  but  I  desire  you  that  ihisj
a  H  a


knight,  (pointinu;  to  J'lorian)  make,-  trial
thtrcot"  no  niorr  ;  lor  his  lack  of  loyalty
is  such,  that  jncthinks,  thouiili  the  atlvcu-
ture  is  iini.^lird,  lie  wouhl  make  it  darkci*
than  ever  ;  at  which  prctiy  trimii[)li,  the  la-
dies conceived  good  occasion  ot  laughter.

Then  the  emperor  connnanded,  that  some  ot"
the  knights  should  take  the  cup  again  ;  but
their  labour  was  in  vain,  for  nothing  re-
mained to  he  done.  The  empress  took  it,
and  beheld  the  emperor  so  perfectly  in  it,
as  if  she  had  verily  seen  him  face  to  face.
After  the  empress,  came  Gridonia  and  Ba-
siiia,  wherein  they  each  beheld  him  whom
they  desired  ;  but  when  Polinarda  took  it,
she  perceived  Palmerin  within,  in  as  do-
lorous a  state  as  love  then  occasioned  him  ;
whereat,  thinking  some  one  might  see  him
also,  her  heart  so  leaped  that  every  limb
shook,  and  hastily  she  delivered  the  cup
from  her,  fearing  to  let  it  fall.  Many  per-
ceived her  perturbation,  but  none  knew  the
cause.  The  emperor,  whose  mind  was
awake  upon  these  occasions,  knowing  that
his  grandchild   had  seen  some  one  in   the


o<j


53


x:up  whom  she  dcshcd  to  do  her  service,  em-
braced her,  and  said,  it  seems,  hid}',  your
beauty  is  not  without  its  servants.  At  which
■words,  she  began  so  sweetly  to  blushj  that
her  rare  beauty  was  made  yet  more  beautiful,
and  the  grief  of  the  i^night  of  the  Dragou
yet  more  grievous.

The  cu])  ])asácd  from  hand  to  hand,  knights
and  ladies  all  beholchng  in  it  those  Avhoui
tliey  loved.  TIkii  might  it  be  seen  that  some
were  greatly  contented,  others  otherwise,
according  to  what  they  had  seen  in  the
tears  ;  those  who  Avcre  free  from  this  pas-
sion laughing  to  see  all  this.  The  last  jicr-
son  to  whom  the  cup  came,  was  Palmcrin,
who  beholding  in  it  the  iace  of  Polinarda,
with  so  serene  a  semblance  that  it  manifested
uothiiig,  said,  Lady,  I  well  know  that  even
as  I  remember  you,  so  do  you  now  show
yourself  ;  be  it  as  you  please,  for  1  am
born  to  serve  you,  and  serve  you  without
hope  :  what  is  your  pleasure  is  mine  ;  for  in
fine,  I  neither  know  what  to  desire,  nor  de-
sire any  thing  but  to  do  your  will.  'Jheii
he  delivered  the  cup  to  Tlorian,  who  woi^ld


354

aho  look  ill  it^  and  fixing  his  eyes  upon  the
tears,  he  beheld  in  them  an  infinite  nnuiber
of  women  with  enraged  coinitenanees,  the
princess  Arnalla  of  Navarre,  and  Targiana,
appearing  more  incensed  against  liim  tli.'in
all  the  rest.  What  see  you  iheie  ?  said  the
damsel  of  Thrace  ;  belike  you  see  your  de-
serts. Methinks,  replied  he,  by  what  I
perceive  in  yon,  you  would  not  favour  me,
though  I  should  serve  you  well  ;  but  I  be-
lieve that  you  and  others  of  your  name
would  be  better  served  by  me  than  by  some
of  those  who  have  juade  a  better  show  with
the  cup.

The  damsel  making  him  no  answer,  turned
to  the  emperor,  saying  :  \  ou  should  now
command,  sir,  seeing  it  is  yet  early,  that  the
proof  of  the  disfavoured  shoidd  be  made,
M'hich  will  be  a  thing  to  see.  That  will  I  do,
replied  he,  and  without  delay  ;  and  1  will
myself  make  trial  first,  for  I  believe,  that  as
being  but  slenderly  favoured  of  the  empress,
I  did  so  little  in  the  first  proof.  So  holding
the  cup,  it  remained  in  the  same  order  still,
without  anv  chancre  cither  of  heat  or  cold


355

wliereforc  the  damsel  sakl^  Confess,  sir,  that
you  are  altogether  grown  cold,  and  lay  the
fault  to  that,  and  not  to  the  empress,  who
hath  none  towards  you.  In  truth,  he  an-
swered, the  fault  is  my  own,  for  trying  what
was  made  for  another.

Prlmaleon  took  it  next,  and  made  as  little
change  ;  king  Polendos  had  the  like  fortune.
Then  Don  Rosuel  received  it,  and  because
at  that  time  he  was  out  of  fovour,  he  found
such  a  heat  in  the  cup,  that  being  scarce
able  to  bear  it,  he  gave  it  to  Piatir,  who
found  it  more  temperate,  things  not  being
so  bad  with  him.  Plalir  jiassed  it  to  CJra-
ciano,  and  so  it  went  on  to  \  ernao,  Beroldo,
Belisarle,  Dramiante,  I'raneican,  Frisol,
and  Onistaldo,  w  ho  were  all  so  well  favoured,
ihat  they  found  no  difference  in  the  cup.
'J'lien  Germam  of  Orleans  took  it,  who  served
J^lorcnda,  daughter  of  the  king  of  Prance  ;
and  the  cup  not  only  burnt  him  so  severely
that  he  coidd  not  hold  it  a  moment,  but  its
colour  also  beeame  like  a  burning  coal.  Es-
trelante  took  it  I'rom  him,  and  then  it  was
passed  to  Tencbror,  Vasilardo,  Lnymanes  gt'
'Z  n  3


3ò6

r>iiigiinuy,  Blandidon,  Dridem,  rolliiardo,
Ticiiioran,  Roramontc,  Albanis  of  Frisa,  and
FJorainan,  some  Avitli  good  Ijap  and  some
Avitli  i!l,  but  with  so  little  difíercnce  that  it
deserves  not  be  ípeciíicd;  only  I'olinardo
uas  the  one  vho  felt  the  greatest  heat.
Then  Florian  took  it  at  the  request  of  the
damsel,  who  enjoyed  to  see  how  carelessly  he
esi^ayed  these  adventures  :  he  held  it  awhile
nnconc'crncdlvj  as  one  who  felt  nothing.  It
seems,  quoth  the  damsel,  love  and  the  ladies
have  so  little  power  over  you,  that  you
neither  siiiTer  from  the  one  nor  fear  the
other.  And  taking  it  from  him,  she  gave
it  to  Albayzar,  who  being  a  favoured  man^
held  it  without  pain,  to  his  no  small  con-
tentment. The  knight  of  the  Dragon  took
it,  and  it  became  so  red  and  boiling,  as
to  strike  fear  into  all  who  beheld  it.  Its
heat  was  so  great,  that  it  seemed  as  if  his
entrails  were  roasting  within  him  ;  and
though  the  pain  tormented  him  grievously,
he  held  the  cup  long  time  ;  for  now  he
verih'  thought  tp  consummate  his  days,
and  that  his  life  should  end  by  this  sup-
portable mean,  and  all  other  pain  be  thus


357

excused  :  but  all  u'lio  beheld  judged  this
to  be  a  mortal  one,  for  it  manifested  itself  in
his  colour,  and  in  the-  trembling  of  his
limbs  ;  and  they  were  moved  even  to  tears.

Trust  me,  said  the  damsel,  the  unfeigned
love  of  so  true  a  knight,  deserveth  not  to
be  rewarded  with  sueh  recompense,  and
with  these  words  she  offered  to  take  the
cup  from  him  ;  but  he  gave  hack,  saying.
Lady,  I  beseech  you,  deprive  me  not  of  this
good,  but  suflcr  me  abide  this  doom,  if  my
mishap  hath  ordained  it  for  me  to  end  a
mourning  and  despairing  life.  The  cm])c-
ror,  not  able  to  abide  so  sad  a  sight,  arose
and  caught  the  cup  from  him,  which  was
immediately  quenched  as  though  it  had
never  been  lieatcd,  whereat  he  received
no  small  cause  of  amazement.  Florendos,
who  had  yet  to  drink  of  this  draught,  weak
as  he  was,  received  the  cup  from  the  hand
of  the  enip(  ror,  when  ]ircsently  the  rigour
of  Miraguarda  was  not  content  to  deal
with  him  after  the  moasure  of  Palmcrin's
sufferings,  but  executing  upon  him  a  far
stronger  proof,  the  fire  brgan  to  spread    it-


3J8

self  over  him,  anrl  llie  ilnmr  uhich  aioso
out  of  the  cup  environed  him,  and  he  \\;is
nrapt  in  the  midst  thereof;  liis  limbs  burnt,
and  the  inward  pain  uhich  he  felt  was
such  as  a  heart  so  tormented  could  suffer.
ISone  of  those  who  stood  round  about  him
could  see  any  thing  of  Florendos,  because
of  the  blaze  in  which  he  was  encircled.
'I'hc  fire  had  with  it  a  roaring  sound,  so
dolorous  and  fearful,  that  it  filled  all  with
terror  as  well  as  compassion.  He,  like  a
man  enduring  the  flames,  sent  put  such
groans  from  his  very  soul  at  times,  that
being  heard  amid  the  roaring  of  the  firo,
they  made  so  pitilul  a  sound,  that  nothing
l)Ut  sobs  and  groans  of  piiy  sounded  in
the  hall.  The  empress  and  Gridonia  would
man}-  times  have  rushed  into  the  same
peril  with  him,  and  bitter  words  were  uttered
against  Miraguarda  ;  but  Florendos,  in  the
midst  of  his  torments,  would  not  suffer  to
hear  her  blamed  who  destrov'ed  him.  The
emperor  seeing  the  evil  increase,  and  that
neither  by  water  nor  by  any  other  mean*
could  the  flames  be  quenched,  put  himself
into  the  midst  thereof,  and  took    the   cup


359

from  i'loreudos,  thinking  that  then  it  would
[)resenily  he  quenched,  but  to  no  elfect,
tor  thelîaiTic  continued  about  him  as  it  did
bcibre.  At  this  the  empress  and  Gridoiii;i
became  hke  dead  j)ersons,  and  all  the  ladies
iV'll  into  such  rueful  complaints,  that  the
palace  sliook  witli  their  lamentations.  Po-
lendos,  king  of  Thessaly,  seeing  tiie  emperor
his  father  in  tears,  and  ieeble  as  he  was  with
extreme  age,  supporting  the  empress,  and
Primaleon  in  like  manner  holding  the  lifeless
(  iridonia,  not  knowing  what  to  do,  but  above
all,  not  able  to  bear  to  see  Florendos  perish
thus  without  remedy,  went  to  the  damsel  of
Thrace,  saying,  I  beseech  you,  seeingyou  have
found  the  thing  you  sought  for,  that  if  you
know  any  remedy  lor  this  groateiil,you  would
apply  it,  though  I  believe  all  is  over,  for  Flo-
rendos must  hy  this  time  be  burnt  to  ashes.
1  am  so  unlucky,  replied  the  damsel,  that
that  though  I  have  been  crying  out  to  be
lieard,  none  would  hear  me.  Do  you  aj)-
peasc  this  uproar,  and  I  w  ill  shew  the  mean
to  deliver  him.  With  this  news  Polcndos
went  to  the  emperor  and  (juicted  the  hall  ;
the  empress  and  (Jridonia  recovered,  though


360

•v«(ilh  ;i  colour  more  deadly  ihaii  like  lluit
of  living  persons.  The  damsel  oi'  'I'liriice
then  seeing  uU  was  abated  save  the  lire  of
Fiorendos,  vvhieh  continued  to  increase,  said
iviih  a  loud  voice,  High  and  invincible  em-
peror, tlie  adventure  of  the  cup  is  finished  ;
and  the  flame  which  doth  comi)asá  tlie
prince  riorendos,  can  no  wiiy  be  extinguish-
ed, but  only  by  the  virtue  that  eoiisi^teth
in  the  tears,  and  by  the  hand  of  the  knight
who  hath  ended  the  eiichatitmenr.  'I'liose
tears  by  liis  hand  must  be  sprinkled  on  the
jflamc  wherein  he  is  cnclosetl,  and  then  it
will  be  (pienched  ;  for  the  lire  being  engen-
ilered  by  so  cruel  a  woman  as  he  loveth,  can-
not be  any  way  quenched  but  only  by  the
tears  of  such  a  pitiful  lady  as  was  this  con-
stant and  faithful  Brandisia.  lhe  knight  of
the  Dragon  seeing  this  charge  was  his,  took
the  cup  and  emptied  it  upon  I'lorendos  :
vhen  presently  the  lire  vanished  away,  leav-
ing him  like  one  dead,  though  the  joy  which
all  now  felt  did  not  let  them  dream  this;  for
when  joy  is  great  it  driveth  away  all  sorrow.


361


CHAPTER  90.


riorendos,  bcl^ig  thus  delivered  and  restored
to  liis  former  state,  and  the  tumult  of  th?
company  pacified,  the  emperor  and  empress,
with  the  other  princes  and  princesses,  took
their  seats  again,  talking  of  the  fear  into
which  that  adventure  had  thrown  them.  So
well  content  was  Florendos  at  having  made
this  public  and  certain  proof  of  the  disfavour
with  which  he  was  treated,  and  of  the  favour
which  his  true  love  merited,  that  this  satis-
fied one  of  his  condition;  for  by  what  he
knew  of  the  humour  of  her  whom  he  served,
he  was  past  all  hope.  The  emperor  being
desirous  to  know  the  knight  whose  spotless
loyalty  had  ended  this  enchantment,  and
misdoubting  that  it  was  Palmerin^  besought

YOJ,.  If.  "a  1


362

him  tliat  he  would  take  off  his  lielmct.  As
this  was  his  intention, he  was  about  so  to  do  ;
but  for  his  more  honour,  a  great  adventure
prevented  him,  whieh  at  that  moment  liap-
peued.

For  as  he  was  unlacing  his  helmet  to  take  it
off,  there  entered  the  hall  a  damsel  large  of
body,  clad  in  rich  apparel,  but  little  goodly  ;
hehind  her  three  giants,  of  bigness  out  of
measure,  whose  armour  was  of  one  colour
and  fashion,  their  bodies  being  covered  with
plates  of  steel,  so  huge  and  strong,  that  it
seemed  impossible  for  any  thing  to  demolish
them  ;  their  helmets,  which  were  carried  by
three  men,  were  made  of  a  white  bone  sur-
passing smooth,  and  so  hard  that  its  strength
was  yet  more  to  be  admired  than  that  of
their  arms  ;  their  faces,  which  were  unarm-
ed, nature  had  made  so  ugsomc  and  terrible,
as  not  only  caused  the  ladies  to  tremble  and
change  colour, but  also  in  the  hearts  of  many
stronc;  and  good  knights  stirred  a  secret  fear,
which  was  manifested  in  their  deportment.
All  made  way  for  them,  but  they  with  their
fierce  pride  came  thronging  on,  nothing  re-


S63

earcliiiG:,  nor  waitinq;  the  courtcsv  which
Avould  have  given  them  passage.  As  soon
as  the}'  came  before  the  emperor,  without
shewing  an}'  reverence,  they  stayed,  for  that
the  damsel  had  in  charge  to  declare:  she
looking  round  the  liall,  and  seeing  so  great
nobility  about  the  emperor,  and  the  knights,
how  many  there  were,  and  of  what  goodly
appearance,  and  on  the  other  hand  the  great
company  of  fair  ladies,  attired  so  well  ancl
with  sucli  goodly  adornments,  began  in  this
order  :

Certes,  high  and  mighty  emperor,  the  re-
nown which  is  blazed  all  the  world  over
of  your  princely  court,  is  too  little  ;  respect-
ing the  honourable  company  I  sec  at  this
present,  which  urgeth  me  to  enter  into  due
laud  thereof,  one  thing  only  is  wanting,  and
then  you  might  subdue  and  govern  the
Avhole  world  ;  and  this  is  in  your  own  hand,
if  you  would  accept  it;  but  I  fear  fortune,
who  in  all  your  affairs  hath  hitherto  pros-
pered you,  may  now,  as  envious  at  your
long  peaceable  felicity,  prevent  you,  desirous
that  the  glory  you  have  gained  above  all
'l  I  '1


3GA-

others  may  now,  in  the  end  of  your  tlays,  br
beaten   down.     Hear    my   embassage,   and
accept  its  conditions,  and  not  only  shall  you
be  lord  of  what  yon  would,  but  fortune  shall
have  no  means  to  injure  you,  nor  you    any
cause  to  fear  her.      The  high  and   mighty
soldan  of  Persia,  principal   eaprain   of  the
law  of  Mahomet,  iheGrer.t  Turk,  lord  of  the
most  part  of  Greece  and  Asia,  and  the  noble
governor  of  the  country  of  the    soldan   of
Babylon,  in  the  name  of  Albayzar,  of  whom
rothing    is    known    in    his  own  dominions
since  he  left  them  long   ago,  give  you  to
vit,  that  at  the  call  of  the  blood    of  many
j)agan  princes  here  slain  before  the  v.alls  of
Constantinople,  which  every  day  crieth  out
and  soundeth  in  the  ears  of  their  successors,
many  times  have  the}'  been  moved  to  go  up
against  your  city  with  great  fleets   and  an
innumerable   gathering  together  of  nations,
to   revenge  their  old  wrongs  with  so  cruel
a  vengeance  taken  upon  thee  and  thy  people,
that  lime  should  not  last   lonç  enough  to
•wear  out   the  remembrance  of  so  signal  a
destruction.     But  it  seems  either    that    for-
time  isnotyet  wearied  with  favouring  you,  or


265

that  the  gods,  the  protectors  of  \'our  welfare,
have  heretofore  hindered  the  determination  of
these  princes  :  for  many  times  when  their  ar-
mies were  ready,  either  the  sea  with  sudden
tempests  hath  ovcrwhehiied  their  ships  and  de-
stroyed tlieir  navies, or  there  hath  such  quar-
rels and  seditions  sprung  up  amongst  them,
that  by  the  death  of  many,  they  have  been
hindered  from  putting  this  their  pia-pose
in  execution.  Wherefore,  fearing  any  more
such  miscliance,  as  also  desiring  your  alli-
ance and  friendship,  they  propound  to  you
these  conditions  :  That  you  will  be  con-
lent  to  give  Poliiuirda,  daughter  to  the
prince  Primaleon  ^'our  son,  to  the  soldan
of  Persia,  for  wife,  who  is  aged  twcnty-live
years,  as  renowned  a  knight  as  he  is  puis-
sant a  prince  ;  and  that  Florendos,  your
grandson,  shall  marry  with  Armenia,  sister
to  the  same  soldan,  who  is  beautiful  above
all  women  of  these  days.  To  her  dowry,
the  soldan  will  give  all  that  part  of  his
tlominions  which  borders  upon  your  em-
pire, without  desiring  any  on  the  behalf  of
Pohnarda,  but  only  that  in  order  for  these
alliances  to  remain  iirm  for  ever,  vuu
2  I  3


would  deliver  up  to  the  Great  Turk  a
christian  knight,  named  Dorian  of  the
Desert,  for  that  bv  his  deceit  he  hath
brought  his  daughter  Targiana  from  thence
into  your  court,  \Yhose  marriage  he  hath
already  provided  to  Albayzar,  now  soldan
of  Babylon,  because  his  brother  is  lately
deceased.  Thus  have  I  reported  the  whole
sura  of  my  embassage,  attending  how  your
highness  shall  answer  the  same  :  and  if  you
will  not  agree  with  the  heathen  princes,
these  giants  have  in  charge  to  tell  you
that  which  perhaps  may  enforce  you  to  a
greater  marvel.

The  emperor  having  noted  well  and  with
great  sufferance  the  words  of  the  damsel,
smiling  thereat,  began  to  say,  Truly,  lady,  I
know  not  what  embassage  these  giants  can
have  which  will  be  less  to  my  will  than
yours;  as  concerning  the  amiiy  which  your
princes  request  with  me,  the  condition  is
so  opposite  to  my  liking,  that  I  should
ïather  chuse  perpetual  Avar,  wherein  myself,
my  friends,  and  subjects>  will  more  willingly
die  than  hold   league    with    them    in    any


367

íiuch  order.  For  the  knight  whom  you
reijuest  to  have,  he  is  not  here  ;  but  if  he
were  here  present  in  my  court^  httle  would
I  do  him  this  wrong  ;  and  1  well  believe
that  if  he  have  brought  here  the  princess
Targiana,  ir  is  not  without  her  own  free  will
and  consent.  This  is  your  answer;  now
let  your  knights  say  for  what  they  arc  come,
and  they  shall  have  theirs.

Whh  that,  one  of  the  giants,  who  seemed
to  have  some  advantage  above  the  others,  ad-
vanced himself  beibre  the  emperor,  and
with  a  loud  and  fearful  voice,  which  filled
the  hall,  entered  into  these  speeches:  The
princes,  whose  good  will  vou  neither  chusc
to  feci  nor  requite,  dcf}'  thee  and  all  who  fol-
low thy  standard  to  a  war  of  fire  and  sword;
and  they  take  the  gods  forjudges,  that  they
not  only  intend  by  force  of  arms  to  slay  and
destroy  all  who  bear  arms,  but  to  execute
such  cruelties  upon  women  and  children,
burning  and  destroying  all  })laccs  famous  or
not  famous  in  thv  whole  empire,  till  they
ihall  be  satisfied  for  the  losses  here  formerly
received.     Moreover,   besides  this  defiance


56s

uhlch  we  give  tliee  on  their  part,  I,  in  the
name  ol'  myself  and  of  my  two  companions,
say,  that  it"  thou  dost  not  accept  the  ofíer  of
my  lord  the  soldan  of  Persia,  thou  dost  what
thou  oughtcst  not  to  do.  And  if  tliy  knights
dare  presume  to  maintain  the  contrary,  my
companions  and  I  will  undertake  the  combat
with  seven  of  the  best  of  them,  two  for  each
of  my  companions,  and  three  for  myself  ;  and
we  will  make  them  confess  the  folly  thou  iiast
committed,  or  carry  away  their  heads  in  re-
quital for  this  contempt.

AVhen  the  great  Barrocante,  as  he  was
called,  had  delivered  this  embassage,  the  em-
peror, in  whom  it  occasioned  little  fear,  with
a  good  countenance  and  a  smiling,  replied  :  I
see  you  are  so  melancholiek  that  1  know  not
whether  I  must  not  grant  what  ye  require  ;
but  on  the  other  hand,  were  I  to  agree  to
these  marriages,  perhaps  my  grandchild
Polinarda  would  not  consent.  And  as  for
the  battle  to  which  ye  challenge  my  knights,
I  could  rejoice  if  it  might  be  excused,  be-
cause of  the  danger  it  would  be  to  them,
and  the  little  honour  to  you,  as  it  must  needs


369

seem  by  the  conditions  which  you  propose.
Now  at  this  tunc  the  knight  of  the  Dragon
was  so  incensed  with  anger,  that  he  could  not
speak  as  he  would  fain  have  done,  for  excess
of  wrath  ;  and  for  this  reason,  before  he  could
command  himself  for  utterance,  some  knights
had  already  risen.  But  the  giant  Dramuziando
was  before  them  all,  who  began,  saying,Often-
times,  high  and  mighty  emperor,  the  great
benignity  and  courtesy  of  princes  is  an  oc-
casion to  encourage  a  wilful  offender  ;  even
so,  for  the  vain  boasting  of  these  giants  yoiir
majesty  is  in  fault,  your  bounty  pn(i  icentle-
ness  having  produced  in  them  this  insolence,
which  fools  call  courage.  They  defy  your
knights  and  offer  them  vantage.  I,  os  one  of
yours,  and  requiring  none,  accept  their  defi-
ance, and  trust  that  1  shall  make  Barrocante
know  the  folly  of  his  embassy,  and  the  little
which  the  proud  and  discourteous  gain.  If
any  ehuse  to  combat  with  the  other  two,  let
them  ;  if  not,  anrl  I  remain  in  such  condi-
tion as  to  be  able,  I  will  take  thciu  one  l)y
one,  all  three,  and  ten  times  three  were  they
so  many,  and  if  my  strength  and  breath  did
not  fail:  let    not   these    words  be    thought


J/O

amiss,  lor  against  sucli  pride  any  thing  may
be  allowed.

The  kniglit  of  the  Dragon,  and  Florian,
armed  as  they  were,  then  approached  Ura-
iniiziando,  desiring  him  tliat  he  would  ac-
cept them  though  they  were  unknown  to
him,  as  his  comrades  against  the  other  two
giants.  Seeing  they  were  ready  for  the
field,  he,  thanking  them  for  their  knightly
oiïcr,  accepted  it,  holding  the  victory  certain  ;
for  of  all  present  he  was  the  only  one  who
knew  them.  Graciano,  Beroldo,  Pompides,
prince  Floraman,  and  some  others,  at  this
^vc\■e  somewhat  discontent,  because  there
was  none  of  them  all,  but  would  gladly  have
taken  part  with  the  giant  Dramuziando.  The
giants  Albuzarco  and  Albaroco,  companions
of  Barroeante,  refused  to  accept  the  battle;
answering,  that  if  there  were  no  giants  for
them  to  deal  withal,  more  knights  should
be  given  them,  for  one  to  one  they  would
not  enter  the  lists.  But  he  of  the  Desert,
who  on  such  occasions  v.as  not  w ont  to  have
much  patience,  took  Albuzarco  by  the  arm,
saying,  Thou  mismade  and  overgrown  thing,


371

tbii)k  not  by  such  arrogant  boasts  to  cxcusr
thyseli"  so  fondly  from  entering  the  combat  ;
for  I,  wbo  am  the  least  of  this  company^  and
least  wortliy^  will  this  day  cut  off  this  head
of  tbine  from  tb}'  sboulders.  And  to  give
tbee  tbe  better  occasion  to  figbt,  tbou  shah
understand,  lliat  1  am  the  knigbt  wbo
brought  the  princess  Targianainto  tbis  coun-
try ;  and  for  tbis  knigbt  tbou  seest  with  mo,
he  is  so  good  a  one  tbat  1  know  not  wliether
he  will  condescend  to  do  as  much  for  Alba-
roco  as  I  shall  for  tbee.  The  giants  hear-
ing him  confess  tbat  he  it  was  who  bad
brougbt  tbe  princess  Targiana  from  her  coun-
try, became  so  full  of  choler,  that  their
countenances,  fierce  and  terrible  as  nature
bad  made  tbcm,  became  more  fearful  and
ferocious  ;  and  calling  for  tbeir  bclmets,  as
witb  all  else  tbey  were  prepared,  tbey  cried
out  to  bave  tbe  place  of  battle  sbewn  them,
tbat  tbey  migbt  not  be  delayed  from  taking
satisfaction  for  such  words,

Tbe  emperor  gave  orders  to  shew  them  the
lis.s,  and  to  set  a  guard  round  about,  ac-
cording to  tbe  custom  of  his  court,  holding


•372

this  to  be  the  most  signal  and  notable  adven-
ture that  he  had  ever  seen  or  heard  of",  as
in  truth  it  was.  It  troubled  him  to  sec  Tio-
rian  in  such  danger,  tor  now  he  knew  him,
having  heard  him  name  himself,  and  he
suspected  that  the  other  might  be  Palmerin,
tiiough  contrariwise,  seeing  him  the  quietest
in  this  dispute  made  him  doubtful.  When
they  were  departing  to  the  lists,  the  damsel
of  Thrace,  seeing  J-'lorian  so  full  of  life  in
an  afi'air  which  made  the  hearts  of  many
dead  within  them,  came  to  him,  and  said.
Sir  knight,  if  you  should  find  yourself  iti
danger,  commend  yourself  to  the  ladies';  yon
deserve  so  much  at  their  hands  that  tlicy
will  needs  save  you.  God  send,  ({uolh  he,
that  they  may  never  bring  me  into  worse  ;
as  for  this,  I  want  no  aid  from  any,  and  wish
for  none  from  them,  that  I  may  then  owe
them  nothing,  nor  they  suppose  that  1  am
their  debtor.  With  tliis  they  descended
from  the  hall,  accompanied  by  many  knights,
to  the  place  of  the  lists,  where  they  all
mounted  on  horseback.  The  horses  of  the
giants  were  as  huge  and  strong  as  they  had
needs  be    for   such   riders.     Tiie   emperor,


373

Pjimaleon,  and  Polendos,  went  to  a  window
to  see  the  battle  ;  the  empress  and  the  other
l;<(lics  to  those  of  her  apartments.  Albayzar
likewise,  weak  as  he  was,  came  to  one  of  the
windows,  desiring  that  the  victory  might
fail  to  the  giants,  as  he  never  doubted,  ac-
cording to  their  great  strength  and  courage  ;
not  remembering,  that  sometimes  in  an  un-
just battle  the  might  of  man  avails  less  than
iheritrht.


Vol.  II.  2k


C>74i


CIIJPTER  91-


^^''hen  they  were  placed  in  ilie  liste,  the
judges  divided  the  sunshine  between  them.
The  knight  of  the  Dragon,  before  the  trum-
pet sounded,  fixed  his  eyes  upon  her  who
destroyed  hiui,  who  was  at  a  window  with
Targiana,  saying.  These  are  the  times  iu
which  I  most  desire  to  serve  you  and  to  ap-
pear well;  remember  me  at  others,  for  to
conquer  such  monsters  as  this  no  other  help
do  I  require  than  their  pride  and  lhe  ])adne.ss
of  their  cause.  This  done,  they  w  ere  readj',
their  shields  before  them,  their  lances  low-
ered ;  the  trumpet  sounded,  and  they  ran
their  career  with  such  a  thundering  sound,
as  if  the  earth  were  opening.  None  failed  in
his  attaint,  both  shields  being  pierced.  Dra-
muziando    and    Barrocante    came   to    the


375

gronnil  with  the  siiddles  between  their  legs.
rioriaii  and  Albiizarco  broke  botli  their
spears,  and  past  on,  Albuzarco  losing  his
stirrups,  and  he  would  have  fallen  if  he  had
not  held  by  the  neck  of  his  horse.  But  as
the  cause  of  this  battle  touched  the  knight
of  the  Dragon  more  nearly  than  any  other,
so  his  encounter  was  given  with  more  force  ;
for  neither  strenoth  nor  skill  availina;  Aiba-
roeo,  nor  shield  nor  armour,  he  came  to  the
ground  with  a  wound  in  his  breast,  and  so
stunned  that  for  some  time  he  did  not  come
to  liimself.

Bnrrocante,  who  at  such  time  had  all  his  wits
about  him,  and  no  fear,  seeing  Albaroco
in  this  plight,  came  near  to  defend  him,
sword  in  hand,  and  began  with  Dramu-
ziando  a  battle  so  worthy  of  admiration,  that
it  might  have  put  all  others  which  had  ever
been  seen  in  that  court  out  of  remembrance.
iUit  it  was  not  Barrocante's  strength  which
could  have  saved  Albaroco's  head,  if  the
knight  of  the  Dragon  had  n<ii  had  one  of
his  reins  broken  by  Albaroco's  lance  in  the
encounter  ;  and  by  reason  of  this  his  horse


376'

lan  with  hiin  about  the  hsts,  and  ccrte:
would  have  carried  him  out,  if  it  had  not
been  surrounded  with  a  strong  pahsade,
which  the  emperor  would  always  have  starid-
iilg,  fearing  that  some  good  knight  might
else  lor  lack  of  it  one  day  lose  the  guerdon
of  his  courage.  While  he  was  delayed  in
quieting  the  horse  and  leaping  oft",  Albaroco
had  time  to  recover  and  make  ready  for  bat-
tle. Florian  of  the  Desert,  who  till  now  had
thought  of  nothing  but  the  knight  of  the
Dragon,  looking  at  him,  and  fearing  some
mishap  through  the  fault  of  his  horse,  as
soon  as  he  saw  him  safe  on  foot,  alighted
also,  and  both  joining  Dramuziatldo,  who
Was  doing  wonders,  altogether  began  their
terrible  battle.  Now,  though  Albaroco  had
been  maltreated  in  the  joust,  the  rage  whicii
he  felt  gave  him  so  great  strength  beyond
his  wonted,  that  it  seemed  impossible  for
any  one  to  overcome  him.  This  perilous
and  cruel  battle  not  only  occasioned  fear  in
those  who  were  ensraojed  in  it,  but  even  in
those  who  were  looking  on,  such  amazement
as  things  which  are  wonderful  and  strange
excite.     The   emperor,  though  he  had  seen


'oil

many  things  in  his  time,  and  gone  through
many,  3'ei  this  appeared  so  much  greater^  that
it  put  all  others  clean  out  of  his  rcniembraiicc.
He  on  whom  he  most  fixed  his  eyes  was
Palmerin  ;  for  after  he  had  seen  him  with  one
encounter  overthrow  Albaroco_,  iie  was  as
certain  that  it  was  Palmerin  as  if  he  had
known  him.  Polendos  and  Prinialcoii  blest
themselves  at  the  fierceness  of  this  battle,  and
greatly  did  they  desire  to  see  the  end  of  it
to  their  wiih,  and  greatly  did  they  doubt  it,
as  well  because  the  strength  of  the  enemies
occasioned  this  distrust,  as  because  what  is
greatly  desired  is  alway  doubted.  Floren-
dos,  who  beheld  it  from  another  window,
great  and  fearful  as  thatadventure  appeared
to  him,  thought  more  of  his  own  weakness,
tliinking  that  this  prevented  him  from  being
one  in  the  danger;  not  remembering  how
much  less  secure  his  life  would  have  been
there  than  elsewhere,  and  believing  that  life
is  no  loss  to  one  who  loses  it  well,  and  gains
honour  by  death.  The  empress  and  G'rido-
uia  had  no  hearts  to  see  such  cruelty,  and
withdrew  from  the  window.  l\)linarda  did
not  do  this,  but   remained  till  the  end,  and

2   K  v'i


i378

Targiana  also,  who  was  as  much  dismayed
and  sorrowful  to  see  the  skill  and  courage  of
riorian,  as  she  had  at  first  been  joyful  in
the  Herccncss  of  these  giants,  thinking  that
from  them  the  vengeance  wliich  she  desired
was  certain.

They  fought  on,  the  fury  of  their  battle  in-
creased, their  strength  and  breath  appeared
not  to  fail.  The  knight  of  the  Dragon,  and
Florian,  availed  themselves  so  much  of  skill
find  slight,  fearing  the  blows  of  their  ene-
mies, that  Lhcymade  them  deliver  the  greater
part  in  vain;  and  for  this  reason  they  were
less  wounded,  and  had  maltreated  the  giants.
Dramuziando,  confiding  in  his  strength  and
courage,  fought  less  like  a  skilful  knight
than  a  terrible  giant,  and  this  made  the
battle  between  him  and  Barrocante  fiercer
and  more  terrible  than  the  others;  for  chus-
ing  rather  to  avail  themselves  of  strength  of
limb  than  any  art,  they  smote  each  other  so
mortally,  that  their  armour  was  demelished,
and  they  themselves  had  received  so  many
wounds,  that  there  was  scarcely  a  sound
place  in  their  whole   bodies.    The  knight  of


llié  Dragon  was   full  of  po  great  anger  and
nielaiicboly,   seeing  that  a  giant  whom   he
liad  overthrown  at  the  first  encounter  should
now  withstand  him  so  long,  that   he  began
to   hew  away  his  armour,  and  lay   his  flesh
oj)cn  with  such  great   and  perilous  wounds,
that  AJharocOi  despairing  of  life,  fought  like
one  dead,  thinking  that  sometimes  the  only
remedy  for  life  is  to  expect  none.     In  that
hour  he   of  the    Desert  well  proved  to   the
damsel  of  Thrace,  that  not   for  default   of
courage  Imd   he  failed  in  the  adventure  of
the  cup  ;  for  though  the  valour  of  Albuzarco
did  feats  beyond  the  strength  which  nature
had  given  him,  he  handled  him  so  hardly
that  he  could   now  scant   stir.     Long  time
they  continued  thus  in  battle  wit'hout  feeling
weakness  on  either  side  ;  but  the  labour   of
liieir  strife  was  so  great  that  at  length  breath
began  to  fail,  and  they  drew  back  awhile  to
recover  it,  the  giants  to  one  part  of  the  lists,
Dramuziando   and    his    comptmions    to  th€
other.     Barrocante,    who  saw   himself  and
his  comrades  so  near  their  end,  and  hope
lost,  being  full  of  wralh  ami  pride,  began  to
rai;e  with  himself  in  this  manner:  O  gods.


380

is  it  possible  tliat  tlie  force  of  Barrocante,
Albuzarco,  and  Albaroeo,  so  bighly  dreaded
throughout  the  whole  world,  should  be
brought  into  subjection,  by  one  only  giant
and  two  knightsr  Certesyour  power  is  great,
and  I  know  now  that  you  delight  to  display
it  when  human  weakness  distrusts  it.  Would
that  I  had  here  him  who  conquered  Ura-
muziando  and  all  the  guardians  of  his
castle,  and  would  that  here  were  with  liim
four  of  the  best  knights  on  the  earth,  so
losing  my  life  on  them,  I  might  the  belter
brook  my  fortune,  and  leave  it  well  sold.  But
you  gods  will  not  have  it  thus  ;  you  have
ordained  that  he  to  whom  all  otlier  giants
bow  down,  by  one  single  giant  should  see
his  life  brought  to  so  weak  a  state,  that  he  has
no  other  hope  than  to  take  in  exchange  for
it  that  of  him  who  bereaves  me  of  it.

Now  of  a  truth,  though  Barrocante  and  his
comrades  saw  themselves  in  this  cxtremit}^,
those  on  the  other  part  did  not  fail  to  think
the  same  ;  the  knight  of  the  Dragon  apphed
in  that  hour  for  succour  to  his  lady,  and  dis-
masting her  remembrance  of  him,  consoled


38 1

himself,  thinking  death  a  light  thing  for  one
vhose  life  was  so  sorrowful,  Florian,  who
had  no  one  to  betake  his  thoughts  to,  com-
iriended  himself  to  fortune,  as  her  who  i.s
mistress  of  all.  Dramuziando,  whom  the
adventure  of  that  day  had  cost  more  blood
than  either  of  his  companions,  seeing  his
enemy  so  terrible  and  strong,  felt  not  his  spi-
rit so  much  at  ease,  but  that  he  feared  the
end  of  his  days  ;  on  the  other  hand,  he  con-
tented himself,  seeing  that  he  had  adventured
to  lose  his  life  in  a  place  where  so  much  ho-
nour was  to  be  gained  :  and  he  said  within
himself.  Come  death  when  it  will,  I  will  sell
niy  life  so  dearly,  that  none  :;hall  live  to  boast
at  my  expence  ;  at  least  no  failure  shall  be
found  in  m}^  courage,  for  it  shall  come  to  its
end  in  its  duty,  and  Í  believe  that  these
tilings  are  thus  ordained  l)y  Divine  Provi-
dence, which  human  weakness  cannot  set
aside.  By  this  time  the  day  was  so  far  spent
that  night  hegan  to  close  in,  and  they,  that
they  might  make  use  of  \vh:it  little  daylight
remained,  at  the  cost  of  their  flesh  and  blood,
lell  to  more  ficrct;ly  than  ever,  waging  battle
more  cruelly    than   :ii    tirsti      Drnn.u/.iando


082

and  Bairocantc  seized  each  other  and  grap-
pled, each  putting  fortii  all  his  strength  ;
but  when  neitiier  could  overthrow  the  other,
they  separated  and  again  laid  on  their  blows
like  men,  each  of  wliom  was  willing  to  give
his  own  life  so  he  could  take  his  enemy's.
He  of  tlic  Dragon,  who  bore  deep  in  his  me-
Jiiory  the  giant's  embassage,  and  the  marriage
which  they  had  proposed  for  Polinarda,  and
knowing  that  she  beheld  him,  began  to  re-
double his  blows,  and  defended  liimself
from  those  of  Albaroco  so  skilfully,  that
what  with  wounds  and  fatigue  he  laid  him
at  his  feet,  as  one  dead;  and  not  content
with  this,  unlaced  his  helmet  and  cut  off  his
head,  and  threw  it  out  of  the  hsts,  being  full
joyful  for  his  victory.  Then  seeing  Dramu-
ziando  so  maltreated  that  his  armour  was
covered  with  his  own  blood,  he  thought  to
help  him,  and  aimed  at  Barrocante  one  of
his  accustomed  blows.  Dramuziando,  not
brooking  to  accept  of  such  aid,  caught  it
on  the  piece  of  his  shield  which  yet  hung
upon  his  arm  ;  it  was  so  mighty  a  one,  that
cutting  away  part  thereof,  it  fell  upon  the
lielmet,  which  v.  as  in  many  parts  laid  open.


3S3

and  made  in  liiá  bead  a  greater  wound  tlian
any  which  he  had  received  tVorn  Barrocante;
Draniiiziando  saying  the  while,,  Sir  knight,  if
hy  such  help  you  think  you  are  doing  me  a
friendly  part,  I  receive  it  as  an  injury;  leave
me  to  linish  my  battle,  and  if  you  see  me  con-
tjuered,  kill  him  who  conquers  me  ;  I  had  ra-
ther owe  you  this  love  in  death,  than  live  and
n main  bound  to  you  and  dishonoured.  At
this  the  knight  w  ithdrew,  sorrowful  because  of
the  wound  he  had  given  him,  and  which  })e
feared  might  endanger  liim:  nor  would  behave
wished  for  the  victory  over  Albaroco,  if  the
joy  bad  been  thus  to  be  abated.

By  this  time  Floriau  had  laid  Albuzarco
dead  upon  the  field,  remaining  himself  so
wounded  and  backed  by  him,  that  it  was  ne-
cessary to  carry  him  iVom  the  lists  ;  but  nei-
ther the  need  in  which  he  stood  of  succour,
nor  the  entreaties  of  other?,  could  prevail
upon  iiini  to  leave  the  field  till  he  had  seen
the  issue  of  Dramuziando's  battle.  Albayzar
now  withdrew  from  the  window,  giving  up
the  hope  which  he  had  at  first  entertained.
Targiana  did  the  same,  seeing  Florian  vie-


384.

toriou?,  a  thing  which  she  had  not  desired,
tor  the  love  \vl)i('h  she  had  formerly  borne
him  was  converted  into  liatred  :  lor  it  is  their
quality  to  have  no  mean  between  these  things,
but  always  eitlier  to  love  or  to  hate.  The  em-
peror, Primakon,  Pííleiídos,  and   the  other
princes,  seeing  the  mishap  which  liad  belai-
]cn    Dramuziando^    and    that    more    blood
issued  from  tlje  wound  which  the  knight  ol"
the  Dragon  had  given  him,  than  I'rom  all  his
others,  greatly  leared    what   might   be   tlie
end,  and  worthily  lauded  the  excellent  proof
ot"   courage    which    he     had   manitested  in
defending  Barrocante.     But  tliougli  all  had
this  fear  for  him,  because  he  was  so  beloved
by  all,   his  goodness   in   arms  had   so  much
in  reserve,  that  when  they  most  gave  him  for
dead,  he  came  forward   with  new   reverses,
overcoming  all  the  power  of  fortune;  and
as    he    now    felt    that    it    was    needfid     to
shew  the  whole  extent  of  his   strength,  he
fought  so    manfully,    that  Barrocante,   not
able  to  bear  up  against  such  a  weight  of  ri-
gorous blows,  fell  dead  before  him;  thus  be-
ing   as    good    a     companioa  to    the    other
twain  in  death  as  he  had  been  in  life.


Then  cainc  the  judges  into  the  field,  accom-
panied by  many  princes,  and  with  the  greatest
honour  that  ever  was  done  to  knights,  took
tliem  out  of  the  hsts.  The  emperor  had  not
patience  to  wait  for  them  above,  but  with
great  haste,  accompanied  by  his  sons,  cafiie
down  into  the  square  to  receive  them.  Pal-
laerin  and  Florian,  having  taken  off  their  hel-
liicls,  kissed  his  hands,  and  he  embraced
I  hem  with  many  tears,  which  exceeding  joy
is  as  apt  to  occasion  as  exceeding  grief.
And  having  clasped  Pahnerin  to  him  as  one
ulu)  v.as  as  dear  as  his  own  son!,  he  took  Tlo-
rian  in  his  arms,  whom  he  had  never  seen  be-
fore, and  with  words  full  of  love  took  them  up
with  liim  to  the  empress,  who,  with  Basilia
and  PoliiKirda  was  expecting  them  ;  for  the
report  who  they  were  had  now  reached
her.  The  emperor  presented  tlifim  to  her,
and  she  received  them  with  more  tears  than
lie  had  done,  women  being  more  affected  by
these  things.  Having  kissed  her  hands,  they
did  the  like  to  Gridonia  and  Basilia.  Pai^
merin,  whose  heart  was  Hxed  upon  only  his
lady  Polinarda,  as  soon  as  he  saw  her,  w  ith
lier  eyes  turned  downwards,  expecting  him

VOL.   II.  '2   L


38G

to   kiss  her  hand,  sucli  a  sudden  fear  did
overcharge  him,  that  he  fell  senseless  lo  the
ground  ;    and    though    she   perceived   from
whence  this  had   arisen,    the  emperor   and
those  who  were  present  thought  surely  that
his  wounds  and    loss  of  blood  had  brought
him    into   such  estate   of   weakness.      And
\  ernao,  Polcndos,  Prinialeon,  and  Beroldo,
taking  him  in  their  arms,  carried  him  into  a
chamber,    where    three    beds,    all   of    one
fashion,  were  prepared;   and  laying  him   iti
one,  Florian  and  Dramuziando  were  laid  in
the  others,  and  then  alike  attended  and  cured  ;
for  the  emperor  made  such  account  of  Dra-
muziando, that  he  would  suftcr  no  dilFerence
to  be  made    between    him   and   his   grand-
children.     The  masters  soon  certified   that
their  wounds  were  not   dangerous,  whereat
the  emperor  and  his  court  v,  ere  as  well  con-
tented as  Albayzar  was  the  contrary  ;   and
then,  accompanied  by  their  friends,  and  pro-
vided with  all  things  needfid,   they  conti-
nually talked  of  the   demand  of  the  giants,
and  the  end  w  liich  they  had  met  with  so  con-
formable to  their  deserts,  looking  every  day
for  war,  according  to  the  defiance.    At  other


limes  tlicy  changed  the  discourse,  thinking
it  needless  to  presage  future  evils^  and  also
because  peace  is  to  be  preserved  ^vith  words,
war  to  be  finished  by  arms.


w     Ij    •-<


38S


CHAPTER  9'Z.


Certain  days  after  this  cruel  combat,  FIo-
rendos,  seeing  Dramuziando  and  the  EngHsh
princes  out  of"  any  danger,,  as  his  longing
after  the  waters  of  the  Tagus  and  the  groves
of  the  castle  of  Almourol  would  not  let  him
rest,  neirher  could  he  bear  the  delights  of
the  court,  and  the  life  which  he  led  there,
determined  to  depart  and  restore  the  shield
of  Miraguarda  to  the  place  from  whence
Albayzar  took  it,  and  to  present  him  to  her,
where  he  should  abide  the  doom  of  her
judgment,  according  to  the  conditions  of
their  battle.  AVhen  he  had  well  provided
himself  of  armour  and  other  necessaries,  he
besought  leave  of  the  emperor,  and  having
bidden  iarewell  to  his  friends,  when  he  came
to  do  the  same  to  the  empress,  and  to  Gri-


3S9

donia  his  mother,  so  hardly  could  they  re"
suive  to  part  with  him,  that  before,  they
gained  of  him  to  stay  yet  tor  eight  days
longer.  In  the  whieh  time  the  emperor  had
concluded,  through  advice  ot"  his  council,
to  send  tlie  princess  Targiana  home  again
to  her  father,  accompanied  with  kingPolen-
dos,  and  divers  other  princes  and  knights;
hut  lirsi  he  would  content  the  desire  of  her
love  ;  wliercfore,  with  great  royalty,  he  mar-
ried her  to  Albayzar,  celebrating  the  day  of
this  ceremony,  whieli  was  performed  after  the
manner  of  Turkey,  with  such  royal  feasts,
that  the  like  had  never  been  seen  in  his  court
at  the  marriaije  of  his  own  children.  JSor
was  it  much  that  he  should  do  this,  for  in
so  doing  he  followed  his  disposition,  which
was  to  treat  every  one  according  as  his  rank
required,  even  though  they  w  ere  his  enemies
and  deserved  it  not.

All  persons,  of  whatever  rank,  attired  ami  a-
dorned  themselves  that  day  the  best  iliey
could,  according  to  their  means.  'I'argiana
came  forth  so  fair,  and  so  rich  with  ornaments
which  the  empcrorhad  given  her,  that  she  had
2  l3


390

noue  to  fear  or  be  envious  of  e.xccpt  Po-
liuarda,  who  in  the  gifts  of  nature  greatly
had  the  advantage  over  her,  Albayzar,  though
the  joy  of  these  feasts  was  great  to  him,  yet
was  he  troubled  when  he  remembered  that
lie  had  been  vancjuislied  by  Florendos,  and
was  by  him  to  be  presented  prisoner  before
JNJiraguarda.  The  marriage  day  being  past>
on  the  foUowina;  nioruiuii  Tariiiana  took
leave  of  the  empress,  G'ridonia,  and  Basiliif,
expressing  great  desire  always  to  serve
them,  in  remembranee  of  the  signal  favours
she  had  received  from  them.  But  though
she  made  these  aeknowledgments  with  words
and  demonstrations  worthy  to  be  esteemed
and  remembered,  much  greater  were  re-
served for  Polinarda,  to  whom  she  confessed
herself  to  be  far  more  indebted.  So  with
tears  on  one  side  and  on  the  other,  as  is  na-
tural at  parting,  she  took  her  leave,  and  iu
company  with  Polendosand  theotherknights,
set  forth  on  her  journey.  The  emperor  and
Primaleon,  and  the  princes  of  his  court,  ae-
compani-cd  her  a  league  out,  who  could  not
persuade  Florendos,  but  he  would  needs  pre-
sent Albiiv^ar  at  the  castle  of  Almourol,  to


S9l

witness  his  deeds  and  faithful  obedience  to
Miraguarda.  Targiaua  being  gone,  and  the
emperor  returned  to  the  city,  Florendos,  who
could  not  rest,  determined  to  puthis  resolution
inefl'ect;  and  thougii  tlie  empress  and  Gri-
donia  did  what  they  could  to  detain  him,  all
was  in  vain,  for  two  days  after  he  departed
from  Constantinople,  taking  with  him  Al-
bayzar,  unarmed,  upon  a  palfrey,  with  two
pages  ;  one  carried  the  shield  of  Miraguarda
in  a  silken  bag;  the  other  was  one  of  the
squires  of  'J  argiana,  who  carried  his  own,
and  whom  Florendos  in  courtesy  permitted
him  to  take.  Great  was  the  regrut  whicli
the  knights  wlio  remained  in  the  court  re-
sented for  tlie  departure  of  Florendos,  as  in
truili  his  conversation  deserved;  but  in  the
empress,  and  in  Gridona  his  mother,  it  was
far  greater  ;  for  as  women  have  by  nature
more  delicacy  in  feeling,  so  have  they  in
enduring  less  moderation.

The  damsel  of  Thrace,  seeing  Palmerin  in
good  disposition  of  health,  for  uhich  alone
she  had  tan  ied,  said  to  him  one  day  in  the
presence     of    the    emperor.     Sir  Palnicrin.


392

you  well  know  that  I  cannot  depart  from
licncc  without  you,  seeing  that  the  remedy
which  1  have  so  loniz;  sought  is  in  your  hand.
I  hesecch  you,  since  your  person  has  never
vet  been  denied  to  the  succour  of  those
who  are  in  need,  rcmcmhcr  now,  that  this
which  you  have  to  do  is  not  less  worthy  than
aught  which  30U  have  yet  done,  or  can  yet
meet  witli  :  and  vou  are  the  more  bound  to
it,  seeing  that  they  wlio  knew  you  not,  yet
affirmed  that  in  you  was  the  height  of  valour
comprised — for  by  those  "^^ho  knew  your
name,  the  proof  of  the  cup  might  have  been
excused.  The  princess  Lionarda  can  be
disenchanted  only  by  your  hand  :  by  this  you
may  increase  your  renown,  great  even  as  it
is;  and  as  in  conformity  of  person  and  beauty
you  are  not  unworthy  of  her,  you  may  join
in  marriage  with  her,  and  thus  increase  yof.r
state.  But  if,  perchance,  the  desire  you
have  to  follow  adventures  w  ill  not  suffer  3'ou
to  join  with  her  in  this  honourable  estate,
tlien  shall  she  stand  at  your  appointment,
to  marry  with  such  a  one  as  you  shall  think
meetest  for  her.  The  wounds  which  you
received  in  the  battle  with  the  giants  do  not


393

now  hinder  you  iVom  travelling  ;  this  excuse
no  longer  exists,  and  you  can  have  no  other.
1  heseech  you,  therefore,  let  us  to-morrow
set  forth.

Fair  damsel,  answered  Palnierin,  I  am  de-
voted to  travel,  and  never  did  I  reiuse  my
person  in  aid  of  any  ;  much  less  should  1
now,  where  I  am  so  bound  by  reason.  1
should  rejoice  could  I  depart  to-day  ;  but
vait  till  my  armour  is  finished,  for  in  what
plight  my  former  arms  were  leit  you  werî
witness.  I  pray  you,  therefore,  let  not  this
little  delay  offend  you,  it  being  so  necessary.
Satisfied  and  contented  w^as  the  damsel  with
this  answer  ^  but  the  emperor,  (who  loved
him  better  than  any  other  of  his  e,randsoai)
conceived  great  grief  to  lose  his  company  so
soon.  From  him  he  went  to  the  empress,
who  also  was  sorry  he  should  go;  but  as  ghe
loved  Fiorendos  better  than  any  otih-r,  in  lier
regret  for  liis  absence  she  expected  to  forget
Palmerin.  Polmarda,  though  she  had  al-
ways so  constrained  herself  as  never  to
show  him  any  sign  which  might  content
him,  yet,  when  she  saw   him   about   to  de-


3.94

part,  love,  whicli  had  tilrcady  sliiick  root  in
lier  heart,  occasioned  wonders.  Not  able
to  bear  it,  she  retired  to  her  chamber  with
Uramaciana,  and  luivinii!;  fastened  the  doors,
began  to  wring  her  iiands  and  manifest  other
tokens  of  wliat  she  ieh,  her  face  streaming
with  tears.  Dramaciana  had  great  ruth  for
this  extreme  passion,  and  though  she  ahvay
l\new  her  inclination  toward  I'ahnerin,  see-
ing her  now  so  differently  moved  from  what
she  had  at  any  time  been  before,  sought  to
console  her,  saying,  Lady,  I  never  thought
that  any  misfortune  could  deprive  you  of
discretion  ;  if  your  grief  be  grounded  on  the
departure  of  Palmerin,  why  do  you  not
consider  that  his  desire  is  to  return  where
lie  may  behold  you  ;  and  though  your  high
estate  and  v.orth  did  not  suffice,  yet  dare  I
assure  you,  that  the  perfection  of  your  beauty
is  sufficient  to  bring  free  hearts  into  thral-
dom, and  enforce  them  to  passionate  ex-
tremes. Palmcrin  would  be  Avell  pleased  to
wed  with  you,  and  I  well  know  that  this  liope
supports  him,  and  that  were  it  taken  from
him  he  would  die.  Do  vou  therefore  favour
him,  and  look  upon  him,  and  let  him  per-


S<)5

ccive  ill  you  some  acknouledgracnt  of  his
deserving  ;  fur  this  will  make  him  so  con-
tented as  will  urge  him  the  sooner  to  return
to  the  courtj  as  you  desire.

Polinarda  having  received  some  content  by
the  words  of  Dramaciana^  for  till  now  the
force  of  grief  liad  kept  her  spirits  dead  and
her  tongue  mute,  began  now  to  say,  All  !
Uramaciana,  what  would  you  have  me  do  ?
for  how  I  love  Pahiierin  1  cannot  dissemble,
and  to  confess  it  to  him,  I  would  not  for
any  price,  least  it  should  seem  to  iiiin  that
the  greatness  of  his  state  is  the  cause,  seeing
that  I  did  not  when  he  had  no  hope  of  such.
Besides,  1  remember  that  he  is  going  to
disenchant  Lionarda,  (jf  whom  it  is  said,
that  she  is  llie  fairest  woman  in  the  world.
1  fear  that  this,  and  the  desire  of  dominion
which  among  men  haili  such  power,  toge-
ther with  the  remembrance  of  the  wrongs  I
have  done  him,  may  move  him  not  to  return,
but  to  wed  with  her.  I  do  not  believe,  re-
plied Dramaciana,  that  inconstancy  can  iiar-
bour  in  the  heart  of  him  who  proved  him-
bclf  so  loyal  in  the  adventure  of  the  cup;  if


396

vou  win  vouchsafe  me  the  leave,  I  will  in
private  talk  with  him  at  the  dance  this  even-
in-,  without  letting  him  suspect  that  it  pro-
ceeds IVoiu  any  but  myself,  as  his  friend,  and
,o  see  what  his  affections  are.  Pohnardu
replied,  Dramaciana,  God  grant  that  I  may
one  dav  be  able  to  requite  the  mucii  1  owe
thee  !  Í  like  this  well  ;  but  of  all  loves,  I  pray
you,  use  the  circumstance  of  your  matter  m
such  sort,  that  he  perceive  nothing  therein
to  be  done  with  mv  knowledge.  Then  dry-^
ing  her  tears,  .he  returned  to  the  empress.

But  Palmerin,  seeing  the  time  of  his  depar-
ture so  nigh,  did   not  pass   the  day  in  plea-
sure, but  retiring  to  his  own  chamber  with
Selviam,  said  to  him  many  things  worthy  oj
compassion.     What  most  grieved  him  was,
that  he  could  not  find  in  his  memory  the  trace
of  any  one  kindness  at  any  time  vouchsafed
by  his  ladv,  though  there  were  a  thousand
acts  of  rigour  of  which  he  had  never  com^
pUined.  Selviam,being  discreet,  consoled  him
ivith  such  eood  reasons,  that  though  Palmerm
^vould  not^assent  to  them,  because  he  would
'  Bot  entertain  my  such  good  hope,  yet  he


S97

roul<J  mnke   no  jeply,    and  thus  tliey  past
I  lie  ddy.

Enl  wlu^n  the  evening-  came,  lie  went  to  tlie
iMiipress'i  chamber,  wliere  the  knights  und
huUes  danced  ;  and  he  came  and  sate  down
by  Drama-ciana,  that  hcing  the  most  certain
place  where  lie  was  to  be  iound,  and  began
to  converse  with  her  upon  that  wiiicii  touched
him  nearest,  saying,  Lady,  LÏ  I  could  utter
my  complaints  to  any,  by  whom  I  had  opi-
nion to  receive  redress,  with  glad  conseut  I
would;  but  seeing  to  none  but  you  I  dare
bewray  thein,  I  be&eech  you  tell  me,  how
have  I,  being  so  much  your  friend  and  ser-
vant, deserved  so  ill .  of  you,  as  that  you
should  consent  that  the  neglect  of  the  lady
Polinarda  should  destroy  me  ?  At  least,  Í
Would  have  her  remember  me,  even  if  it
were  to  do  me  hurt,  if  1  deserve  no  other
remembrance.  AV'luit  shall  I  doi"  Tlie  whole
business  of  my  thoughts  is  how  to  serve  her,
and  she  will  not  remember  that  I  do  this,
that  she  may  withhold  from  me  any  requital,
il"  any  be  due  from  her.  Look  now  wiih  how
little  I  am  content;  in  payment  for  so  maiiv
Vol.  II.  'Z  M


3<)S

troubles,  1  wish  no  other  satisfaction,  than  to
think  that  sometimes  she  knows  I  endure
them  ;  not  that  she  would  relieve  me  from
them,  for  in  the  hour  when  she  imposed  them
iipon  me  I  lost  that  hope.  I  have  never  be-
fore so  freely  disclosed  myself,  but  now  nei-
ther time  nor  sufl'erance  will  let  me  conceal
it  longer,  especially  from  you,  towards
whom  I  have  erred  in  not  discovering  it
sooner.  I  beseech  you,  help  me  to  some
Temedy,  and  if  you  know  that  there  be  none,
]ct  not  me  know  it,  for  I  would  not  know  that  ]
which  would  kill  me,  and  prevent  me  from
farther  serving  her  who  will  not  remember
iny  life,  and  from  relating  to  you  what  I  '
suffer.

Sir  Palmerin,  answered  Dramaciana,  who
was  to  think  that  any  one  in  this  house  could
remember  you,  seeing  the  patience  you  had
to  wander  about  so  long,  without  ever  re-
turning toit?  This  moves  one  to  think  either
that  there  was  no  one  who  should  remem-
ber you,  or  that  you  rather  complain  for
custom  than  cause,  as  you  are  all  wont  to  do.
You   go   now   to   end  the  enchantment  of


399

Lionarda  ;  she  is  faii;,  lich^  and  above  all,
inheritrix  of  a  great  and  noble  realm  ;  it
may  be,  that  her  new  love  will  make  you
forget  old  thoughts,  and  then  you  will  have
nothing  to  hope  from  any  one,  nor  to  com-
plain of.  Lady,  replied  Palmerin,  if  I  had
at  any  time  deserved  that  you  should  say  to
me  words  so  grievous,  I  should  not  have
wondered  to  hear  them;  but  mine  aíTection
hath  ever  been  so  stedfast  to  serve  you,  that
any  wrong  received  from  you  is  far  greater
than  if  it  had  come  from  another.  I  would
Lionarda  were  far  more  beautiful  than  she  is
said  to  be,  that  you  might  see  if  that  could
shake  my  faith.  Let  her  dominions  be  great,
this  is  not  the  satisfaction  which  my  desires
seek.  If  you  will  vouchsafe  to  prevail  upon
the  lady  Polinarda  to  hear  me,  I  shall  be-
heve  that  you  wish  to  do  me  service.  Now
I  believe,  said  Dramaciana,  that  your  con-
stancy cannot  be  changed.  As  for  speaking
Avith  the  lady  Polinarda,  do  not  imagine
that  that  can  be  done  before  your  de-
parture. Go  your  way  ;  when  you  are  re-
turned, I  hope  to  have  so  settled  it  that  she
will  hear  you,  and  that,  if  you  may  believe
M  2      *


400

me,  saving  Avbat  is  due  to  her  honour  and
dignity,  she  will  not  gainsay  your  wishes.
The  d:in»  ipt^  is  now  over,  and  there  is  no
time  lor  farther  talk  ;  Jet  this  sufBce  to  give
you  good  hope  on  your  journe}'  :  and  so,  as
he  could  not  answer  her,  they  parted.  The
empress  went  to  her  chamber,  and  the  em-
peror with  her,  and  all  the  others  each  to
his  apartment.  Palmerin,  somewhat  more
contented  with  that  he  had  heard  from  Dra-
maciana,  knowing  how  close  she  was  with
Polinarda,  past  that  night  more  peacefully
than  the  late  ones.

Early  on  the  morrow  the  armourer  brought
him  his  arms,  which  were  not  only  fair,  but
coniormable  to  the  times  :  they  were  quar-
tered with  white  and  grey  with  butterflies
of  gold,  and  in  his  shield,  in  a  grey  field,  he
bare  a  man  torn  in  pieces  by  a  tN'ger,  which
made  him  in  every  place  to  be  called  the
Knight  of  the  Tiger.  Then  went  he  with  the
danisel  of  Thrace  to  take  his  leave  of  the
emperor,  as  he  was  returning  from  mass.
The  emperor  brought  him  to  the  empress's
chamber,  to  whom  he  humbly  did  his  duty,  as


401

also  to  Giidonia  and  Basilia  ;  but  when  in  like
manner  he  came  to  take  leave  of  Polinardiv,
his  heart  so  greatly  panted,  that  if  his  self-
command  had  not  been  very  great,  he  must
needs  have  been  discovered.  She  could  not
at  that  parting  so  well  dissemble,  but  that
some  chang(^  of  colour  was  to  be  seen.  Some
tears  were  shed  by  those  ladies,  though  not
so  many  as  at  the  departure  of  Florendos.
Having  left  the  apartment,  J\ilmerin  took
leave  oi  l*rimaleon,  V  ernao,  and  his  brother,
of  Dramu/ciando  and  his  other  friends,  w  ho
unwillingly  let  him  depart,  and  in  company
with  Selviam  and  the  damsel,  took  his  way
towards  Thrace.

On  the  day  after  his  departure,  two  Alle-
niaigne  ambassadors  arrived  at  the  court  in
quest  of  Vernao,  summoning  him  to  go  lake
possession  of  the  sceptre  and  government,
for  tlie  emperor  Trinco  was  dead.  Great  was
the  sorrow  which  these  tidings  occasioned,
especially  to  the  emperor,  for  they  twain  had
been  great  friends.  And  from  thencefor-
ward he  looked  when  his  own  hour  should
come,  the  age  at  which  he  was  occasioning

M  3


402

this  fear.     The  empress  inarle  great  lamen-
lation  for  her   brother.     After  some   days,
Vernao,  with  his  wife  the  empress  Basiha,
accompanied  by  all  the  princes  and  knights
who  were  in  the  court,  hej^an  his  journey.
She  was  at  that  time  great  with  a  son,  who  was
afterwards  called  Trineo,  like  his  grandfather,
and  was  abetter  knight  than  he.   ^^'hen  they
reached  Germany,  though  the  death  of  the
emperor  was  much  felt  by   his  subjects,  he
having  been  one  of  the  most  bomitiful  princes
in  the  world,  yet  inasmuch  as   the   people
always  delight  in  novelties,  they  received  the
son  with  such  rejoicings  as  if  they  had  clean
forgotten  the  loss   of  his   father.     He    was
crowned  in  the  city  of  Cologne,   with   such
magnificai  triumphs  as  never  were  seen  the
like  in  the  days  of  his  predecessors.

On  the  day  of  his  coronation  he  conferred

the  dutchy  of  Saxony  and  county  of  Flanders
on  his  brother  Polinardo,  a  prince  who  till
now  had  been  without  estates,  but  not  with-
out princely  virtues.  And  the  more  to  ho-
nour these^  feasts,  Tlorian  of  the  Desert
was  then  present,  and  the  giant  Dramuzi-


403

ando,  Albanis  of  Frisa,  Roramontc,  pnnce
Graciano,  Beroldo  prince  of  Spain,  Ger-
inam  of  Orleans,  Don  Rosuel,  Belisarte,
and  Ponipides,  who  all  escorted  Vernao,  to
do  service  to  the  emperor  ;  for  the  other
knights  and  princes  were  gone  in  company
of  Polcndos  to  guard  Targiana.  After  the
coronation  they  went  their  way,  each  seek-
ing adventures,  thinking  nothing  of  the  toils
they  must  pass  through,  neither  fearing
liazard  nor  death  :  for  though  these  things
be  apprehended,  the  apprehension  ought  not
to  appear.


404


CHAPTER   y 3.


King  Polendos  and  his  companions,  who
were  a  hundred,  among  whom  were  princes
and  other  heirs  of"  great  estates,  travel-
led on  till  they  reached  a  sea-port,  where
four  royal  galleys  awaited  them,  which  the
emperor  had  given  orders  to  store  and  pro-
vide with  artillery  and  other  munition  and  im-
plements of  war,  that  if  any  disaster  chanced,
they  might  not  be  taken  unprepared.  Targi-
ana,  embarking  in  the  captain's  ship,  Polen-
dos, with  twenty-five  knights  went  with  her';
the  others  were  equally  divided  in  the  other
three  gallics.  So  spreading  sails  to  the  wind,
W'hich  was  then  fair,  they  thought  now  in
short  time  to  cross  the  sea  of  Turkey  ;  but
fortune,  who  had  otherwise  determined,  after
they  were  partly  out  at  sea,  changed  the


405

Nvind  round  to  so  opposite  a  quarter,  that  in
a  few  days  they  were  driven  upon  the  coast
of  Africa,  which  was  at  that  time  under  the
dominion  of  their  enemies.  There  the  wind
fell,  and  they  were  assaulted  by  ten  galleys,
belonging  to  the  king  of  jNIorocco  and  lord
of  Ceuta,  who  as  then  had  all  the  country
under  his  subjection.  But  though  in  times
of  great  danger,  prudent  counsel  and  great
courage  are  rarely  found  in  one  man,  Po-
lendos  behaved  himself  so  wisely,  and  cou-
rageously as  well,  that  by  great  skill  and
singular  bravery  he  discomfited  them,  killing
his  enemies  and  taking  prisoner  Molcy  Xeque,
commander  of  the  fleet,  and  nephew  to  the
king,  being  the  son  of  his  sister  and  the
king  of  Tunis;  he  on  his  part  not  losing  a
man,  though  some  were  wounded.  With
the  glory  of  this  conquest,  he  came  to  the
princess  Targiana,  who  was  now  well  nigh
dead,  d  reading  the  d isd> tors  which  ihe  thought
were  always  prepared  for  her  by  fortune  ;  and
comforting  her  with  news  of  their  victory,
they  set  forth  «Mgain,  by  force  of  oars,  the
wind  not  permitting  ilirm  to  carry  sail,  and
they  not  decminglhemselves  safe  upon  that


406

coast.  Thus  ere  long  they  made  way  again  into
the  Turkish  sea,  and  then  in  short  time  ar-
rived at  the  city,  where  the  Great  Turk  was
resident.  There  casting  anchor  close  along
shore,  they  saluted  the  fort,  and  discharged
their  ordnance  in  such  a  brave  peal,  that  the
people,  not  accustomed  to  so  sudden  a
greeting,  came  running  on  heaps  to  the
haven,  others  to  the  walls  and  windows,  to
know  the  cause  of"  such  a  brave  warninu;.


The  Great  Turk  himself  came  riding  with
his  courtly  attendants  towards  the  haven,
on  a  grey  horse,  with  his  long  white  beard
down  to  his  girdle  ;  and  being  a  goodly  person
and  full  of  years,  he  appeared  worthy  of  the
great  dominions  \\hich  he  })Ossessed  ;  for
this  advantage  they  have  whom  nature  hath
gifted  with  bodily  perfections,  as  on  the  other
hand,  actions  however  good  are  sometimes
little  honoured  for  lack  of  personal  autho-
rity in  him  who  performs  them.  Polendos
ordered  the  prow  of  the  galley  to  be  turned
ashore,  took  Targiana  by  the  hand,  and  ac-
companied with  his  noble  train  of  princes
and  knights,  armed  in  rich  and  sumptuous


407

oidcrj  îîhc  and  her  damsels  also  bcin^  at-
tired ill  rich  liabilimeiits  wliieli  they  hud
brought  from  Coiisiaiitinople  lor  the  nonce,
they  landed,  and  largiana  uitli  her  eyes
on  the  í^roiuid,  and  many  tears,  woidd  have
humbled  herself  to  kiss  the  feet  of  her  father,
y.iu)  being  thus  surprised  diil  not  know  her,
nor  what  it  might  be.  Uut  w  hen  he  saw  that
it  was  his  daughter,  thougli  his  anger  had
been  very  great,  yet  his  fatherly  love  was
such  that  he  could  not  but  iorgive  her  on  the
instant,  and  he  took  lier  in  his  arms  and
embraced  her  manv  times.  Then  sending
ior  pahVeys  for  her  and  her  damsels,  he
w  ould  have  horses  brought  also  lor  Polendos
and  his  companions,  whom  he  received  with
much  courtesy,  understanding  who  they
were.  All  the  people  of  the  city  crowded
that  way  to  behold  their  lady,  and  with  great
joy  accompanied  her.  'J'he  Great  Turk  or-
dered ]\)K>ndos  and  all  his  company  to  be
lodged  in  his  own  palace,  feasting  them  in
such  noble  wise,  that  in  the  emperor's  court
they  thought  themselves  at  no  time  better
used.  Thus  continued  they  in  all  possible
pleasure,    till   the    eve   of  their   departure.


40S

whiMí  tlic  Turk,  whoso  iuUMUion  was  a  damii-
ahlo  one,  prcpiucd    such  a  primely  supper,
as  ill  all  the  lime  of  lluir    hcinsi  ihoro,  or
clsowhcio,  they   uvwv  had  the  lik<%  passini;
the  lime  in  talk  of  the  einpei\>r  PalmiMiii.  a>i
also  the    honourahlo   u>;a!j;e  of  his  dani^hU'r
at    (\Mislaiitim)ple.      'I'he     lahlcs^    were    no
sooner   withiiniuii,  hut    there   eiiiired    fiftv
armed   ami    well   appointed    kniuhts.   swuril
in  hand,  t-iyinti  out,   lie  still,  and  Jit   not  a
man  stii  unless  he  would  prosontly   lose  his
life,   lhe  Great  Turk  hail  gone  out  at  a  secret
tloor,  at\d    from   tlieuee  ascend  in  u;  to  a  jj^n!-
Icry  ahovethe  hall,  lookeil  tlown  upon  ihcin.
ami  saitl  with  a  loud  voice.    Yield,  Polendos,
and  grant   thyself  anil   thy  com[>any   to    be
iny  prisoners,  otherwise,  you  shall  ail  pre-
sently   lo>e    your  head<.     lUit    as    it  is  ih»
nature  of  brave  hearts  rather  to  die  in  free-
dom than  to  live  in  captivity,  Polendos  with
his  knights  took  one  corner  of  the  hall,  un
armed  as  they  were,   and  having  onlv  their
swords,  but  resolute  rather  to  die  than  yield  ;
and  being  full   angry,  he  said  to  the   Turk,
Certes,  two  things  have  been  ill    bestowed
upon  this  thy  person  and  thy  state,  and  it  Is


409

plain  tliat  nature  lies  in  many  oi'  \\cr  works.
1  \vi>n]<l  i'jiin  know,  for  what  causo  you  uQ'av
lis  this  villainy,  considering  how  well  your
daughter  hath  hcon  used  at  Constantinople,
and  the  service  we  have  done  you,  to  con-
(hifi  Ik  r  to  your  court  with  more  honour
than  you  deserve.  Certos,  none  ought  ever
Id  Irusi  i\\v  wicked,  lor  the  guerdons  which
tluy  hestow  arc  conlornnd)lc  to  their  condi-
tion. J'olendos,  answered  ih(  Turk,  to  the
emperor  thy  lord,  and  ihyseil",  you  may  be-
lieve that  I  would  do  whatever  lay  in  my
power;  hut  I  am  so  olTended  with  his  refusal
to  deliver  up  the  knight  who  took  my  diiugh-
Icr  hence,  that  you  shall  iu)t  (le|)art  iVom
hence,  till  the  emperor  give  him  into  my
hands.

'JVusl  me,  (]Uuih  Polendos,  our  hope  would
st;uid  in  hard  suspcncc,  if  we  shoidd  stay
here  un  this  condition,  wherefore  we  esteem
it  uiori'  honour  to  ciul  our  lives  in  the  face  of
our  cntiuiics,  than  to  live  in  continual  pri-
son. And  hereupon  assure  thyself,  that  the
emperor  would  lieftr  lose  his  whole  kingtlom
ihiUi  satisly  lliy  desire  with  him,  who  is  one
VOL.    U.  t:  is


410

of  the  best  knights  on  the  earth,  and  whom
he  best  loves.  Well,  said  the  Turk,  then
must  you  resolve  yourselves,  either  presently
to  abide  the  death,  or  to  remain  my  pri-
soners.

At  these  words,  the  fair  Targiana  came
lip  and  cast  herself  on  her  knees  before  her
father,  beseeching  him  not  to  use  such  cru-
elty to  those  who  had  not  deserved  it,  and
reminding  him  of  the  honour  which  had
been  done  her  in  the  emperor's  court,  how
wellslie  had  been  received,  and  how  lovingly
entreated,  and  of  the  service  which  they  had
done  h(  r  in  the  vo^^age.  Then  seeing  her
father  was  nothing  moved  by  her  prayers,
and  not  bearing  to  see  them  slain,  and  be
herself  unable  to  help  them,  she  went  down
into  the  hall,  and  even  as  earnestly  as  she
had  pleaded  with  her  father,  now  intr'^ated
Polendos  and  his  company,  that  they  would
suffer  themselves  to  remain  as  prisoners  ;
and  during  the  time  tliey  were  in  prison,
she  would  devise  such  means  as  she  could
to  assist  them.  So  much  she  urged,  and  so
well,  that  at  length  laying  down  their  swords.


411

they  yielded  themselves^  when  they  were
presently  carried  into  a  deep  dungeon  in  a
strong  tower,  and  there  were  laden  with  as
many  irons  as  they  could  possibly  bear.
Targiana,  as  long  as  they  continued  there,
Avould  put  on  nothing  but  serge,  ajid  lived
in  continual  sorrow.

The  Turk  commanded  the  Christian  ffallevs
to  be  seized,  and  set  Mulcy  Xeque  at  liberty,
and  presently  sent  uord  to  the  soldan  oi'i*er-
sia,  and  the  other  pagan  princes,  how  he  had
divers  oi"  the  emperor's  kniglits  prisoners,  on
whom  he  determined  sharp  revenge  for  the
stealing  of  his  daughter,  and  the  death  of
Barrocante  and  his  companions  ;  and  he  in-
vited them  to  come  and  witne:»s  the  execu-
tion, saying  he  would  wait  till  such  time  as
they  should  appoint.  This  purport  appeared
ill  to  all  these  princes;  butas  the  wicked,
though  they  may  know  what  is  evil,  have  it
not  in  them  to  do  good,  they  commended
him  for  what  he  had  done,  lauding  it  as  a
thing  necessary  for  his  lionour;  but  by  all
means,  giving  him  counsel  not  to  kill  them,
until  Albayzar  were  returned,  U])on  whom
2  N  "^


41í2

their  death  might  else  be  revenged.  This
advice  seemed  good  to  him,  and  for  this
reason  he  somewhat  enlarged  their  prison,
and  gave  them  permission  to  send  away  their
esquires  ;  but  the  esquires  by  no  means  would
forsake  their  masters,  desiring,  as  they  had
accompanied  them  in  prosperity,  so  not  to
leave  them  now  in  this  great  mischance.  Only
lîelcar  commanded  his  to  go  and  certify
the  emperor  what  great  misiiap  had  befal-
len them.  Much  did  this  news  trouble  the
emperor  ;  and  Primaleon,  being  full  of  anger
and  melancholy,  said,  My  lord  and  father,
this  mischance  is  only  procured  by  j'our
means,  for  that  you  dealt  so  courteously
with  them  who  had  neither  quality  nor  any
motions  of  desert  in  them.  But  now  I
would  gladly  see  what  you  can  accomplish
any  way  to  help  them  ;  for  I  judge  that  all
our  power  is  not  sufficient  to  deliver  them
from  the  bondage  wherein  the}'  are.  Where-
fore, I  think  it  best,  that  you  send  with  all
speed  to  seek  Albayzar  and  seize  him,  through
whom  you  may  recover  king  Polendos  and
your  knights  ;  other  way  I  cannot  perceive,
what   may   pleasure    them,    or  profit   you.


413

This  ought  not  to  displease  you,  for  faith  is
not  to  be  kept  with  faith- breakers.

ISly  son,  answered  the  einpcror,  if  besides
Polendos  and  Bclcar  and  their  companions,
I  had  seen  thee  prisoner  also,  do  not  believe
that  1  would  have  endeavoured  to  deliver
you  b}'  any  arts  foreign  to  my  nature,  even
thouííh  there  were  no  other  remedv.  I
would  rather  see  ye  die  in  prison  than  do
aught  dishonourable  :  this  difference  I  would
have  between  the  Tuik  and  me,  which  is
what  there  is  between  the  good  and  the  bad.
Albayzar  is  not  guilty  of  the  ofl'ence  of  the
Turk  :  therefore  it  were  against  honour  that
he  should  suil'er  for  another's  fault,  but  this
is  it  whereat  1  am  most  amazed,  that  Tar-
giana  will  suffer  this  great  discourtesy,  con-
sidering the  honour  she  received  in  our
court.

Certes,  sire,  quoth  the  esquire,  there  is  no
cause  to  complain  of  her,  for  she  remembered
what  she  owed  yon,  and  did  all  she  could.
\\'hercu[)on,herehearsed  the  whole maunerof
their  imprisoument,which  the  emperor  having


414

lioiucl,  departed  with  the  nnpress  into  hh
chamber,  where  we  must  forsake  him,  and
return  to  Floreiidos.

He  travelled  on  toward  S[)ain,  inectins:
no  let  upon  his  road,  Tor  adventures  were  now
scarce  ;  till  one  day  about  the  hour  of  ves-
pers, they  came  into  a  great  and  fair  valle\
where  was  a  fair  caslle,  which  Albayzar
knowing,  said;,  At  the  foot  of  that  castle  I
went  through  the  greatest  danger  that  ever
I  was  in,  for  giving  aid  to  a  damsel,  whom
two  knights  sought  to  dishonour.  I  slew
them,  with  ten  more,  as  also  their  lord  l^ra-
morante  the  Cruel,  who  kept  this  castle,  at
w  hich  exploit  Palmorin,  Tlurian,  and  I'om-
pides  were  present.  I  pray  you  let  us  go  to
the  castle  and  rest  a-while,  ior  the  lady  to
whom  I  gave  it,  at  such  time  as  1  delivered
her  out  of  danger,  will  receive  us  with  a
courteous  and  friendly  welcome.  1  am  eon-
tent,  quoth  Florendos,  seeing  we  have  no
other  place  to  lodge  in  this  night  that  Í
can  see  near  here  about.

Put  this  castle  had  changed  its  possessor.


415

and  before  they  ccme  up  to  it,  a  squire  came
forth  before  them  ;  behind  him  at  some  httle
distance  were  four  knii^hts,  well  armed.  He
approathing  Florendos,  said,  Sir  KnÍL(!r,
the  great  Astribor  sendeth  straight  com-
mandment, that  you  and  your  companion
do  presently  yield  your  armour  under  Ins
obeisance;  the  denial  whereof  shall  cause
him  to  use  more  cruelty  toward  yon,  than
he  would  williii;j:'y  oiler  to  any  good  knight.
No  other  thing  doth  he  request  of  you,  but
to  know  if  eitiicr  you  be,  or  can  report  to
him  tidingi  of  a  kniglit  who  haih  slain  vil-
lainously and  by  treason,  Draniorante,  his
cousin,  sometime  lord  and  rightful  possessor
of  this  castle,  and  given  it  to  a  damsel,  whom
he  kcepeth  in  prison,  till  fortune  send  the
knight  iuiher,  when  he  will  burn  them  both
alive.

Albayzar  advanced  himself  to  make  an-
swer ;  but  because  he  was  unarmed,  Floren-
dos  thus  replied  to  the  squire.  Go  tell
Astribor,  that  I  am  not  the  knight  he  would
so  gladly  find,  but  I  am  well  acquainted  with
him,  and  know  that  he  slew  Dramorante  and
VOL.  II.  2   o


4lG

nil  his  kniglits  deservedly^  ;:nd  like  a  hrave
man.  As  ibr  mine  armour,  1  shall  iioi  part
with  it,  except  it  be  when  I  am  more  secure.
Well,  said  the  scjuirc,  since  you  will  not
yield  it  by  gentle  means,  you  must  prepare
yourself  against  these  kni<^hts,  wlio  are  here
appointed  to  take  their  armour  awnv  per-
force, who  refuse  to  yield  it  according  to
custom.

riorendos  seeing  the  knights  provided  to
joust,  took  a  lance  and  enccnmtéred  them  ;
all  four  brake  their  lances  njion  him,  and  did
not  move  him  in  his  seat  ;  but  he  ran  the
one  through  whom  he  charged,  and  bore
him  dead  to  the  ground  ;  then  drawing  out
his  sword,  before  Astribor  could  come  out,
who  was  arming  himself  in  great  haste,  be-
lieving this  to  be  he  who  had  slain  J)ra'mo-
ranle,  he  cut  off  the  arm  of  another,  and  so
handled  the  remaining  twain,  maugre  their
stout  defence,  that  when  he  came  out  they
were  not  able  to  move.  He  came  upon  a  great
roan  horse,  armed  in  black  ;  and  seeing  Flo-
rendos  destitute  of  a  lance,  because  he
thought  any  courtesy  which  he  used  might


417

Le  to  his  cost,  he  gave  his  horse  the  spury,
a;jd  ran  against  him  with  such  force,  that
he  drove  hiin  and  his  horse  lo  the  ground.
Florendos  seeing  himself  in  this  strait,  and
beino:  full  of  animer  and  melancholy  at  the  vil-
lainy  of  Astribor,  protecting  himself  with
the  little  of  his  shield  which  was  left,  ad-
vanced on  foot  towards  him,  who  remained
on  horseback  awaiting  him.  But  thinking
Florendos  might  kill  his  horse,  and  he  re-
ceive some  hurt  by  the  tall,  and  being  also
confident  in  his  own  strength  and  courage,  he
alightedj  and  they  began  a  great  and  terrible
battle,  wherein  Florendos  dealt  with  him  in
such  courageous  manner,  that  bringing  him
at  his  feet,  he  cut  off  his  head  in  recom-
pence  of  liis  disloyal  acts.

Cerîain  knights  that  were  in  the  castle,  and
had  seen  their  lord  and  master  so  conquered,
left  their  armour  and  came  toward  Florendos,
to  whom  in  reverent  manner  they  yielded
themselves  and  the  keys  of  the  castle.  He,
before  he  would  have  his  wouiuls  cured,  gave
order  that  the  damsel  should  be  delivered
from  prison  ;  whereupon  Aibayzar  entered,
C  o   2


418

and  found  her  in  a  dungeon,  with  some  light
irons  i;pon  her  leet;  but  in  such  lamentable
plight,  that  he  did  not  know  her.  So  lead-
ing her  to  Florcndos,  when  siie  came  into
the  light  and  saw  him,  remembering  the
danger  from  which  he  had  once  before  deli-
vered her,  but  holding  the  present  bcaefit  as
greater  than  the  former,  she  fell  at  his  feet,
and  began  with  many  tears  to  thank  him  for
so  many  service?.  But  he  replied.  Lady,  for
this  deliverance  you  must  thank  sir  Floren-
dos;  he  performed  it,  for  I,  for  my  misfor-
tune, can  give  succour  to  none,  not  being
permitted  to  bear  arms.  Ill  befall  him  that
hath  done  tliis  ill  to  you,  cried  the  damsel,
for  knightly  arms  were  never  better  bestowed
than  on  you;  and  if  this  continue  long,  great
loss  will  it  be  to  many,  Avho  stand  daily  in
need  of  such  feats  as  yours.

Albayzar  not  suffering  her  to  run  so  far  in
his  praise,  framed  his  talk  to  another  pur-
pose; desirous  to  know,  in  what  manner
Astribor  had  happened  thither.  Sir,  quoth
she,  this  Astribor  was  cousin  to  Dramorante
the  Cruel — a  man  of  more  malicious  nature


419

than  evea  he;  he  was  no  sooner  advertised
of  his  death,  but  with  ten  knights  he  came
here,  where  finding  small  force  to  resist
him,  he  entered,  causing  all  he  found  here
to  be  put  to  the  sword,  reserving  me  in  pri-
son, till  he  might  find  you,  when  he  intended
to  burn  us  both  together;  and  till  he  might
come  by  you,  he  ordained  this  custom,  making"
his  kniglits  attack  all  whom  they  could  find,
and  when  they  were  brought  before  him  and
he  found  them  not  to  be  whom  he  sought,
then  would  he  command  them  to  be  slain.
Now,  quoth  Albayzar,  this  cruelty  is  worthily-
finished.

By  this  time  they  had  disarmed  Florendos
and  laid  him  in  bed  ;  his  wounds,  which  were
few  and  trifling,  were  carefully  respected  by
the  damsel,  who  as  ye  have  heard  before  had
good  knowledge  in  the  art  of  cViirurgcry,
where  they  staid  longer  than  the  prince  Flo-
rendos willingly  would  :  lor  any  delay  seemt
long  to  him  who  hath  his  heart  elsewhere.


2o  3


420


CHAPTER  94.


Such  speed  Palmerin  of  England  made  in
company  of  the  damsel  with  whom  he  travel-
led, that  they  quickly  entered  the  iiingdom  of
Thrace  ;  \vhereat  the  damsel  was  very  joy-
ful, seeing  the  labour  she  had  spent  so  many
years,  began  as  now  so  happily  to  prosper.
This  damsel  being  well  known,  and  highly
honoured  through  all  the  kingdom,  great
resort  of  people  came  from  the  towns  and
places  through  which  they  passed,  to  receive
herjoyfidly,  who  had  been  so  long  time  ab-
sent.

These  beholding  Palmerin,  gave  forth  these
speeches  :  Behold  our  gracious  lord  and
sovereign  !  happy  shall  his  subjects  be^  to  be


421

under  the  government  of  such  a  nohle  prince,
in  whom  remaincth  all  courage  and  loyalty  ;
who  shall  finish  the  enchanted  estate  of  our
princess,  enjoy  her  as  his  only  queen  and
Jady,  and  govern  the  sceptre  over  us,  accord-
ing as  our  deceased  prince  did  aj)point  it.
!Nor  was  it  to  be  admired  that  they  thus  be-
forehand loved  and  affected  him  as  their  na-
tural king,  for  it  was  not  to  be  supposed  that
any  prince,  how  great  soever  he  might  be,
would  refuse  to  be  king  of  Thrace,  and  hus-
band of  Lionarda,  who  in  those  days  was  re-
ported to  be  the  fairest  woman  that  ever
nature  made;  and  this  was  expected  from
the  words  of  her  grandfather,  who,  for  the
things  which  were  to  come,  had  a  prophetic
spirit,  or  knowledge  so  certain,  that  his  art
was  never  known  to  have  deceived  him.  But
as  the  heart  of  Palmerin  was  fixed  upon  one
of  higher  deserving,  he  took  little  delight  in
the  honour  which  was  done  unto  hiai  :  and
though  he  had  good  hope  to  end  this  enter-
prize,  his  intent  was  presently  to  return  to
his  h.dy.  They  rode  on  together  till  they
came  to  the  (ity  of  Limorsan,  where  the
principal  lords  and  rulers,  whom  the  damsei


4122

by  a  courier  bnJ  advised  of  their  coming,
■came  to  receive  him  with  all  triuinplis  pos-
sible ;  conduciing  him  to  the  royal  palace,
and  in  all  re&pects  using  him  as  ihcir  king
and  srovernor.  Then  came  he  to  the  cham!)ef
of  the  queen  Carmelia,  uho  was  grandmutlié*
to  Lionarda^  and  still  living,  th'  ugh  Teeble
by  reason  ot"  her  great  age  ;  uhere  iloing  his
duty  unto  her,  she  received  him  as  nobly  as
he  had  been  her  own  son,  because  shetliought
he  should  marry  with  the  princess.

But  she  was  far  from  the  inteat  of  Palmerin,
\vho  seeing  tiicm  so  verily  to  believe  that
he  should  be  their  king,  was  troubled  at  all
then- ceremonies  and  courtesies,  because  of
the  end  wiih  which  thcv  were  offered,  think-
ing it  an  otience  to  his  lady  that  he  should
suiter  them,  ^^'heleibre,  as  scon  as  he  could,
he  took  leave  and  went  to  his  chamber, where
Le  was  unarmed  by  iielviam  and  tlie  dauiseh

At  supper  he  was  accompanied  with  many
lords  and  noble  gentlemen  of  that  country,
all  striving  assiduously  to  win  his  iavuur,
liii   the    hour   of   rest    came;    wiiLii   xeur-


425

injr  to  liis  chamber,  he  dismissed  them,
not  as  their  superior,  but  as  an  equal;  and
rcccivina:  their  services,  not  as  thcv  dc-
sii^ned,  but  as  he  meant  to  interpret  them  ;
V  hereat  some  began  to  murmur,  not  undcr-
standint;  him.  That  ni^ht  he  could  take
Uttle  rest  for  many  stirring  thoughts,  waiting
for  day-light,  that  he  might  bring  to  an  end
tliat  for  which  he  was  come,  if  fortune  did
not  prevent  him,  and  tarry  no  lonuer  in  this
laud.  In  the  morning  Selviam  armed  him
very  early,  so  that  when  the  lords  came  to
his  chamber  they  found  him  ready  to  de-
part y  wherefore,  seeing  he  was  determined
without  any  delay  to  essay  the  adventure,
they  accompanied  him  to  hear  mass,  which
was  solemnized  royally  by  the  archbishop  of
the  city,  and  then  they  rode  with  him  near
the  place  where  the  princess  was  enchanted,
reporting  to  him  tli€  dangers  and  fears  which
tiiey  supposed  in  this  adventure  should
chance  unto  him.


END  OF  VOL.  II.


C  o  N  T  E  N  T  S.


VOL.  II.


Chap.  Pagt

50.  In   Tihich  some  account  is  given  of

the  Tristful  knight  _         -         -         1

51.  liow  Pahnerin  left  the  court  of
England,  andof'ahat  bejel  him     -      J 3

52.  Shozcing  zcho  the  damsels  zc'erc,  and
how  the}/  came  there         -         -         -     23

^3.   Of  what    bcfel   Palmerin   after   he

lej't  Giaciano,  P latir,  and  Floramari     IS

54.  Of  what  past  between  Palmerin  and
the  beasts  who  guarded  the  fountain,
<ind  of  what  else  he  did  there        -  58

55.  ricw  Palmerin  entered  the  castle,  and
what  bifcl  there      -         -         -         -     4t


CONTENT?

Chzp.  fap

56.  Of  what  Talmerin  did  in  the  castle,
and  how  Frafician  and  Onistaldo
came  there,  and  how  they  departed    -     57

57'  How  Palmerincame  to  the  castle  of
Almourol,  and  of  what  bejel  there  -     65

58.  How  the  Tristful  Knight  left  the
castle  of  Almouroly  and  of  zchat  far-
ther happened        -        -        -        -      74

59.  How  the  giant  Dramuziando  came  to
ths  castle  of  Almourol,  and  of  what

he  did  there   -         -         -         -         -     81

60.  Of  what  hefel  DramuziandOf  keeping

the  castle  of  Almourol        -         -         89

61.  Of  what  befel  Palmerin,  going  to
Constantinople      -        -        -        -     97

62.  Showing  what  the  knight  of  the  Sa^
vage  did  in  the  court  of  England  be-
fore he  departed   therefrom,   and  of

what  befel  him  seeking  adventures    -   103

63.  Of  what  befel  Florian  after  his  wounds
were  healed    -        -        -        -        -  113


CONTENTS.

f'hap.  Page

04.  Ofzihat  befel  these  three  knights  in

the  pass  of  a  forest         -         -         -    123

Cj.  Ofzchat  befcl  Pahnerin,  in  companj/
tilth  the  damsel       -         -         -         -   1Í

66:  Ilozi)  Palmerin  did  buttle  zíúth  the
keepers  of  the  fortress,  according  to
the  custom  thereof  -         -         -         -   !.*^§

G7.  Hon'  Pahnerin  tnarried  the  duJce  and
his  brothers  to  the  three  damsels,  and
how  Florinn  and  Pompides  anivcd  -   143

Ê3.  JIqzc  a  hnight  come  to  the  cattle  of
yilmourol,  and  stole  the  shield  nf  Mi la-
guarda  - I.35

Crj.  Uozc  they  missed  the  shield  of  Mira-
gnarda  at  the  castle,  and  ichat  u.-as
done  thereupon        -         -         _         -   ]  6(3

70.  S/wuing  uho  the  knight  zcas  that  was
in  compam/  icith  Florendos,  and  how

by  misadventure  they  separated     -     -   1 74

71.  ShozL-ing  zzhose  the  castle -a-as  in  zchich
Albayzardid  battle,  and  the  reason  <  f
the  custom:  and  ofzchat  happened  to
Florendos  in  the  boat        -         «         -181

'2  p


CONTENTS.

chap.  Page

72.  llou)  Palmerin,  Florian,  and  Pom-
pides  came  to  the  castle   of  Dramo-

rante  the  Cruel,  and  of  what  they  did
there     -        -,        -         -         .         .  ig.-)

73.  Hozo  Florian  and  Albayzar  defied
each  other  for  the  emperor  s  court    -  202

74.  Of  rchat  hefel  Florian  of  the  Desert
in  the  adventine  of  the  dead  body  in

the  litter 211

75.  Of  ichat  befel  Pahnerin  after  he  left
Florendos    in    the    vallcj/,    zchen  he

found  him  complaining  of  fortune     218

76.  Shewing  zcho  the  giant  Bracandor
was,  and  Khxj  he  came  there     -        -  224

77'  How    Florian   of    the    Desert    teas'
brought  to   the   court   of    the  Great  '
Turk,   and  of  the    battle   which  he
fought  there  with  Auderramete    -     -  229

78.  How  Pahnerin  helped  Dramuziando
and  Florendos,  who  were  engaged  in
battle     ------  238

79.  How  Albayzar  arrived  at  the  empe-
ror s  court,  and  of  the  conditions  which

he  appointed  in  his  adienture      -       -  24^


CONTENTS.

Chap.  Paj«

80.  Of  the  jousts  on  the  first  day  -         -  253

81.  Of  the  jousts  on  the  sixth  dai/  -       -  260

82.  How  Albayzor,  offer  he  was  recovered,
returned  to  the  joust,  and  of  the  many
knights  whom  he  overthrew       -         -  266

83.  Of  what  hefel  Florian  of  the  Desert

in  the  court  of  the  Great  Turk  -         -  272

84.  Of  what  hefel  Florian,  leaving  the
valley  where  he  conquered  the  four
knights  -         -         -         -         -  281

^5.  Showing  who   the   knight   was    that
carried  Targiana  away,  and  what  be-
fel  him  -         _         -         -         -  298

86.  How  the  knight    in    black    armour

fought  with  Albayzar      -         -         -  506

87-  Of  an  adventure  brought  to  that  court

by  the  damsel  of  Thrace    -         -         -  322

88.  Showing  who  proved  the  adventure  of
the  cup,  and  how  they  sped        -         -  333

SO-  How  Florendos  and  Albayzar  proved
the   adventure  of  the  cup,  and  how
Falmerin  and  Florianarrived    -       -543
2  P  2


CONTENTS.

Chap.  Page

00.   Of  a  great  adventure  at  the  emperor's

court     ------  361

OT.  Of  the  terrible  battle   between  these

knights  -  -         -         _        -  374

92.  Of  what  past  in  the  emperors  court
after  the  battle  with  the  giants     -      -  3SS

93.  Shewing  what  hefel  king  Polendos
going  with  J'argiana,  and  of  that
"which  happened  to  Florendos  in  the
castle  of  Astiibor   -         -         -        -  404

O^.  Of  what  befel  Palmerin  in  company/

Kith  the  damsel  of  Thrace.      -        -  420


If-'.  Pople,  Printer,
Î3,  Old  BoswilL  Ctfurt,  òtranà.


<   ^L.    ^


^   i,^


<  <■  <


^^<^


^•^


(D
tJ

O
O

m

•H
O

Pm


•O

g

c  ci

(ti  w

c  o

C!

o  »-*

C    B

Th  ^    W
0)  CU    C

CD


3


a  >


o  i>
Ph  h


s


University  of  Toronto
Library


DO  NOT

REMOVE

THE

CARD

FROM

THIS

POCKET


Acme  Library  Card  Pocket
LOWE-MARTIN  CO.  LIMITBD


•■-•í/v^" T'^-'i-    /'J»'';''-



PALMERIN OF ENGLAND
VOLUME III

iSr<  *  v .*  r      »


-Ci-


&$  Capí    s  -fia?


«     4fF  <~<      A  :jT       t.V  «£

..  ce  •  r     G,  C

-  .a.     *;<*.:■■  •>■*-•  •  «=-

DC  «  <*£  «


. -te  «    <-<  ■:  *  C


c       *

•   »

£  V-


l&almm'nofenglttîD,

IN   FOUR    VOLUMES.


CORRECTED    BY


ROBERT  SOUTHEY,

FROM    THE    ORIGINAL    PORTUGUEZE.


'fl^


<  <>v


jMmmit  of  CnglanD,
iftanctèco  De  Moraes*


VOL.    III.


LONDON:

PRINTED  FOR  LONGMAN,  HURST,  REES,  AND  ORME,
PATERNOSTER    ROW.


1807


»  I


UVor

"Phis'


594989

1ST    !o    S^f


W[  Pop/e,  Printer,
2  2,  Old  Boswetl  Court,  Strand-


CONTENTS.


VOL.   III.


Chap.  Pag«

95.  Of  zchat  befel  Palmerin  in  the  ad-
venture of  the  enchantment  of  Lio-
narda  princess  of  Thrace  -          1

96.  Of  zchat  farther  befel  Palmerin  in
this  adventure  -  -9

97.  How  the  enchantment  of  Lionarda
was  ended  -  -  19

98.  Of  what  Palmerin  did  while  he  re-
mained  in  the  court  of  Thrace      -       SO

99-  Of  what  befel  Florendos  after  he
left  the  castle  of  Dramorante  the

Cruel  -  -  40

100.  Of  what  befel  Florendos  after  he

left  the  castle  of  Amaita  -       -4


CONTENTS.

Chip.  Pitt

101.  Of  the  embassage,  which  the  damsel
of  Thrace  bore  to  the  emperors
court;  and  of  what  bejel  the  knight

of  the  Tjjger  ...       64

102.  Shewing    what    past   between    the

knight  of  the  Tj/ger  and  the  knights
who  were  in  pursuit  of  the  damsel         75

103.  Of  what  bejel  the  knight  of  the
Savage  after  he  left  the  court  of

the  emperor  I  ernao  -  -       84-

104.  Of  what  happened  to  the  knight  of
the  Savage  before  he  parted  from

the  damsel  -  -  -       9&

105.  Hoic  the  giant's  knights  delivered  up
their  castles  to  the  knight  of  the  Sa-
vage, and  of  what  passed  when  Flo-
reados arrived  at  the  castle  of  Al-
mourol  -  -  107

100.  Of  the  battle  which  Florendos fought
for  the  shield  of  Miraguarda  on  the
second  day  after  his  arrival  -     120

107.  Of  an  adventure  which  happened
at  the  castle  of  Almourol,  and  of
what  Florenloi  did  -  -     1S\


CONTENTS.

Chap.  Pagt

108.  Skewing  who  t/te  knight  of  Arnalta
was,  and  the  reason  why  he  came
there;  and  of  the  arrival  of  Lio-
narda  at  the  court  of  the  emperor
Palmer  in  -  -  -     144

109-  Of  Lionarda's  reception  at  Con-
stantinople -  -     159

110.  Of  an  adventure  which  came  to  the
emperors  court,  and  what  happened
thereupon  -  •         -     176

111.  Shewing  who  the  damsel  was,  and
what  happened  upon  the  voyage         lyo

11(2.  Of  what  bcfel   the  knight  of  the

Tyger  in  this  adventure         -        -     201

113.  Of  what  happened  to  him  of  the
Savage  after  his  landing  -     220

114.  Of  what  the  knight  of  the  Savage
did  going  with  his  damsels  to  the
court  if  Spain,  and  of  what  bejel
him  of  the  Tyger  in  his  voyage   to

the  Profound  Island  -         -     2.12

115.  Of  the  battle  between  the  giant  Pa-
voroso and  the  knight  of  the  Ty^er,
and  three  others  on  each  side         »     2J*J


CONTENTS.

Chap.  Pagí

110'.  Of  what  the  knight  of  the  Ti/ger

did  before  he  left  the  island  -     £65

UT.  Of  what  the  knight  of  thi  Ti/ger

did  in  the  Perilous  Island  -     282

118.  J  low  Alfernao  came  to  the  court  of
Constantinople,  and  of  what  hap-
pened there  -  303

119.  Hozc  the  prisoners  came  whom  the
Great  Turk  had  held  captive,  and
how  Albaijzar  was  released  -     314

120.  Mow  the  knight  of  the  Damseh
reached  the  court  of  Spain,  and
of  what  passed  between  him  and
Albayzar  -

121.  Of  the  great  jousts  between  the
knight  of  the  Damsels  and  AU
bayzur  -  345

122.  Of  what  befel  the  knight  of  the
Damsels  going  to  the  castle  of
Almourol  -  -  3(JO

123.  How  Trofolante  and  the  others
arrived  at  the  court  of  Spain,  and
the  knight  of  the  Damsels  at  the
castle  of  Almourol  -  -     373


Pag*


Chap.  CONTENTS.

124.  Of  the  great  jousts  between    the
knight    of  the    Damsels    and   the
deeper  of  the  shield  of  Miraguarda
ond  of  the  battle  between  him  and
Almourol

-     385

**5.  0/  ^at   befel  the  knight         ^

Damsels  returning  to  the  court  of
bpain  .  J

-    399


CHAPTER   95,


The  lords  of  the  kingdom  of  Thrace  led
Palmerin  to  a  hill,  from  whence  they  showed
him  the  place  where  Lionarda  remained  en-
chanted. Now  as  the  day  was  clear,  at  the
foot  of  the  hill  he  beheld  in  a  pleasant  valley
some  brave  and  stately  towers  among  the
green  trees,  a  goodly  sight  to  behold  ;  for
îlot  only  was  the  valley  wherein  they  were
edified  as  fresh  and  delightful  a  place  as
nature  could  make,  but  also  the  edifices  and
palaces  displayed  such  numerous  pinnacles
and  sumptuous  varandas  of  marble,  so  white
and  lofty,  that  tney  seemed  to  touch  the  sky  ;
with  other  surpassing  devices  and  inventions
so  worthy  of  admiration  that  he  thought
vol.  in.  B


them  to  be  framed  by  the  celestial   powers
rather  than  by  any  earthly  creatun

Well  was  Palmerin  pleased  to  sec  a  thing
so  pleasant;  and  though  at  that  tim<-  hia
spirit  was  as  it  were  dead  with  the  longing
remembrances  which  tormented  it,  yet  the
;y  of  the  place  stirred  in  him  a  certain
lively  joy,  and  he  thought  how  fair  a  lot
would  be  his  who  should  enjoy  it,  together
with  Licnarda  ;  a  lot  which,  however  fair,  he
wished  not  for  himself,  nothing  sufficing  fol
him,  but  only  the  hope  he  had  of  his  services
and  merits  with  Polinarda.  After  lie  had
stayed  awhile,  beliolding  the  manner  of  the
valley,  and  thinking  of  the  dangers  which
Jiad  been  menaced,  holding  them  in  little,
seeing  that  the  place  rather  promised  to  de-
light the  senses  than  to  dismay  the  heart,  h«?
began  to  think  lightly  of  the  entcrprize,
which  in  truth  a  wise  man  ought  not  to  have
done,  because  that  divers  times  the  doubt-
fullest,  things  have  the  pleasantest  issue  ;  and
that  which  seemeth  most  pleasant  at  the  be-
ginning, doth  prove  to  be  the  sharpest  dan-
ger in  the  endinsr.     But  as  in  Palmerin  this


contempt  of  the  clanger  arose  from  his  sur-
passing  hardihood,  and  from  the  many  dan-
gers which  he  had  happily  gone  through,
and  this  seemed  to  threaten  none,  he  is  the
less  worthy  of  blame.

One  of  the  knights  that  kept  him  company
then  advanced  from  among  the  others*  he
was  a  man  of  great  authority,  for  his  grey
hairs,  and  the  quality  of  his  person,  and  the
experience  of  things  which  many  years  had
shewn  him.  Sir  knight,  said  he  to  Palmerin,
to  whom  fortune  hath  alway  been  so  great  a
friend,  that  in  no  danger  or  distress  hath  sue
ever  played' you  false,  not  for  this,  your  ac-
customed prosperity,  should  you  cease  to  fear
dangers,  which  to  appearance  may  seem
little;  for  she  who  in  great  things  hath  been
willing  to  forward  you,  may  peradventurè  in
lei  ser  ones  forsake  you,  for  the  greater  proof
of  her  power:  moreover,  nothing  should  be
judged  of  by  its  first  appearance,  seeing  from
such  judgment  errors  arise  for  which  after-
wards there  is  no  remedy.  This  1  say,  be-
cause  the  adventure  which  you  are  about  to
essay  seem  et  h  in  its  beginning  more  made  for
B2


contentment  than  to  bo  feared.  But  T  would
have  you  know,  that  this  contentment  is  to
be  gained  bv  danger,  and  perchance  when
you  find  yourself  in  it,  you  \\  ill  find  it  greater
than  you  thought  for.

Sir,  answered  Pahnerin,  your  counsel;  shew-
ing so  great  good  will,  deserves  a  guerdon
which  I  cannot  now  bestow  ;  and  indeed  your
words  are  full  of  truth.  I  am  right  thankful
that  you  have  given  me  so  good  a  lesson  to
hear  in  mind  hereafter;  God  grant  that  this
may  have  the  end  which  we  all  desire,  and
if  I  speed  to  my  v,  isb,  I  will  not  be  unmind-
ful of  your  friendly  warning.  This  promise,
presented  with  so  great  humanity,  inflamed
a  sudden  envy  in  the  hearts  oí  some  there
present,  who  for  the  hope  they  hod  to  sec
him  king,  began  to  enter  into  more  praises
than  any  true  or  faithful  subject  would  oiler.
For  they  began  to  persuade  him,  that  no  ad-
venture, how  dangerous  sorver  it  proved,
might  astonish  his  person:  but  he  declining
from  such  praise  as  was  the  daily  gift  and
Work  of  flatterers,  set  spurs  to  his  horse,
and  rode  down  the  hill.


An  example  surely  worthy  of  great  praise  to
all  princes  and  rulers  living  on  the  earth,
that  they  should  not  incline  and  lean  to  such,
who  only  study  with  sweet  words,  flattering
tales,  and  false  reports,  to  rest  and  bring
them  asleep  in  so  vile  an  exercise.  Which
painted  faces  if  they  would  surpass,  their
subjects,  friends,  and  servants,  should  be
equally  regarded,  their  renown  plentifully
increased,  and  accordingly  honoured  ;  yea,,
the  virtuous  should  be  richly  rewarded,  and
the  vicious  rightfully  for  ever  reproached  ;
then  would  not  the  plain  dealer  be  governed
by  such  as  have  been  noted,  but  the  good
should  be  openly  discerned  from  the  evil,
and  all  enjoy  one  hope  for  a  continual  quiet:
but  to  our  ma* ten-.  As  soon  as  Palmerin
pricked  forward,  the  light  began  to  darken,
the  air  to  be  marvellously  troubled,  and  misty,
so  that  the  lords  of  Thrace  lost  sight  of  him,
and  could  not  even  see  one  another;  and  there
was  loud  thundering,  and  great  earthquakes,
and  other  fearful  signs,  so  they  were  over-
come with  such  fear,  that  some  fell  before
their  horses,  being  astounded  ;  others  lost
their  stirrups  and  clung  to  the  horses'  necks,
b  3


and  tinis  they  made  their  way  to  the  cily,
tearing  their  cloaks  in  the  thickets,  neither

remembering  the  road  nor  any  thing  else.
lint  as  the  signs  that  day  weir»  different  from
what  they  had  been  at  any  former  time  when
this  adventure  had  been  essayed,  the  city  it.-elf
Avas  overspread  with  so  thick  and  black  a
cloud,  and  filled  with  sounds  so  dolorous  and
dismayful,  that  no  one  had  either  judgment
so  free,  or  heart  so  strong,  as  to  hr  exempt
from  the  fear  which  these  terrors  occasioned.

Selviam,  whom  Palmerin  had  ordered  to  stay
upon  the  hill,  seeing  his  master  as  he  deemed
in  such  danger,  forgot  all  fear,  and  being-
guided  by  the  love  with  which  he  served
him,  spurred  his  horse  to  follow  him.  But
as  the  nature  of  the  enchantment  was,  that
no  one  could  enter  the  forbidden  ground,
except  by  great  prowess  and  force  of  arms,
he  found  himself  suddenly  in  the  city,  with-
out knowing  how  he  came  there,  in  com-
pany with  the  rest,  and  at  such  time  as  the
cloud  was  beginning  to  disperse  :  Palmerin,
meantime,  remembering  the  words  of  the
old  knight,,  perceived  the  error  of  his  first


opinion;  for  he  knew  not  whither  he  went  in
that  thick  darkness,  nor  conlcl  he  resist  an
inward  pain,  which  seemed  as  if  it  would
have  rent  his  heart  ;  whereat  he  greatly  mar-
velled, thinking-  that  nothing  hut  his  own
passion  could  have  touched  him  there.  .And
now,  certain  invisible  bodies  approached
him,  and  by  force  plucked  him  from  the  sad-
dle, and  threw  him  down  ;  and  though  to
defend  himself  he  drew  his  sword,  and  struck
on  all  sides,  he  found  that  his  blows  did  no
harm,  for  they  were  smitten  against  the  air.
Then  he  thought  to  mount  on  horseback
again,  but  his  labour  was  in  vain  ;  it  was  not
possible  for  him  to  find  his  horse,  which
Mas  tar  enough  away,  and  presently,  not  only
his  sword  was  taken  from  him,  but  likewise
all  his  armour  was  caught  away  on  a  sudden  ;
whereat  he  began  to  stand  in  some  fear,  as
knowing  that  strength  hath  need  of  arms  to
execute  its  purpose.  Finding  himself  thus
disarmed,  and  weary,  with  striving  to  seize
these  bodies  which  were  without  souls,  he
sate  himself  down,  not  knowing  what  to  do,
and  holding  that  the  adventure  was  iu


8

bible  to  Le  atchieved,  for  he  could  see  none
with  whom  to  fight;  and  even  it"  he  had  seen
any,  he  was  spoiled  of  all  implement  of
offence  or  defence.  The  darkness  be-
came every  minute  more  and  more  ;  he
could  neither  go  forward  nor  return  ;  where-
fore he  said  to  himself,  Certes,  there  are
more  adventures  in  the  world  than  men
suspect;  and  let  not  him  who  is  without
mishap  wish  to  enter  into  them,  for  he
who  fears  it  least  will  find  it,  and  they  who
have  longest  avoided  it  cannot  escape  at
last.


CHAPTER    96.


The  history  saith  thatPalmerin  remained  some
time  sitting  upon  the  ground,  deliberating
with  himself  what  he  should  do  ;  and  seeing
that  in  these  cases  there  was  no  room  for
counsels,  he  rose  without  any  determination,
committing  himself  to  the  difficulties  which
fortune  might  ordain,  and  careless  what  might
happen,  even  if  it  were  the  end  of  his  life,
m  Inch  he  was  resolved  to  sell  as  dearly  as  he
could,  believing  that  he  who  does  what  he
can  when  dying,  satisfies  with  his  life
what  he  owes  to  honour.  Still  it  troubled
him  to  see  himself  without  arms,  fearing
that  for  lack  of  them  he  could  not  fulfil  his
intention.  But  what  most  dismayed  him
to  feel  his  soul  so  depressed  within  him,


10

that  his  limbs  seemed  to  he  almost  deprived
of=thèir  wonted  virtue.  And  no»  there  came
irom  the  hill  above,  a  mighty  and  terrible
thundering,    that  he    expected    the    earth

would  have  opened  under  him.  With  this
he  heard  fearful  hollow  voices,  and  when
the  rolling  sounds  reached  him,  then  was  he
snatched  up  a  mighty  height,  and  presently
let  fall,  so  that  he  thought  himself  descending
to  the  abyss.  These  fears,  however,  he  un-
derwent as  one  who  expected  worse  ;  what
he  most  grieved  at  being  that  thev  were  of
such  a  nature  that  resistance  could  not  be
made.  At  this  time  the  darkness  began  to
clear  away,  when  he  found  himself  to  be  in
the  midst  of  a  little  island,  enclosed  round
about  with  a  water  so  black  and  deep,  that
it  seemed  as  if  it  came  from  the  centre  of
the  earth.  In  the  midst  of  this  islet  Pal-
merin  espied  an  old  withered  tree,  and  under-
neath it  stood  a  knight  armed  in  bis  own  lost
armour,  with  his  sword  likewise  in  his  hand,
who  said  unto  him,  Now,  O  thou  valiant
knight,  I  would  fain  see  what  thy  courage
will  avail,  or  by  what  means  thou  canst  de-
fend thyself  from  the  wrath  of  my  hands,


11

which  with  the  edge  of  thy  own  sword  will
mangle  thy  flesh  and  bones,,  whereon  the
wild  beasts  of  the  country  shall  feed  :  so  that
thy  renown,  famed  over  all  the  whole  earth,
shall  here  take  full  end,  where  none  can  ap-
proach to  bear  witness  of  thy  death.

Of  a  truth,  he  who  should  say  that  Palmerin
was  at  this  time  free  from  the  fears  which
such  a  danger  might  well  bring  upon  him,
might  say  what  he  pleased;  for  his  heart,
though  it  were  always  accompanied  with  all
virtue  and  all  courage,  at  that  hour  was  not
so,  in  that  he  was  destitute  of  any  thing  for
his  defence  in  this  extremity;  and  seeing
that  he  had  to  defend  himself  with  nothing
but  the  limbs  which  nature  had  given  him,
against  an  armed  enemy,  who,  according  to
his  proportions  and  semblance,  was  no  little
to  be  feared,  committing  himself  to  the  will
of  fortune,  though  things  of  honour  ought
not  to  be  committed  to  her,  yet  being  in  such
a  stale  that  there  was  no  other  remedy,  he
approached  the  knight,  who  with  all  fierce*
liess  advanced  to  meet  him  with  his  lilted
sword.   A  dark  cloud  suddenly  overshadowed


12

them  ;  but  in  the  cloud,  though  he  saw  him
not,  Palmerin  seized  him  in  liis  arms,  and
the  other  thrust  his  sword  into  his  breast  up
tu  the  hilt,  he  feeling  such  pain  as  if  he  had
indeed  received  so  deadly  a  thrust;  and
though  against  such  a  fear  no  courage  could
suffice,  yet  was  his  such  that  it  never  for-
sook him,  and  he  grappled  with  that  phan-
tom, till  by  fine  force  at  length  he  ov<  r-
threw;  then  meaning  to  cut  off  his  head,  at
the  instant  when  he  drew  the  sword  out  of  hi?
own  body,  the  cloud  dispersed,  and  he  found
himself  with  it  in  his  hand,  and  his  armour
under   the  tree,  but  the  knight  was  gone.

Amazed  at  these  things,  but  seeing  that  what
was  at  first  so  fearful  proved  at  last  to  be
fantastic  and  vain,  he  began  to  recover  confi-
dence, and  donned  his  armour,  wherewith  he
felt  his  strength  increased,  and  a  lively  hope
of  more  wonders,  being  now  disposed  to  be
delighted  with  them.  Presently  the  day
cleared,  and  he  could  see  every  thing  as  far
as  the  eye  could  reach,  and  then  on  the
other  side  beyond  the  island,  in  the  midst  of
a  green  field  and  among  goodly  trees,  he


saw  the  edifices  which  he  had  seen  from
the  hill;  but  there  was  no  way  of  crossing
to  them,  because  of  that  great  water  which
hath  been  spoken  of,  except  by  swimming  ,
and  this  he  feared  to  attempt,  having  no
skill  therein.  Moreover,  the  hank  on  both
was  so  steep  that  its  height  appeared
immeasurable.  Now  seeing  that  he  had  this
precipice  to  descend,  and  neither  knowing
how  he  could  get  up  on  the  opposite  side,  nor
how  he  could  get  to  it,  for  the  weight  of  his-
armour  would  drown  him,  he  was  so  con-
founded, that  neither  was  his  courage  suffici-
ent to  induce  him  to  attempt  it,  nor  his  un-
tanding  to  console  him.  There  seemed
to  be  no  remedy,  and  for  his  more  dismay,  on
the  other  side  of  the  water  he  espied  a  com-
pany of  monstrous  and  mishape-n  beasts,  who
seemed  to  be  waiting  there  to  devour  him  ;
and  as  if  they  were  quarrelling  who  should
he  the  first  to  fall  on  him,  they  began  a  fu-
rious battle,  some  helping  others,  so  that  it
looked  like  a  challenge  and  pitched  battle,
party  against  party.  This  Palmerin  jud;j<  d
to  be  one  of  the  most  notable  things  that
ever  he  had  seen  :  for  while  the  battle  conti-

VOL.11I.  C


u

wued  many  of  them,  spoiled  and  killed  one
another,  howling- the  while  so  loudly,  that  it
was  heard  in  the  city  as  though  they  were
in  the  midst  or'  it,  so  that  the  fear  there  was
greatly  increased,  for  tliey  thought  that
Palmerin  was  surely  in  some  great  danger.
He  who  resented  the  most  fear  wasSelriam,
grieving  that  he  was  not  present  with  his
lord,  to  go  through  the  same  dangers,  with
that  true  iove  of  a  faithful  servant,  which
masters  for  the  most  part  understand  so  well,
and  so  ill  requite.  The  fury  of  this  battle
was  so  great,  that  at  last  all  who  were  en-»
gaged  in  it  lay  dead  upon  the  field.

Their  grievous  light  being  thus  ended,  Pal-
merin went  about  the  island,  to  see  where  he
might  have  passage  to  the  other  side.  At
last,  in  one  part  where  the  waters  made  a
resting-place,  he  espied  a  boat,  having  four
oars  in  it,  which  were  handled  and  governed
by  four  beasts  of  marvellous  bigness,  each
one  tied  with  a  mighty  chain,  and  at  the
poop  sate  a  mighty  lion,  all  imbrued  in
blood,  as  though  he  were  master  of  the  pas-
sage, who  fed  himself  with  nothing  else  but
the  flesh  of  his  passengers.


lã

VI  fuie  Palmcrin  was  beholding  this  fearful
boat,  he  espied  a  man  on  the   farther  side,
crying  to  the  beasts  to  carry  him  over  with
them  ;  whereat   he   was  much   amazed,    as
thinking  no  man  to  be  so  foolish  as  to  ha-
zard himself  in  so  perilous  a  river  with  such
boatmen,  and  under  such  a  pilot.     The  boat
put  oil*  to  take  him  in,   and  the  man  was  no
sooner  entered,  but    the   lion  seized  him  in
his  paws,  and  with  his  mighty  claws  straight-
way rent  him  in  pieces,  and  devoured  him,
giving  part  to  his  companions,  the  rowers  ;
for  this  was  their  ordinary  food.   Any  one
may  conceive  in  what  state  was  Palmerin's
heart,  when  he  beheld  all  this,  for  he  saw
no  way  to  pass  but  the  terror  of  death  was
both  before  and  behind  him  ;  but  seeing  there
was  no  remedy,  for  if  he   remained  in   the
lit  must  needs  die  for  want  of  food,  so
as  a  last  resolution,  he  concluded  to  put  him-
self to  the  rigour  of  the  beasts,  and    shift
with  them  by  strength  of  aims  ;  for  he  saw
himself  wholly   destitute  of  any  other  hope.
Hereupon  he  looked  how  he 'night  descend,
but  there  was  no  other  way  except  by  a  rock
which   reached    down    to    the    water   side,

(  Q


and  winch  was  so  slippery  and  steep,  that
there  was  nothing  on  which  he  eoold  lay
hold,  or  stav  himself;  and  he  thought  that
lie  must  needs  be  dashed  i<>  pieces  be-
fore he  could  reach  the  bottom.  This  made
him  demur  a  little;  and  as  this  extreme
danger  was  so  greatly  to  be  dreaded,  he  ad-
dressed himself  to  the  remedy  which  he
alway  reserved  for  the  worst  perils,  that  is,
to  the  remembrance  of  his  lady,  with  which
he  was  accustomed  to  surmount  all,  how-
great  and  terrible  soever  they  might  be.  And
having  invoked  her,  he  felt  his  fear  gone,
and  without  farther  dread  or  delay  let  him-
self slide  down  the  rock  ;  but  a3  all  those
dangers  were  in  truth  no  otherwise  dangerous
than  in  appearance,  he  attained  the  river-side
without  any  harm  :  the  lion  and  his  fellows
pushed  off  from  the  opposite  shore  to  receive
him  into  the  boat;  and  he  perceiving  this,
drew  his  sword,  and  with  shield  advanced,
made  ready  for  the  adventure.  But  for  this-
adventure  such  readiness,  which  is  elsewhere
so  profitable,  was  nothing  needed,  for  all
were  but  phantasms  and  unreal  shapes;  and
go  soon  as  the  prow  was  rim  ashore,   and  he


17

had  leapt  in,  he  saw  none  to  attack,  for
forthwith  that  strange  pilot  and  his  boatmen
were  gone,  he  knew  not  how,  and  he  found
himself  alone  in  the  boat:  then  taking  the
oars,  he  rowed  himself  to  the  farther  side  ;
but  when  he  had  crost  the  river,  the  oppo-
site bank  was  so  steep  and  overhanging,  that
he  could  by  no  possible  means  climb  up  ;
so  that  he  was  again  utterly  at  a  loss  how  to
proceed.  Being  thus  confounded,  presently
he  saw  an  old  au  d  broken  bask  et  lowered  down
to  him  from  the  top  of  the  rock,  by  a  rope
which  was  so  weak  and  slender,  that  he
thought  the  mere  weight  of  the  basket  would
have  broken  it.  When  Palmerin  perceived
that  there  was  no  other  means  of  ascending
that  great  height,  once  more  trusting  in  the
remembrance  of  her  whom  he  served,  he,
thought  to  lay  aside  his  arms,  that  he  might  be
less  heavy  ;  and  disarming  himself  he  was
about  to  get  into  the  basket  with  nothing  but
his  sword.  But  as  many  times  the  heart
feels  within  itself  foreboding  doubts  of  what
is  to  come,  a  fear  came  upon  him  which
made  him  put  them  on  again,  thinking  they
might  still  be  necessary.  Then,  trusting  to
fortune  and  abiding  the  chance,  he  got  into


18

the  basket,  and  without  seeing  run  one  to
hoist  him,  was  raised  into  the  air,  but  with
so  slow  and  swaying  a  motion,  that  the  delay
doubled  his  fear.  And  now  when  he  was  at
a  great  height,  he  saw  that  the  basket  b
to  break,  and  the  eord  give  way  with  the
weight,  and  untwist  itself,  so  that  atlast  no-
thing but  a  single  thread  was  left,  which
was  almost  invisibly  small.  Certes,  though
he  had  already  suffered  many  fears,  this  was
the  worst  of  all,  for  he  saw  himself  in  the
last  extremity,  being  suspended  in  h<
by  a  single  hair.  This  made  him  again  be-
take himself  to  his  lady  for  help,  as  the
one  in  whom  he  trusted  in  such  need  ;  and
as  it  is  by  faith  alone  that  we  must  stand  or
fall,  so  this  faith  which  he  hud  in  his  lady-
was  of  such  avail,  that  overcoming  the  slow-
ness of  the  enchantment,  in  one  moment  it
brought  him  up,  and  landed  him  above  in
the  held  where  the  battle  of  the  beasts  had
been,  of  which  he  could  now  see  no  sign,
neither  of  the  water  below.  The  disappeai-
ance  of  these  things  which  had  caused  him
such  fear,  giving  him  »ow  a  new  joy,  which
dissipated  all  his  sorrows,  as  joy  when  it  is
unexpected  is  ever  wont  to  do.


-:'t


CHAPTER  97-


The  day  was  now  spent,  and  the  moon,  which
was  then  full  and  in  her  strength,  having  no
clouds  to  oppose  or  ohseure  her,  began  to
rise  in  the  East  with  a  splendour  which  seem-
ed almost  unnaturally  bright.  The  night-
ingales and  other  birds  with  which  that  land
abounded  began  to  welcome  the  night  with
such  variety  of  songs  and  rejoicing,  that
Palmcrin  forgot  all  his  past  troubles.  And
laying  himself  down  under  a  tree,  intending
to  listen  to  them,  fatigue  so  overpowered
him,  that  he  fell  asleep,  not  having  eaten  all
that  day,  food  indeed  being  little  needed  by
him  :  for  though  without  it  nature  cannot  be
sustained,  yet,  when  the  spirits  are  roused
by  difficulties,  the  very  occasion  administers


20

strength  to  lhe  limbs,  provided  it  be  not
over  long;  for  of  long  want  nature  is  inca-
pable, and  thereby  in  course  becomes  weak
and  broken  down,  and  finally  perishes.  Pal-
merin  past  as  peaceful  a  night  as  he  had  pain-
ful a  day.  When  the  dawn  appeared,  the
birds  awoke  him  with  a  song  so  joyous  to
hear,  and  so  delightful  to  muse  upon,  that  he
wished  the  day  had  tarried  longer,  to  have
let  him  longer  enjoy  so  sweet  contentment.
But  as  these  follow  their  appointed  order,  it
was  not  long  before  they  forsook  him,  bright
day-light,  and  their  custom  of  seeking  food,
making  them  disperse.  Palmerin  rose,  and
looking  round  the  field,  well  pleased  at  its
beauty,  beheld  towards  the  East  the  towers
and  edifices  which  he  had  seen  from  the  hill
yesterday,  surrounded  with  the  same  goodly
trees  ;  and  though  in  this  there  was  no  show
of  danger,  what  he  had  already  witnessed
taught  him  still  to  apprehend  it;  on  the
other  hand,  the  same  experience  taught  him
to  have  little  fear.  He  had  not  advanced
far  towards  them,  before  he  espied  his  horse
tied  to  a  tree,  saddled  and  bridled,  and  in
such  case  as  when  he  left  him  ;  at  which  he


21

little  marvelled,  being  now  accustomed  to
the  wonders  of  this  land.  So  mount-
ing upon  him,  he  rode  a  little  farther,,  where
he  met  with  two  knights,  who  were  of  great
stature,  and  clad  in  the  brightest  and  richest
armour  that  he  had  ever  seen  ;  and  they,
without  any  words,  couched  their  spears
against  him.  He  encountered  the  first  full
upon  his  shield,  and  the  knight  presently  va-
nished away  :  the  second  burst  his  lance  upon
him.  Palmerin  veered  round  to  requite  him
with  a  blow  of  his  sword,  but  he  vanished  in
like  manner  as  the  other.

Then  Palmerin  looking  about,  espied  som*
men  about  to  draw  up  a  bridge,  which
Mas  the  passage  over  a  moat  of  one  of  the
towers:  at  this  he  clapt  spurs  to  his  horse,
and  galloped  thither  apace,  so  that  he  cross-
ed the  bridge  before  they  could  raise  it,  and
before  they  could  fasten  the  gate  forced  his
way  with  them  into  a  court,  which  was  sur-
rounded with  lair  apartments.  But  though
the  manner  of  this  was  worthy  to  be  admired,
two  giants  who  came  out  with  huge  maces
in  their  hands  did  not  give  him  leisure  foi


oo


this.  This  danger  was  more  welcome  to
Palmerin  than  the  others  which  he  had  past;
so  leaping  from  his  horse,  he  advanced  on
foot  to  attack  them  with  his  wonted  courage.
The  battle  was  soon  finished,  for  all  that
they  were  designed  to  do  was  in  appearance,
and  as  soon  as  he  touched  them  they  dis-
solved into  air,  of  which  they  were  made.
Then  seeing  that  all  the  dangers  which  had
threatened  him  were  illusions,  he  determined,
all  which  might  yet  present  themselves  to
him  as  nothing  more.

And  now  looking  to  see  how  he  might  as-
cend into  the  building,  he  perceived  a  little
gate  under  some  arches,  and  from  thence  a
flight  of  steps  ascended  so  steep,  that  it  was
a  labour  to  climb  them,  so  narrow  that  it
was  with  difficulty  a  man  could  get  up  be-
tween the  walls,  and  so  long,  that  the  top  of
them  was  out  of  sight.  Palmerin,  desirous
to  see  the  end  of  his  labours,  adventured  to
go  up,  and  when  he  was  a  little  way  up  the
walls  about  him  began  to  shake  vehemently,
so  that  sometimes  he  thought  the  vaulted
?oof  would  fall  in   and  crush  him  ;  at   other


times  he  was  so  squeezed  between  the  sides
that  he  could  not  move.  Long  it  was  before
he  could  gain  the  top,  but  then  the  shaking
ceased,  and  he  found  himself  in  a  long  open
gallery,  which  was  of  marvellous  workinan-
Ship.  At  the  end  thereof  there  was  a  great
door,  made  fast  with  three  great  locks  and
bolls  of  iron,  and  before  the  door  lay  a
mighty  serpent,  whose  horrible  bigness  not
only  filled  up  the  door-way,  but  likewise
great  part  of  the  gallery  ;  the  countenance  of
this  serpent  was  such,  that  the  very  sight  of
it  struck  fear  to  the  heart  ;  and  his  eye  above
all  was  so  watchful,  that  it  seemed  hopeless
1o  attempt  aught  against  him  by  slight,  if
it  could  not  be  obtained  by  force.  About
hie  neck,  upon  a  string,  were  hanged  the
keys  that  should  open  the  three  locks.  Then
Palmerin  perceived  that  whoever  would  enter
must  use  these  keys;  and  seeing  the  porter
was  <o  unsociable  that  he  would  give  them  to
no  one,  and  that  to  take  them  from  him  against
his  will  would  be  a  hopeless  endeavour,  he
;-tuod  awhile  in  doubt  what  he  should  do;
but  calling  to  mind  the  illusions  of  this
place;  he  determined  to  attack  him,  and  ad-


24

vanced  to  strike.  The  serpent  rose  in  anger,
glowing  with  fire,  and  breathing  out  flames
from  his  mouth.  But  the  danger  quickened.
Palmerin's  courage,  and  seeing  himself  .so

3jed,  lie  thrust  his  sword  into  one  of  hi»
nostrils.  At  tills  he  snorted  out  such
volumes  or'  smoke  as  blackened  the  whole
air,  and  tied  out  of  the  gallery  with  terrible
roarings,  which  seemed  to  shake  the  very
earth.

The  people  seeing  him  fly  over  lhe  city,  and
now  fearful  a  monster  he  was,  well  judged
that  Paimerin  had  been  in  some  great  clanger  ;
and  though  they  were  in  great  trouble  for
him,  it  was  far  greater  pain  to  Selviam,  who,
though  he  was  free  from  bodily  dangers,  felt
in  his  soul  those  of  his  master.

When  Paimerin  saw  himself  delivered  from
this  danger,  and  the  smoke  had  dispersed,
he  found  the  keys  on  the  ground,  where-
with he  opened  the  locks,  and  entered  into
so  fair  a  hall,  and  so  marvellously  wrought,
that  neither  those  in  the  island  which  he  had
won  from  Eutropa,  nor  the  abode  of  Daliarte


S3

in   the  Dark  Valley,    might  compare   with

this.

Entering  then  into  other  apartments,  for  there
was  none  to  oppose  him,  he  saw  that  thev
were  all  of  the  same  cunning  workmanship,
which  made  him  highly  account  the  rare
knowledge  of  the  king  of  Thrace,  by  whom
such  a  work  had  been  devised.  JSow,  as  the
serpent  was  the  last  of  these  vain  perils,  no-
thing more  hindered  him  from  approaching
the  true  danger,  which  was  the  sight  of  Li-
onarda,  from  which  no  human  wisdom  could
secure  him.  So  proceeding  from  one  apart-
ment to  another,  at  last  he  heard  the  voices
of  women  in  one  of  the  rooms,  who  as  soon
as  they  perceived  him,  being  terrifù  d  at  such
a  novelty  as  the  sight  of  an  armed  man,  fled
from  the  apartment,  leaping  from  some  va-
randas into  a  garden.  Palraerin  followed
them  into  this  garden,  which  seemed  to  him
yet  more  worthy  of  admiration  than  all  which
he  had  seen  within.  He  had  not  proceeded
far,  when,  under  the  shade  of  some  thick
and  green  laurels,  round  about  a  fountain
of  rarer  and  more  marvellous  fashion   than

VOL.  HI.  D


26

lie  hud   ever  beheld,  he   saw  some   dam
seated,  so   fair  that  they  seemed  worthy  to
be  in  so  fair  a  place;  and  among  them  was
Lionarda,    who  in    form  and   feature    wae

more  beautiful  than  the  rest,  beyond  com-
parison. They,  when  they  saw  him  approai  b,

rose  up  to  receive  him,  knowing  that  by  him
they  were  released  from  that  enchantment.

Lionarda  welcomed  him  with  that  graceful
courtesy  which  nature  had  imparted  to  lier.
Sir  Knight,  said  she,  though  certes  the  ob-
ligation which  of  so  great  a  debt  as  you
have  laid  me  under,  cannot  be  discharged
with  words,  yet  I  beseech  you  accept  now
the  wish  I  have  to  requite  you,  in  satisfaction
for  your  deeds  ;  and  hereafter,  it'  time  shall
give  me  room  to  requite  you  better,  stand-
ing with  mine  honour,  then  shall  you  see  the
desire  I  have  to  recompense  you  what  is  due.

Lady,  he  replied,  abundant  recompence  for
any  atchievement,  how  great  soever,  is  this
sight,  and  this  beauty,  for  one  who  should
have  a  heart  free  enough  to  let  him  un-
derstand  so  great  a  happiness.  The  things
of  this  place  are  all  so  wonderful,  that  the


27

present  put  the  past  out  of  remembrance  ;— *
I  intrcat you  tell  me,  if  I  have  any  greater
danger  to  pass,  than  this  which  you  present
before  me,  for  if  there  be  1  shall  despair  to
accomplish  it.  The  hope  of  such  great
things  ought  to  be  reserved  for  a  greater
heart  than  mine.  Now,  though  Lionarda  of
a  truth  was  so  fair  that  fairer  might  not  be,
what  she  felt  at  these  words  sent  up  so  mo-
dest a  colour  into  her  countenance  as  made
her  appear  yet  fairer,  for  they  seemed  to
have  in  them  that  meaning  which  might  well
be  suspected.  She  replied,  I  know  not,  sir
Knight,  what  danger  you  sustain  at  this
present  ;  all  the  dangers  of  this  place  were
ended  at  such  time  as  you  came  into  this
garden.  But  then  to  break  off  their  talk,
there  came  in  the  lords  and  governors  of  the
city,  who  seeing  the  serpent  fly  over  the  ci  (y,
which  ihey  knew  to  be  the  end  of  the  en-
chantment, came  with  full  speed  riding  to
the  castle,  where  coming  into  the  garden,
they  humbled  themselves  on  their  knees  be-
fore the  princess  Lionarda,  offering  likewise
to  kiss  the  hand  of  Palmerin  as  their  king  ;
but  he,  whose  resolution  was  otherwise,  woulcj
D  2


28

not  suffer  Ûûs,  but  received  them  with  equal
courtesy.  It  was  not  long  before  a  letter  ar-
rived, sentby  queen  Carmelia,  for  thé  princess.

She  was  received  in  the  city,  \%  i  tli  all  the  feasts
and  rejoicing  which  lhe  people  could  devise
in  so  short  a  time.  Palmerin  wns  amazed,  as»
he  returned,  not  to  find  that  water  which  he
hadcrost:  for  thou  irh  he  knew  the  other  things
to  have  been  only  visionary,  this  he  thought
had  certainly  been  real.  As  soon  as  the}rreach-
ed  the  palace,  Lionarda  was  received  by  her
grand-mother  Carmelia,  with  as  much  joy  as
a  thing  so  long  desired,  deserved.  Palmerin
was  lodged  in  the  same  apartment  as  before,
where  Selviam  disarmed  him,  being  full  joyful
to  have  his  lord  again,  returned  from  so  many
dangers  with  such  honour.  This  faithful  love
arose  in  him  from  that  which  Palmerin  bore
to  him  in  like  manner  ;  for  when  it  is  otherwise
the  ingratitude  of  the  lord  makes  the  servant
faithless.  The  damsel  of  Thrace  brought  him
food,  which  is  a  necessary  thing  after  labour  ;
for  only  with  this  and  with  repose  can  the
wearied  limbs  support  themselves.  In  the
city  they  began  to  prepare  leasts  for  the  en-


29

suing  day  ;  every  one  expending  according
as  his  means  permitted  in  different  devices,
after  the  fancy  of  each,  different  people,  as
is  natural,  devising  different  things.


D  3


30


CHAPTER  98.


On  the  morrow  after  Lionarda's  disenchant-
ment, the  people  of  all  the  district  began  to
gather  together  to  sec  their  liege  lady  ;  and
the  rejoicings  began  in  such  guise,  that  the
preparations  seemed  made  to  the  end  that
there  should  be  no  end  to  them  :  for  great
things  have  this  in  them,  that  they  seem  as
if  they  could  not  come  to  an  end.  Eight
days,  at  the  request  of  queen  Cannclia,  Pal-
merin  remained  in  the  court,  appearing  as
goodly  a  man  in  the  eyes  of  Lionarda,  as
she  seemed  fair  a  woman  in  the  (yes  of  all.
Now  the  chiefs  of  the  kingdom  seeing  him
not  disposed  to  become  their  king,  according
to  the  will  of  Sardamante,  took  counsel  to-
gether sundry  times  in  presence  of  Carmclia,


31

and  determined  to  make  a  speech  to  him
upon  the  matter,  entrusting  it  to  duke  lia-
dialdo,  he  heing  a  prudent  -and  eloquent
person.  With  this  determination  they  went
to  the  apartment  of  Palmerin,  who  with
Sclviain,  was  preparing  for  his  departure  the
following  day  ;  and  after  some  words  of  cour-
tesy foreign  to  the  purpose,  the  duke  began
to  say,  Brave  prince,  inasmuch  as  I  con-
ceive it  to  be  known  to  you,  what  com-
mandment our  deceased  king  Sardamante
left  to  be  performed  in  the  marriage  of  the
princess  Lionarda,  his  grandchild  and  our
liege  lady,  I  may  be  excused  from  remind-
ing you  thereof.  Now,  it  is  not  only  right
and  reasonable  lor  us  to  follow  the  command
of  a  prince  so  wise  and  prudent  in  all  things,
and  so  little  wont  to  err  in  any,  but  also
highly  unreasonable  that  what  you  with  so
great  labour  have  gained,  another  should
quietly  enjoy;  and  in  this  we  should  obtain
a  lord  and  king  worthy  of  greater  kingdoms.
Peradventure,  your  exploits  may  have
so  exalted  you,  that  you  may  be  disposed
to  disdain  a  thing  of  so  great  value  ;  but  call
to  mind,  that  oftentimes  in  the  beginning^


32

fortune  cloth  liold  forth  hopes  which  after-
wards prove  vain,  and  when  men  discover
this  deceit,  they  have  neither  time  to  wait
longer,  nor  to  enjoy  other  good,  if  other  she
shoidd  then  he  disposed  to  grant.  Much
more  too  should  you  call  to  mind,  that  it  is
the  office  of  this  same  fortune  more  easily
to  humble  the  great  than  to  exalt  the  lowly,
and  that  human  nature  in  princes,  as  well  as
in  other  men,  is  exposed  to  all  sorts  of  cala-
mity. Since  therefore  these  hazards  which
the  world  brings  to  all  who  live  in  it,  may  bet-
ter be  ended  by  the  certain  blessings  of  for-
tune than  by  her  uncertain  hope;  look  now
what  you  have  in  your  own  hand,  and  the
state  which  is  ready  for  you,  besides  what
by  your  royal  descent  hath  been  from  your
birth  prepared  as  your  inheritance.  With
this  increase  of  dominion  you  will  be  more
feared  by  your  enemies,  beloved  by  your
friends,  and  endeared  to  your  vassals,  if  the
increase  of  wealth  do  not  pervert  your  con-
dition ;  a  thing  which  oftentimes  chanceth.
Thus,  finally,  what  you  have  gained  faith-
fully in  arms,  you  should  possess  quietly  in
peace.    It  would  be  disparagement  to  the


33


high  deserts  and  qualities  of  Lionarda,  if
I  should  speak  of  them  to  you,  nor  will  Í
commit  so  great  an  error  as  to  venture  upon
her  praise.  Only  remember  that  men  some-
times lose  tilings  which,  when  repentance
comes,  they  cannot  recover.

Sir  duke,  replied  Palmerin,  if  any  thing
makes  me  decline  so  good  a  fortune,  it  is  a
belief  that  the  merits  of  the  lady  Lionarda
would  not  be  bestowed  on  me  according  to
their  worth.  I  leave  lier  for  such  a  one  as
she  deserves,  nor  should  you  desire  to  bestow
so  ill  one  whom  fortune  reserves  for  a  better
lot.  At  this  the  damsel  of  Thrace,  who  was
present  in  his  chamber,  exclaimed,  Sir  Pal-
merin, I  know  right  well,  that  love hinder-
eth  you  to  enjoy  what  your  deeds  hath  de-
served, and  in  order  that  you  may  not  be
perfect,  maketh  you  thus  submit  your  rea-
son to  your  affection.  Thus  are  your  thoughts
employed  on  one  who  peradventure  thinketh
not  of  you,  yet  maketh  you  forget  one  whom
you  might  better  l-cmcmber.  Little  wonder,
however,  that  in  what,  so  greatly  concerns
vou,  vou  should  be  so  blind,  for  ii  is  certain


34

that  clear  judgment  is  rarely  found  in  a  iieart
which  is  not  at  case  I  saw  the  proof  of
faithful  love  which  you  displayed  in  Constan-
tinople, and  know,  therefore,  that  the  faith
and  love  wherehy  you  atchieved  so  great  an
adventure,  have  certain  roots  in  you,  which
now  prevent  you  from  your  guerdon  here.

The  words  of  the  damsel  seemed  reasonable
to  the  duke  and  his  company  ;  hut  seeing
they  could  obtain  no  other  answer  of  Pal-
merin,  they  returned  again  to  queen  Car-
melia,  and  as  the  last  remedy,  determined  to
request  of  him  that  he  would  chuse  a  hus-
band for  the  princess,  according  as  the  king
Sardamante  had  ordained  :  whereto  Palmc-
rin  gladly  agreed,  saying,  I  account  this
honour,  sirs,  the  greatest  that  ever  fortune
could  send  me,  in  suffering  your  princess  to
join  in  marriage  according  to  my  mind  :
equal  to  her  merits  I  cannot  provide,  for
that  I  ween  would  be  impossible  ;  but  assure
yourselves,  that  I  shall  bestow  such  a  one
"upon  her,  as  both  she  and  you  shall  be  eon-
Tented  to  receive;  the  good  be  satisfied,  and
the  bad  have  no  reason  to  murmur.


35


Well  pleased  with  tins  answer  were  the  lords
of  Thrace,  and  they  reported  it  to  the  queen
Carmelia,  who  made  such  acceptation  thereof
as  it  deserved,  consoling  herself  with  this
promise  for  her  disappointment  in  that  he
would  not  himself  accept  the  marriage  of
her  grand-child.  Lionarda  was  somewhat
offended,  and  would  have  fallen  into  an-
ger, had  not  the  damsel  of  Thrace  used
these  words  unto  her:  Fair  princess,  me-
thinks  you  should  not  think  so  ill  of  the
constant  faith  and  loyalty  of  Palmerin,  who
will  keep  his  vow  he  hath  made  to  her,  which
perhaps  is  nothing  inferior  to  you  in  heauty
and  desert.  What  contentmeut  could  you  ex-
pect in  marriage  with  one,  who  while  he  were
with  you  would  be  remembering  another?
Palmerin  hath  a  brother  as  comely  a  person
as  himself,  as  good  a  knight,  and  of  such  free
affection,  that  he  not  only  displayed  no  sign
of  true  love  in  the  cup,  but  made  it  blacker
than  any  other  had  done.  He  may  give  you
this  brother,  and  thus  satisfying  your  deserts
you  will  have  no  cause  for  any  offended  re-
membrances, a»  anion;;  the  virtuous  no  angry


36

thoughts  are  so   great  as  thos<   which  arise
from  such  things  as  these.

Tlic  damsel  used  her  persuasions  so  well,
that  she  made  Lionarda  cease  to  regret  the

departure  of  Palmerin,  and  begin  to  allée1
his  brother  ;  for  they  are  by  nature  so  varia,
hie,  that  a  few  words  ean  in  a  single  minute,
efface  what,  many  days  may  seem  to  ha\e
rooted  in  their  hearts.

That  same  day  Palmerin  took  his   leave  of
her  and   of  queen   Carmelia,  who  look  him
aside,    and   said,    Sir  Palmerin,   I    will    not
waste  time  in  proposing   to  you  what  \ou
have  already  refused  to  those  who  could  bet-
ter than  me  propound  it,  only  i  will  remind
you,  seeing  my  grand-child  is  at  your  dispo-
sal, that  you  will  increase  your  own  honour
hy   giving    her   such   a    lord    as  her  birth
and  worthiness  deserve.     And  if  you  think
it  good  that  I  should  send  her  to   the  court
of  the  emperor  Palmerin,  where  there  is  the
flower  of  the  chivalry  of   the  world,  this    1
should  willingly  do,  knowing   that   by   the
emperor  she  would  be  honourably  intreated,


"37

uri  d  placed  in  the  society  of  his  grand-daugh-
ter and  other  princesses  of  high  descent;  and
that  there  are  also  all  the  chivalrous  princes
who  at  this  day  bear  arms,  from  among  whom  I
would  fain  that  the  successor  to  this  kingdom
should  be  chosen.  Lady,  replied  Palmcrin,
your  intention  appears  to  me  as  discreet  as
your  actions  have  ahvay  been.  I  should  es-
teem it  the  greatest  honour  that  in  all  mv
lifetime  might  happen  unto  me  :  for  that  I
persuade  me,  he  would  so  well  entertain  her
as  the  fair  Polinardã,  who  is  his  niece,  with
whom  she  would  likewise  greatly  delight  her-
self. Furthermore,  because  all  the  chief
knights  of  the  world  be  at  the  court  of
Constantinople,  I  would  gladly  this  king-
dom should  be  ruled  by  such  a  prince  as
hath  been  trained  up  by  that  famous  em-
peror.

The  emperor  will  esteem  this  honour  highly,
and  entertain  her  according  as  she  doth  de-
serve ;  therefore' I  wish  you  to  send  her  a?
soon  as  may  be,  because  the  sooner  she
cometh,  the  better  shall  she  be  welcome,
vox.,  m.  F


38

I  will  send  my  damsel  who  carried  the  cup,
said  ihe  queen,  because  she  is  known  there,
and  also,  because  I  think  that  she  is  well  qua-
lified for  any  thing  ;  but  in  this  also,  I  would
know  your  opinion,  for  without  it  I  would
do  nothing.     My  judgment  is,  he  replied,
that  your  highness  is  wise  in  whatever  you
do,  for  the  damsel  is  fit  for  great  things.    So
before  he  departed,  as  these  things  had  already
been  consulted  upon  between  the  queen  and
the  nobles,  she  called  for  the  damsel,  giving
her    to    understand  what  was    determined.
Whereupon     there     were  letters    of   credit,
made  for  her:  which  done,  Palmerin   took
leave  of  the  queen  and  the  fair    Lionarda,
rejoicing  to  think  that  he  was  returning  to
that  place  where  he  so  greatly  wished  to  be  ;
for  neither  her  excellent  beauty,  nor  great
dominions,  could  for  a  moment  shake   his
intentions.     He  rejoiced  moreover  to  think,
that  here  the  feats  of  his  brother   Floriarr
of  the   Desert   would  be  requited,  and   he
should  find  his  resting-place.     The  next  day,
having  heard  mass,  he  departed,  in  the  same
arms,  with    the  device  of  the   tyger,  from
which  he  was  thenceforth  called  the  knight


39

of  the  Tyger,  being  accompanied  with  most
of  the  nobles  forth  of  the  city,  where,  after
many  circumstances  of  friendly  departing,
they  left  him.  He  travelled  on  in  his  jour-
ney, yielding  his  body  to  trouble,  and  his
heart  to  his  lady,  with  the  fear  which  those
thoughts  occasioned,  losing  all  fear  of  any
mishap  into  which  fortune  might  bring  him  ;
not  remembering  that  to  her  disasters  the
brave  is  as  much  exposed  as  the  coward;  and
the  great  as  the  little.


£3


40


CHAPTER  99-


Some  Jays  Florendos  and  Albaysar  .abode  in
the  castle  of  Dramorante,  because  of  the
wounds  which  Florendos  had  received  in  his
"battle  with  Astribor.  Then  having  restored
the  castle  to  the  damsel  who  had  been  his  leech,
they  proceeded  on  their  way  toward  Spain  ;
and  because  some  adventures  which  they  went
through  were  not  such  that  we  should  here  de-
lay to  speak  of  them,  the  history  saith,  that
theypassed  through  the  realm  of  France  with-
out approaching  the  court,  because  Floren-
dos doubted  the  king,  and  queen  Melicia  his
aunt,  would  stay  him  longer  than  he  willingly
would.

Therefore  continuing  on  his  way,  he  came


41

into  the  kingdom  of  Navarre,  wherein  on
the  second  day  they  entered  into  a  fair  and
goodly  valley,  through  the  midst  whereof
there  ran  a  river  of  much  water,  which  had
divers  sorts  of  trees  planted  about  it,  very
pleasant  to  behold  j  the  sight  hereof  greatly
revived  the  pensive  mind  of  Florendos,  for  it
brought  to  remembrauce  the  pleasantness  of
the  waters  of  the  Tagus,  and  the  castle  of  Al-
mourol;  and  this  pensiveness  waxcd-the  more
when,  within  a  while,  they  espied  by  the  river
side  a  castle  of  marvellous  fabric,  whereto
as  they  were  about  to  advance  themselves,
they  beheld  a  damsel  accompanied  with  two
esquires  on  foot,  preparing  herself  towards
them.  Having  reached  them,  and  perceiving
that  only  Florendos  was  armed,  to  him  she
addressed  herself  after  this  sort  :

Sir  knight,  Arnalta,  princess  of  Navarre,
my  lady,  sends  to  say,  that  since  fortune  hath
led  you  hither,  you  must  now  of  three  things
chase  one  ;  cither  you  must  return  to  the
place  from  whence  you  came  ;  or  you  must
swear  that  she  is  the  only  princess  of  beauty
iii  the  whole  world,  and  enter  combat  as  long

E     í>


4-2

as  you  live  with  any  that  dare  maintain  the
contrary;  or  you  .must  make  promise,  that,
you  will  never  exercise  arms  except  in  an  ad-
venture which  she  shall  enjoin.  If  you  cannot,
put  on  the  mind  to  satisfy  my  lady's  will,  you
must  endure  the  perils  of  this  valley,  and  die
in  perpetual  imprisonment,  here  provided
for  those  who  dare  endue  themselves  with
the  hardiness  to  refuse  to  obey  the  conditions
I  have  told  you,  repenting  their  error  wh»  u
repentance  nothing  profiteth  them.  Now
on  my  own  part,  for  you  stem  to  me  to  be
young  and  gentle,  I  counsel  you  to  take,
your  oath  in  maintenance  of  her  beauty,
considering  you  shall  justify  in  this  nothing
but  a  truth,  and  that  he  who  fights  for  the
truth  hath  the  victory  certain.

Lady,  answered  Florendos,  any  one  of  the
things  which  you  command  me  to  do,  I
should  do  with  a  very  ill  will,  and  that
which  you  counsel  me  with  the  worst.  The
adventure  to  which  you  would  have  me
swear  I  would  fain  understand  j  for  it  may  be,
that  if  I  can  serve  her  in  it,  doing  at  the
same  time  what  becomes  myself^I.  may  not.
reject  it.


43

Sir,  answered  the  damsel,  the  enterprize  is
so  full  of  doubt  unto  the  hardiest  knights,
that  first  we  receive  their  oaths,  before  we
discover  to  them  the  will  of  the  princess,
whereof  if  they  should  be  acquainted  before-
hand, they  would  not  advance  themselves
to  undertake  it.  Then,  said  Florendos,  we
are  come  to  the  point.  I  will  not  promise
any  thing  without  knowing  what  it  is  ;  and
will  rather  prove  that  wherewith  you  threaten
ine,  than  assent  to  what  you  require.  I
thought  I  counselled  you  well,  said  the  dam-
sel, but  since  you  think  othersvise,  see  what
is  to  come:  and  so  saying  she  returned  to
the  castle  of  her  lady,  from  whence,  in  short
space  after,  came  forth  six  knights  gallantly
mounted  and  armed,  bearing  their  lanes
downward.  Don  Cavalier  Luckless,  said
they,  for  that  our  lady  hath  been  so  courte-
ous as  to  demand,  and  thou  so  impudent  as
thou  wilt  needs  deny,  thou  shalt  know  that
we  may,  can,  and  will  compel  thee.  lew.
words  and  sweet!  answered  Tloreudos.  Your
lady  may  do  much,  but  not  command  :  yon
as  much,  but  not  compel  ;  and  for  myself,  I
will  neither  command  nor  compel,  but  bid


44

you  heartily  welcome  to  what  you  dare  do.
At  these  words  they  gave  the  spurs  to  their
horses,  and  all  six  fetched  their  career  against
him  at  once  ;  and  though  he  was  ready,  yet
was  the  encounter  so  might}-  that  it  hurst  his
girts  and  brought  him  to  the  ground.  He
had  overthrown  one  and  left  his  lance  in
him,  and  sword  in  hand  now  thought  to  re-
sist the  others;  but  all  five  rode  at  him  to
trample  him  under  foot.  The  sight  of  this
villainy  moved  Albayzar  to  immeasurable
grief,  and  he  felt  more  at  wanting  his  ar-
mour in  such  an  extremity  than  if  he  had
lost  half  his  dominions.

Florendos  thought  to  shun  the  peril,  but  one
of  the  horses  ran  against  him  and  threw  him
down  ;  before  they  could  turn  and  ride  over
him  he  had  risen,  and  protected  himself  by
the  trunk  of  a  tree,  being  so  bruised  by  the
fall  that  it  seemed  as  if  all  his  bones  had
been  ground  to  pieces.  One  of  them,  as
they  turned  again  upon  him,  seeing  him
thus,  said,  These  are  not  the  helps  that  can
save  you  ;  better  is  it  to  yield  yourself  pri-
soner before  it  costs  you  more.     I  had  ra-


45

th^er,  answered  Florenclos,  endure  the  death,
than  render  myself  into  the  hands  of  so  vile
a  crew  ;  if  you  have  not  courage  enow  to  do
battle  with  me  one  by  one,  but  will  come  all
at  once,  let  it  at  least  be  on  foot,  and  I  will
shew  you  how  much  the  virtue  of  one  good
knight  is  above  the  brutish  manners  of  many
bad  ones.  Whereunto  one  of  the  knights  re-
plied, I  see  no  reason  why  you  should  so
much  presume  on  yourself;  there  is  no  one
of  us  but  thinketh  himself  able  enough  to
compel  you  to  submit  j'ourself,  and  so  little
account  do  we  make  of  the  vanquishing  you,
that  for  that  reason  we  deal  with  you  all  to-
gether ;  nevertheless,  seeing  you  fancy  you
would  have  a  better  chance  on  foot,  on  foot
you  shall  see  us.  Whereupon  they  alighted
and  came  together  to  assail  him.  But  he,
being  full  of  rage  and  melancholy,  and  hav-
ing now  less  fear  of  them,  made  at  them  with
such  lui  y  as  their  baseness  inspired  in  him,
smiting  a-right  and  a-left,  and  dealing  such
mighty  and  terrible  strokes,  that  in  short
time  they  repented  that  they  left  their  horses  :
tor  though  these  knights  were  both  for
;.h  and  practice  in  arms  the  best  of  all


4-G

Navarre,  they  could  not  so  defend  them-
selves from  the  fury  of  Floreados,  but  that
in  short  space  they  were  sorely  handled,  and
one  of  them  lay  flat  upon  the  field  \vith  a
blow  upon  the  head,  which  had  reached  his
brain.  He  too  had  received  some  wounds,
from  which  much  blood  issued  ;  but  the
wrath  with  which  he  fought  did  not  let  him
feel  them.  Contrariwise,  seeing  that  it  be-
hoved him  to  renew  his  endeavours,  for  they
shewed  no  weakness  yet,  he  continued  his  de-
voir so  gallantly  toward  the  other  four,  that  he
laid  two  of  them  along,  and  lopt  off  the  sword
arm  of  a  third  by  the  elbow.  The  one  who
was  left,  seeing  his  comrades  in  such  plight,
thought  it  better  to  die  with  them  than  yield
himself  to  a  man,  in  whom  he  knew  not
whether  any  mercy  would  be  found:  and  in
this  despair  his  strength  and  courage  were
redoubled,  so  that  he  fought  better  than  at
first;  but  all  was  little  against  Florendos,
who  laid  such  load  of  blows  upon  him  as
soon  brought  him  to  the  ground  senseless.
And  as  he  was  unlacing  his  helmet  to  part
his  head  from  his  shoulders,  the  princess
Amalta  came  out,   accompanied  with   her


47

damsels,  to  save  the  life  of  this  knight,  who
was  her  cousin-german,  saying,  Sir  knight,
ro  the  end  that  you  may  not  sully  this  great
victory,  by  slaying  him  who  hath  no  power
to  defend  himself,  1  beseech  you  that  you
would  give  me  the  life  of  this  knight.  And
if  for  tlie  wrong  you  have  suffered,  amends
may  be  made,  1  put  myself  to  accomplish
any  thing  that  it  shall  like  you  to  ordain,
provided  always,  that  my  honour  and  autho-
rity bo  no  way  impeached  thereby.  Madam,
answered  Florendos,  though  life  should  not
be  granted  to  such  as  employ  themselves  in
such  base  attempts,  nevertheless  I  will  not  re-
fuse you  any  thing;  tell  me,  I  beseech  you,  in
requital,  why  you  cause  to  be  maintained  this
custom.

Sir  knight,  answered  the  princess,  lest  by
longer  staying,  your  wounds  may  turn  to
greater  danger,  go  with  me  into  the  castle,
where,  having  provided  to  redressyour  hurts>
and  those  of  my  knights,  I  will  not  fail  to
answer  in  what  you  please.  Upon  this  they
went  in,  and  Arnalta  caused  one  of  her
damsels  to  see   the  curing   of  his  wounds,


48

which  in  sooth  were  in  no  greater  danger
than  that  he  might  easily  travel  the  clay  fol-
lowing. After  this  was  done,  and  the  other
knights  were  dressed,  and  those  buried  that
were  slain,  she  took  Florendos  by  the  hand,
and  seeing  him  so  young  and  gentle,  thought
it  much  that  he,  should  have  made  his  prow-
ess so  nobly  known  against  her  knights  ;  and
then  as  she  contemplated  him,  came  to  her
remembrance  Florian  of  the  Desert  :  fur  his
age  was  the  same,  and  he  had  a  something
of  his  air;  and  this  remembrance  caused  a
crimson  colour  to  amount  into  her  chtoL-
so  that  all  her  face  delivered  a  lovely  blush.
They  seated  themselves  in  a  window,  the
prospect  whereof  was  over  a  fair  Fanning
river,  and  she  spake  unto  him  in  this  manner  :

I  know  well,  sir  knight,  that  the  custom  of
my  castle  seemeth  unto  you  to  be  ordained
against  all  reasonable  regard  ;  but  having
understood  for  what  occasion  I  maintain  it  in
this  order,  you  will  not  be  any  ways  offended
thereat.  It  is  so,  sir,  that  the  king  my  father,
leaving  me  in  the  custody  of  sundry  nobles
oiFthis  realm  of  Navarre,  he  desired   them


45

at  his  very  hour  of  death,  that  they  v.-ouli
see  I  should  be  married  to  mine  own  pleasure
and  contentment.  Attending  which  time,  I
withdrew  myself,  for  honesty,  into  a  castle
some  four  leagues  from  hence,  situate  in  a
fair  place  and  pleasant,  and  apart  from  po-
pular fréquentation  ;  where  having  sojourned
a  while,  there  chanced  to  arrive  a  young  and
comely  knight,  whose  qualities  seemed  to
me  of  such  desert  that  I  desired  to  match
with  him,  holding  opinion,  that  in  him  I
should  justly  satisfy  my  father's  command-
ment, and  give  myself  a  husband  worthy  of
my  rank  and  person.  But  he  being  come
from  the  castle  of  Almourol,  was  so  ena-
moured that  he  rejected  my  will,  and  held
my  words  at  nought.  Whereupon  I  caused
hiin  to  be  put  in  prison,  which  was  easily
effected,  because  he  was  unarmed,  purposing
not  to  release  him.  Such  however  was  his
fortune,  that  there  came  another  knight  unto
that  place,  called  Florian  of  the  Desert,
whom  you  do  very  much  resemble  ;  I  know
not  whether  you  be  a-kin  to  him.  His  beha-
viour gained  such  power  over  me,  that  he
not  only  made  me  set  my  prisoner  at  liberty,
vol.  m.  r


JO

but  did  with  mc  what  he  would,  promising
to  return  to  visit  me  again,  and  giving  me
some  hope   that  he   would  marry  me.     But
after  that  Í  had  attended  him  long  time,  and
saw  him  not  to  return  according  to  promise,
I  concluded  myself  to  remove  into  this  vai-
ley,  which  is  a  great  pass  for  travellers,  and
here  by  force  to  make  those  swear  who  pro-
fessed arms,    that   they   should   not    break
spear,  nor  put  armour  on  their  backs,  again.^i
any  other   knight  than    this  only  one  who
hath  offered  me  this  great   despight,  till  he
should  be  brought  prisoner  unto  me.     And
I  held  this  opinion,  that  some  valiant  knight
happening  into  this  place,  would  either  dis-
charge this  vow,   or  by  maintaining  that  the
beauty  of  Miraguarda  might  in  no  respect  be
equalled  with  mine,  cause   Florian,   who   is
curious  in   searching  such  haughty  adven-
tures, to  come   prove   the  contrary  against
him,  and  by  one  or  other  of  these  ways   Í
might  have  him  in  my  power,

Some  knights,  fearing  the  peril,  have  been
glad  to  return  ;  many  have  sworn  themselves
to  defend  my  beauty,  and  so  departed  without


51

battle  ;  others  who  would  not  submit  to  either
condition,  my  knights  have  taken,  and  some
of  these  were  of  such  prowess  as  well  nigh
to  put  them  to  the  worst;  and  thus  it  hath
been,  sir,  till  you  have  marred  all.

Madam,  answered  Florendos,  I  know  well
the  knight  of  whom  you  speak,  and  assure
yourself  that  very  hardly  shall  you  bring  him
into  this  place,  without  he  list  himself;  nor
should  you  marvel  although  he  be  forgetful
in  satisfying  his  promise  ;  for  as  soon  as
these  things  are  over  he  thinks  no  more  of
them.  The  knights  who  maintain  the  quar-
rel of  your  beauty  have  reason  to  do  won-
ders, and  for  this  your  person  is  sufficient,
though  you  had  no  such  custom  :  such  as
you  withhold  by  imprisonment,  I  beseech
you  bestow  them  on  me  ;  they  shall  be  able
to  honour  you  more  by  their  knightly  ser-
vice, being  at  liberty,  than  you  shall  advan-
tage yourself  by  keeping  them  in  servitude.
Sir,  answered  Arnalta,  I  cannot  refuse  what
you  desire;  but  what  shall  1  do,  for  by  your
words  you  make  me  out  of  hope.  The  im-
prisoned knights  shall  be  delivered  you,  and

T  °

1'  «J


52

I  give  into  your  hands  the  keys  of  the  pri
son.  She  then  took  them  from  a  string  which
she  wore  round  her  waist,  and  Florendos  deli-
vered them  to  Albayzar,  who  would  himself
go  to  release  them.     He  found  them  below  in
a  dark  vault,  but  in  no  rigorous  prison,  for  the
condition  of  the  lady  of  the  castle  was  not  so
cruel.     Then  opening  the  locks  he  took  them
out,  and  as  he  was   disarmed,    some  among
them  knew  hi  m  by  the  light   of  two  torches
which  were  carried  before  him  ;  for  they  had
seen  him  at  Constantinople,  in  the  mainte-
nance of  the  beauty  of  Targiana  ;  and  now
seeing  themselves  delivered,  and  yet  perceiv-
ing that  he  was   without  arms,  they  knew
not  what  to  think.     But  when    they   were
come  up,  they  perceived  their  liberty  to  be
by  the  means  of  Florendos  ;  then  they  threw
themselves  at  his  feet:  and  he,  among  others
whom  he  knew,   seeing  Blundidon,    Flora-
man,  Roramonle,  and  Tenebror,  thought  the
more   of  his   victory.     Arnalta  now   seeing
the  day  gave  place  to  the  night,  and  that  it
was   time  to   have  some  refection,   her    at-
tendants prepared  supper  for  Florendos  and
the  knights  that  came  out  of  prison,  to  whoa»


she  gave  such  stately  entertainment  as  if
the  banquet  had  been  of  many  days  pre-
paration. This  sprang  from  a  new  ulFection
which  she  had  conceived  ;  nor  was  it  to  be
wondered  at,  considering  her  condition,  and
that  the  prowess  of  Florendos,  which  she
had  witnessed.,  made  her  forget  former  cares.
Moreover,  his  courteous  words  had  won  her  ;
for  they,  when  they  are  good,  win  over  con-
trary wills.


f3


Í4-


CHAPTER   100.


That  night  Florendos  slept  in  the  castle  of
Araalta  unwillingly,  lor  he  perceived  incli-
nations in  her  which  were  hateful  to  his  con-
dition ;  and  no  sooner  was  it  day,  but  he
arose  and  put  on  his  armour,  which  was
much  defaced,  by  reason  of  his  sore  fight  ;
and  after  taking  his  farewell,  as  also  ot
Blandidon.Tenebror,  and  Roramonte,  in  no
case  would  he  leave  the  company  of  Flo-
raman,  because  since  the  time  that  they  had
met  in  the  woods,  they  twain  had  been  such
friends  that  their  affection  to  each  other  en-
dured as  long  as  they  lived;  a  thing  much
to  be  esteemed,  because  we  every  day  see
how  changeable  such  things  be.  Arnalta
remained  so  greatly  passionate  for  his  de-


55

parttrre,  that  she  now  began  to  devise  mean
òf  vengeance  upon  Florendos,  forgetting
riorian,  even  as  if  she  had  never  seen  him  ;
in  this  not  differing  from  the  true  nature  of  all
womankind,  which  is  for  any  present  passion,
how  light  soever,  to  put  clean  out  of  remem-
brance the  past,  even  though  such  as  ought  not
to  be  forgotten;  and  being  in  this  mood  when
she  took  farewell  of  the  restored  prisoners,
she  could  not  use  such  gracious  behaviour  as
she  had  done  the  da}'  before-.  Florendos  rid
certain  days  in  lhe  company  of  Albayzar  and
Floraman,  who  had  concluded  to  travel  to  the
castle  of  Almourol  to  see  what  entertainment
Mi  rag  u  arda  would  make  to  Florendos,  and
whether  she  could  now  find,  contrary  to  her
former  custom,  his  noble  employed  service
agreeable  to  her  curious  nature.  These  three
knights  following  their  way,  they  perceived
after  they  were  entered  far  within  the  realm
of  Spain,  at  the  foot  of  a  mountain,  a  knight
of  great  stature,  standing  between  two  great
and  wide  branching  ash  trees  :  he  was  armed
in  green  armour,  and  bare  in  his  shield  a
white  ball,  in  a  field  of  sable;  he  was
mounted  on  a  goodly  bay  horse,  and  sat  so


56

well,  and  was  of  sucli  goodly  semblance  him-
self, that  he  seemed  well  to  become  arms.  Ik-
fore  thev  came  up  to  him,  an  esquire  stept  to
them,  who  delivered  his  mind  alter  this  order  :

Sirs,  the  keeper  of  these  ash  trees  givcth  you
to  understand  that  he  hath  maintained  this
passage  a  long  time  against  all  knights:  not
that  he  hath  desire  to  offer  any  knight  dis-
courtesy, but  only  to  satisfy  the  will  of  a
lady  whom  he  serves.  Therefore,  if  it  may
stand  with  your  liking,  to  grant  such  things
as  he  will  demand,  the  passage  shall  be  free
for  you  ;  but  if  you  enterprise  to  do  the  con-
trary, he  will  put  in  trial  to  make  you  confess
perforce,  that  which  you  cannot  reasonably
deny  or  refuse  to  grant.

Declare  unto  us,  quoth  Florendos,  first  the
will  of  thy  master,  and  then  we  will  make
thee  answer  ;  for  hardly  can  we  determine  ot
the  matter  whereof  we  are  ignorant.

You  have  to  confess,  answered  the  ecquire,
that  Arnalta,  the  princess  of  Navarre,  is  the
fairest   creature   under  heaven,    and    most


57


worthy  of  knightly  service.  It  seems  to  are,
said  Albayzar,  that  her  knights  have  found  one
to  perform  this  condition,  rather  than  do
battle  with  them.  A  bad  business  he  will
have  of  it  if  he  thinks  to  follow  it  long.  You
may  tell  your  master,  said  Florendos  to  the
esquire,  what  you  have  heard  this  knight
say.  While  the  esquire  was  returning,  Flo-
rainan,  who  had  laced  on  his  helmet,  and
righted  himself  in  the  saddle,  desired  Floren-
dos that  he  would  grant  him  the  combat,
and  gave  the  spurs  to  his  horse.  The  attaint
was  well  delivered  on  either  side,  and  as  both
were  especial  knights,  they  were  both  dis-
mounted :  they  recovered  themselves  prompt-
ly, and  set  their  handsto  their  swords,  where-
with they  began  to  strike  one  another  fiercely,
using  such  knightly  dexterity  as  manifested
their  practice  in  arms.  This  was  a  notable
hattle,  and  became  so  fearful  a  one,  that  Flo-
rendos and  Albayzar  delighted  to  behold  it.

And  for  that  Floraman  was  reputed  for  one  of
the  good  knights  of  the  world,  they  seeing
how  little  he  had  the  vantage  of  his  opponent,
held   the  other  in  more  account,  and  mar-


58


veiled  why  so  brave  a  man  should  h.\  ■
chosen  to  keep  that  pass,  rather  than  do
battle  with  Arnalta's  knights.  The  combat
now  became  more  furious, and  Floraman,  re-
membering that  Florendos  and  Albayzar,
who  were  very  princes  of  valour,  beheld
him,  fought  with  such  ardour,  that  bia  whole
strength  and  courage  were  displayed  to  their
full  extent:  and  the  other  also,  whom  his
love  for  Arnalta  bound  not  to  spare  himself,
did  wonders  as  well.

These  two  knights  continued  combat  so  long,
that  they  were  constrained  to  take  breath  ;
upon  which  the  strange  knight,  rejoicing
thereat,  began  to  use  this  language  towards
Floraman.  I  know  not,  sir  knight,  why  we
should  kill  one  another  without  cause.  You>
in  confessing  that  my  lady  Arnalta  is  the
fairest  woman  in  the  world,  and  the  most
worthy  to  be  served,  would  confess  the  truth  :
now  this  being  clear,  what  reason  can  bind
you  to  maintain  a  falsehood,  since  certain  it
is,  that  he  who  combats  upon  a  false  quarrel,
hath  the  victory  doubtful.  A  greater  false-
hood would  it  be.  replied  Floraman,  to  admit


59

what  thou  sayest  to  be  truth  ;  Arnalta  may
be  fair,  and  worthy  to  be  served  ;  nevertheless,
the  world  enjoyeth  some  such,  to  whom  she
may  in  no  wise  be  equalled.  I  have  in  time
past  loved  a  lady  myself,  in  respect  of  whom
I  will  rather  die,  than  accord  to  the  error
which  thou  wouldst  have  me  confess.

Floraman  had  no  sooner  concluded  his
>peech,  but  they  returned  afresh  to  the  com-
bat, charging  one  another  more  furiously
than  they  had  done  before,  so  that  it  could
not  be  judged  whether  the  one  had  any  ad-
vantage of  the  other,  they  maintained  the
fight  so  bravely.  But  in  the  end,  the  knight
that  kept  the  passage  began  by  a  little  and
a  little  to  feel  that  feebleness  somewhat  as-
sailed him,  and  that  stroke  by  stroke  his
sword  turned  in  his  hand,  and  his  armour
was  broken  in  many  places.  The  armour  of
r'loraman  was  in  no  better  case  than  his
enemy's,  but  he  followed  his  strokes  more
wisely,  and  was  in  better  wind  ;  and  when
they  drew  back  a  second  time,  seeing  the
weakness  of  his  opponent,  and  being  of  a
noble  nature,  lie  wished  to  see  if  he  could


60

rnake  him  desist  from  the  battle  without  loss
<ji  life  ;  whereupon  he  spake  to  him  in  this
manner  :

Sir  knight,   you  see  very  well   that  the  truth
or' your  entcrprize    is   not   so  clear   as   you
judged  it;   confess  therefore  that  there   are
other  ladies  in   the  world  whose  beauty  Ar-
nalta  may  no  way  parallel,  even   though  she
be  fair  as  you  say  she  is.     I   know  well,  sir,
said  the  knight  of  the  passage,  that  the  weak-
ness whereinto  you  see  me  brought,  induceth
you  to   prove  me    with    s.uch    persuasions  :
certes,  what  I  maintain  is  the  truth,  but  I  am
of  so  little  worth,  and  you  of  so   much,  that
you,  in  maintaining  falsehood,  succeed  against
nie.     I  have  the  worst  of  the  battle,  and  now
know  that  its  end  and  mine  must  be  the  same  ;
but  I  shall  finish  what  I  have  b(gun,  not  de-
siring to   live  except  it  be  to    defend   this
truth,  nor  to  die  in  any  other  cause.     At  the
same  instant  that  he    finished  these   words,
he    charged   Floraman  afresh,   who  caught
him  in  his  arms,  and  with  little  effort  over-
threw him.     Florendos  and  Albayzar   then
came  to  him,  being  grieved  to  see  him  in.


61

this  plight,  for  they  judged  that  he  must  be
dead  ;  and  taking  oft*  his  helmet,  the  air
brought  him  to  himself,  and  they  perceived
that  it  was  Albanis  of  Frisa,  the  prince  of
Denmark  ;  at  which  Floraman  was  little  con-
tent, attributing  it  to  his  ill  fortune,  for  h«
was  his  great  friend.

They  bore  him  to  the  house  of  an  old  knight,
whose  abode  was  in  the  mountain  ;  and  as
they  went  they  demanded  of  him  upon  what
occasion  he  undertook  so  bad  an  enterprise.
Sirs,  answered  Albanis,  I  came  one  day  into
the  valley  where  the  princess  Arnalta  hath
an  abode,  the  plcasantest  in  the  world  ;  and  it
so  chanced  that  at  the  time  when  1  happened
there,  she  was  enjoying  herself  upon  the
banks  of  the  river,  it  being  evening.  Seeing
her  so  beautiful,  together  with  other  graces
which  I  found  in  her,  I  remained  her  vowed
servant  in  good  will  ;  and  because  no  knight
who  entered  that  valley  might  pass  through  it
without  chusing  to  perform  one  of  three
things,  I  undertook  to  approve  against  all
wandering  knights,  that  she  was  the  fairest
person  in  the  world,  that  being  one  of  the
vol.  m.  g


62

three  ;  and  this  I  did,  not  in  any  fear  of  her
knights,  but  because  the  affection  which  I  bad
conceived  made  her  Verily  appear  so  unto  me.

Now  I  am  fallen  into  the  hands  of  sir  Flora-
man,  and  what  Í  regret  is  not  the  loss  of
victory,  for  being  overcome  by  him  I  ac-
count that  no  loss;  but  that  which  maketh
me  grieve  is,  that  I  lose  the  hope  that  till  this
hour  I  entertained.  They  who  make  pro-
fession of  arms,  sir  Albanie,  said  Flore n dos,
ought  not  to  be  abashed  when  any  change
befalls  them.  Arnalta  meritcth  much,  yet
not  so  much  as  that  she  should  obscure  the
merits  of  others  who  are  in  nothing  her  in-
feriors; you  should  rejoice  that  this  disaster
hath  befallen  you  before  your  friends  ;  for  had
it  been  otherwise  vou  would  have  hat!  mon
cause  for  sorrow.

With  this  they  arrived  at  the  house  of  the
knight,  who  received  them  gladly,  for  that
he  was  accustomed  to  lodge  all  wandering
knights  ;  and  such  diligent  attendance  was
used,  that  the  wounds  of  Albania  were  meetly
healed,  and  certain  days  he  was  accompanied


63

by  the  prince  Floreados  and  his  companions,
a  delay  which  was  sorely  irksome  to  Florea-
dos, for  the  desire  he  had  to  reach  the  castle
of  Almourol.  Yet  he  dissembled  this,  and
forced  his  own  inclinations,  to  gratify  his
friends.  This  is  one  of  the  advantages  of  the
wise,  that  they  are  thanked  ever  for  what
they  do  unwillingly.


g  2


64


CHAPTER   101.


This  history  maketh  mention,  how  the  em-
peror was  one  day  in  the  empress's  cham-
ber, accompanied  with  the  worthiest  lords  of
his  empire,  when  the  damsel  of  Thrace  en-
tered the  door,  who  was  well  known  by  all
since  she  had  been  there  with  the  adventure
of  the  cup.  She  looked  round  the  house,
and  because  she  saw  not  the  knights  which
were  accustomed  to  be  there,  it  seemed  to
heras  if  that  could  not  be  the  court  of  the
emperor  Palmerin.  Great  was  the  joy  at  her
coining,  and  great  the  expectation.  The
emperor  received  her  with  a  gracious  wel-
come, desirous  to  learn  what  had  happened
to  Palmerin  in  the  adventure  of  Lionarda.
Whoso  had  then  turned  his  eyes  upon  the  fair


66

Polinarda,  might  well  have  seen  her  fears  in
the  changes  of  lier  countenance  :  for  it  is
natural  for  those  who  live  in  fear  easily  to
lose  heart.

High  and  mighty  prince,  said  the  damsel,
know  that  1'ahnerin  hath  finished  the  en-
chantment of  my  lady  the  princess  Lionarda,
passing  through  all  the  perils  of  the  adven-
ture in  safety,  and  with  the  greatest  honour
that  can  be  said.  The  whole  discourse  whereof
she  then  delivered  in  circumstance.  But
when  she  came  to  report  the  manner  of  his
passing  the  lake,  wherewith  the  isle  was
compassed  round  about,  the  danger  of  the
boat,  and  the  fashion  how  he  was  drawn  up,
the  empress  and  her  ladies  were  so  overcome
with  fear,  that  the  colour  in  their  cheeks
began  to  alter.

I  have  heard  reported,  said  the  emperor,
many  strange  adventures,  and  have  atchieved
some  myself  in  my  time,  but  I  never  either
saw  or  heard  of  any  so  perilous  as  this.  Well
does  it  appear  that  the  cunning  and  discre-
tion of  king  Sardamante  were  différent  from

Go
J


66


those  of  other  men,  and  the  prowess  of  Pal-
merin  above  all  other;  for  I  know  not  who
else  that  had  seen  himself  in  such  dismay,
would  have  had  courage  or  prudence  to  ex-
tricate himself.  The  damsel  went  on  to  re-
late all  the  rest  as  it  happened,  saying,  that
which  above  all  appeared  to  us  most  worthy
of  wonder,  was,  to  see  him  free  from  the  hist  ;
that  is  to  say,  from  the  beauty  of  Lionarcla,
which  is  in  truth  so  much  to  be  lauded,  that
it  seemeth  as  if  nature  here  putting  forth  all
her  skill,  had  made  her  to  be  the  very  proof
and  sample  of  perfection.  But  he  is  alto-
gether blinded,  and  his  heart  is  affectionately
placed  elsewhere  ;  for  love  hath  had  power
over  him  to  make  him  reject  both  the  beauty
and  the  inheritance  of  Lionarda,  two  things
which  are  so  rarely  united  in  the  same  per-
son ;  rejecting  marriage  with  her,  which  was
offered  him  by  her  people  ;  so  that  it  was
finally  determined  she  should  wed  with  whom
he  thought  good,  according  to  the  testa-
ment of  king  Sardamante,  her  grandfather.
And  therefore,  queen  Carmelia,  her  grand-
mother, hath  chosen  that  the  princess
should  sojourn  awhile  in  your  court,  that  the


67

husband  whom  Palm.erin  shall  appoint  for
her  may  be  one  of  the  knights  of  this  house,
and  she,  in  the  mean  time,  remain  in  the
company  of  the  princess  Polinarda,  as  also  of
other  noble  ladies,  wherewith  your  renowned
court  is  plentifully  enriched,  whose  gracious
conversation  may  not  only  entertain  the  heart
of  Lionarda  with  the  precious  dignity  of
unspotted  virtue,  but  also,  by  imitating  their
honourable  examples,  she  may  retain  their
friendship  and  manners  also,  a  better  patri-
mony than  worldly  possessions.  Concerning
this  she  asked  advice  of  Paimerin,  who  not
only  liked  well  of  the  intent,  but  charged  me
In  his  name  to  request  this  favour  of  you.
And  queen  Carmelia  biddeth  me  say  to  you,
that  you  should  remember,  how  you  have
never  vet  denied  to  any  oaie,  any  request
which  seemed  just,  as  this  is,  and  moreover,
one  which  being  granted,  will  so  greatly  bind
both  her  and  the  whole  kingdom  of  Thrace
to  your  service.  To  this  effect  she  com-
manded me  to  present  your  majesty  with  this
her  letter  of  credit.

The  emperor  took  the  letter,  which   when


63

he  had  perused,  he  thus  framed  his  answer  •
Discreet  damsel,  I  give  you  thanks  for  the
good  news  you  have  brought  me  of  my
grandson  Palmerin,  and  God  grant  my  power
may  stretch  so  far  as  to  requiie  you  accord-
ing as  you  have  worthily  merited.

And  for  the  lady,  the  love  of  whom  caused
him  to  reject  the  princess  Lionarda,  I  know
not  by  what  means  she  can  requite  him,
though  the  hearts  of  the  enamoured  are  .sa-
tisfied with  little.  And  where  you  desire  I
would  yield  my  consent,  that  the  princess
might  come  to  remain  in  my  court,  assure
yourself,  that  I  think  myself  more  highly
honoured  by  such  a  request  than  ever  yet  I
have  been  ;  and  the  longer  her  coming  is  de-
layed, the  more  I  shall  think  myself  a  loser.
And  the  better  to  declare  how  grateful  I  ac-
cept her  coming  hither,  Ï  give  to  you  the
county  of  Selim,  to  be  your  portion,  which  by
reason  of  the  death  of  count  Arlao,  remaineth
vacant,  he  not  having  left  any  heirs  to  pos-
sess the  same.  The  damsel  threw  herself  at
the  emperor's  feet,  and  the  emperor  raised
her  up_,  giving  her  his  hand,  which  he  was


69

not  accustomed  to  do  to  any  stranger,  ex-
cept when  he-conferred  some  signal  favour.

The  damsel  then  behaved  herself  in  the  same
manner  of  duty  to  the  empress,  as  she  would
have  done  toward  Primaleon  and  Gridonia,
but  they  by  their  courtesy  made  stay  of  her
humble  offer  ;  whereupon  she  turned  to  the
emperor,  and  delivered  her  mind  in  these
words:  The  bounty  which  your  majesty  hath
vouchsafed  me,  I  aocept  when  I  shall  come
here  with  my  lady  Lionarda,  to  possess  toge-
ther with  the  husband  whom  it  shall  please
you  to  appoint  for  your  service;  and  as  a.
still  greater  bounty  do  I  receive  the  answer
to  my  embassy,  being  such  as  I  wished.  And
now  I  am  eager  to  return  ;  see  therefore  what
your  majesty  will  command,  for  Í  cannot
prevail  upon  myself  to  tarry  a  single  day.

Damsel,  answered  the  emperor,  it  should
like  me  well,  if  you  made  some  abode  here
to  rest  yourself;  but  since  you  like  better  to
depart,  be  it  as  you  will.  Then  she  took  her
leave  of  the  emperor,  and  ajl  his  company»
and  came  to  the  chamber  of  Polinarda,  who


TO

had   secretly   withdrawn   hmelf  with    Dra-
maciana  to  enjoy  those  joyful  tidings:  and
when  the  damsel,  coming  to  take  leave  of  her
also,  saw  her  more  nearly  than  she  had  done
before,  she  who  was  discreet  in  all  things,
presently  began  to  conjecture,  that  it  was
the  beauty  of  this  princess  which  had  caused
Palmerin  to  refuse  the  government  of  Thrace;
in  which  she  was  fully  confirmed  by  seeing
how  particularly  she  enquired  about  all  things
concerning   him.     Polinarda  honoured    the
damsel  with  very  princely  courtesy,  and  gave
her  jewels  and  things  of  her  own  person  of
great  value  ;  and   she   desired  her,  that  she
Avould  be   the  messenger  of  her   unfeigned
good   will  to  the  princess  Lionarda,  whom
she   besought  to  come    unto  the  court  the
sooner  for  her  sake.     The  damsel  made  pro-
mise to  perform  every  thing  to  the  utter-
most; so    departing  from  the  princess,  she
went  from  the  palace  to  her  lodging,  where
she  found  other  honourable  presents,  which
the  empress  and  Gridonia  had  sent  unto  her:
with  the  which  she  departed,  more  rich  and
more  contented  than  she  camp.


71

Leave  we  the  damsel  on  her  journey,  and
return  to  the  knight  of  the  Tyger,  who,  after
he  departed  from  the  kingdom  of  Thrace,
took  the  way  to  Constantinople,  that  being
the  only  place  where  his  passionate  thoughts
could  find  their  certain  repose.  Thus  tra-
velling on,  one  day  about  the  hour  of  sunset
he  arrived  in  a  wilderness,  far  from  any
houses  or  resort  of  people,-  where  riding
.Jong,  he  heard  the  trampling  of  a  great
many  horses  ;  and  casting  his  eye  that  way
where  he  heard  the  noise,  he  espied  ten  or
twelve  armed  knights  galloping  overthwart
the  forest,  as  men  who  were  hastening  upon
some  business  of  great  import.  Whereupon
he  laced  on  his  helmet,  meaning  to  follow
tin  m.  While  he  was  thus  employed  he  saw
another  knight  coming  more  leisurely  along
the  same  track,  by  reason  his  horse  had  re-
ceived an  attaint  in  one  of  his  legs.  To  him
Palmerin  drew  nigh  and  said,  Can  you  tell
mi',  sir,  who  yonder  knights  are,  or  for  what
reason  they  travel  so  fast  :  Von  have  little
need  to  know,  replied  the  other,  but  as  your
acquaintance  with  the  cause  can  neither
hurt  thein  with    your  malice-,  nor    pleasure


72

them  with  your  aid,  1  am  content  to  resolve
you  in  what  you  request.

You  shall  understand,  sir,  that  thr^e  leagues
off  there  is  the  castle  of  a  lady,  who  hath  a
daughter  fair  and   with    a   fair  patrimony;
with  whom  a  knight  named  Felistor,  is  very
desirous  to  marry,  the  chief  of  those  whom
3"0u  see  yonder  ;  but  by  reason  of  old  feuds
between  her  father  and  his,  her  lady  mother
will  not  suffer  her  to  be  so  bestowed,   and
hath  now  given  her  to  be  espoused  to  an-
other principal  knight  of  this  country,  named
Radiamar.     Felistor,  knowing  that  to-mor-
row they  mean    to   remove   her  to  another
castle,  where   the  marriage  is  to  take  place,
is.  going  this  night  to  lay  an  ambushment  in
a  little  wood,  by  which  they  must  of  neces-
sity pass,  that  he  may  take  her  by  force  and
marry  her  himself,  and  slay  those  who  shall
seek  to  defend  her  ;  and  he  maketh  this  speed
fhat  he  may  arrive  in  time  to  ambush  him-
self,   without    being    perceived,    the    place
being  far  distant.     My  horse  stumbled  over
the  root  of  a  tree,  and   can  now  scarcely
stand   upon  the  right   fore-leg,    and  I  am


ready  to  die  with  vexation  that  I  shall  not
be  able  to  arrive  in  time,  ir'  therefore  there
be  so  much  courtesy  in  you,  lend  me  you;
horse,  for  that  whereon  your  squire  rideth
doth  not  seem  so  good.  I  will  receive  it
as  a  great  favour,  and  may  perhaps  here-
after requite  it  on  a  better  occasion.

Certes,  answered  Palmerin,  upon  men  whose
intention  is  so  had,  nothing  could  be  well
bestowed  ;  and  therefore  as  I  found  you,  I
leave  you,  beiug  so  desirous  to  be  with  \<>ui
companions,  that  I  cannot  at  this  time  stay
to  make  you  the  answer  which  your  folly
deserves  ;  and  with  that  he  posted  to  over-
take Felistor.  Ah  !  quoth  the  strange  knight,
thou  makest  overmuch  haste  to  thine  own
misfortune  ;  the  simplest  of  them  before
thee  is  sufficient  for  a  hundred  such  as  thee,
and  thou  art  for  fighting  with  all  of  them  !
\Vrhen  I  come  up  I  shall  find  you  and  your
conceit  both  brought  to  an  end,  and  your
horse  waiting  for  me,  who  shall  have  no
thanks  to  give  thee  for  it.  lie  of  the  Tygcr
had  attained  such  length  of  ground,  that
lie  heard  him  not,  neither  if  he  had  would
vol.  m.  H


74

he  have  turned;  for   noble  hearts  arc   not

moved    by    trifles,    and    tbe    veryest   ti
rouse  an  arrogant  one  tu  anger.

On  he  went  pursuing  their  track  till  night
closed  in,  and  it  became  so  dark  that  lie  could
nut  see  how  to  follow  them  any  further  by
the  tread  of  their  horses;  still,  however,  so
I  was  his  desire  to  come  up  with  them,
that  he  rode  on,  guessing  his  coarse 5  till
towards  morning,  both  their  horses  being  so
weaTythat  thpy  could  scarcely  move,  tbey
alighted  and  took  off  th  :i  bridles  to  let  them
rest  while  the  day  broke-;  which  it  had
scarcely  done  when  he  mounted  and  pro-
ceeded on  his  pursuit,  being  grievously
moved  that  he  could  disèovèr  nu  trace  ot
them  ; — for  it  is  the  nature  of  a  great  mind,
not  to  have  patience  in  that  which  it  greatly
desires.


J<J


CHAPTER  102,


The  knight  of  the  Tyger  so  long  pursued  the
search  in  vain,  that  he  had  almost  spent  one
half  of  the  day.  In  the  mean  while,  Felistor
had  knowledge  given  him  by  his  spies,  that
the  lady  and  her  daughter  were  set  forth  on
their  way,  with  only  four  knights  in  com-
pany; so  sallying  out  upon  them,  as  they
were  taken  by  surprise  he  easily  overcame
them,  took  the  ladies,  and  made  them  turn
back  by  that  way  from  whence  they  came.
The  knight  of  the  Tyger,  being  now  almost
in  despair,  for  by  this  time  the  noon  was
past,  saw  him  with  the  lame  horse  cross
the  forest  in  a  different  direction,  who  had
gored  the  belly  of  his  beast  with  incessantly
spurring  him.  He  seeing  the  knight  of  rhe-
lyger,  and  recognising  him,  stopt  till  he
u  Q


76

came  up.     Sir  knitihr,  said  he,  Î  perceive
that  either  you  have  not  wished  to  encoun-
ter  my  companion?,  or  else   you   mean  to
lend  me  your  hor.se,  which   I  will   not  now
receive,  because  I  will  not  be  so  much  be-
holden to  you.     I  know  not,  answered   the
knight   of  the  Tyger,  whether  you   would
thank  me  for  him  or  not,  but  if  you  had  a  bet-
ter I  would  borrow  him  of  you  whether  you
would   or   no,  because  I  would  follow   the
intent  I    have  enterprized,  and  give  aid  to
those  whose  necessity  requires  it.     I  cannot
chuse  but  laugh,  said  the  strange  knight,  in
that  you  having    spent  the  whole  night  in
sleeping,  would  now  persuade  me  that  you
lost  your  way.    Yonder  they  are,  just  topping
the    hill  ;  and  they  have  got  the  damsel —
for  I    see  petticoats.     Now,    sir,  shall   you
have  opportunity  enough  to  fulfil  your  wish,
if  your  stomach  serve  you.

He  of  the  Tyger  cast  his  eyes  that  way,  and
as  they  were  yet  at  some  distance  had  time  to
lace  on  his  helmet,  and  to  have  his  girths
fastened,  and  to  seat  himself  well  in  the  saddle,
as  was  needful.,  when  he  had  to  deal  with  so


77

many.  They  who  came  with  the  damsel  were
not  more  than  six,  for  the  rest  were  gone  for-
ward to  secure  her  mother's  castle.  He  chose
out  an  open  spot  for  the  meeting,  and  took
his  post  there.

Telistor  came  on  with  his  helmet  in  his  hand*
talking  to  the  damsel,  who  made  him  no
answer,  but  lamented  bitterly.  Her  mother
came  upon  a  palfrey  with  her  face  uncovered,
so  disconsolate  and  sad,  that  she  seemed  to
l::\'-'  no  heed  to  any  thing.  He  of  the  Tyger
waited  till  th<*y  were  passing  him,  and  then
took  the  bridle  of  the  damsel's  palfrey  and
stopt  it,  saying,  Lady,  if  to  he  delivered
from  the  hands  of  these  who  are  leading  you
away  will  dry  your  tears,  begin  now  to  be
contented;  small  force  will  serve  to  chastise
tin-  wicked,  for  they  carry  with  them  the
cause  of  theii  own  overthrow.

IV lister  hearing  this,  hecame  so  melancholick
that  he  had  no  power  to  make  any  answer \
and  without  taking  either  helmet  or  shield
from  his  squire  who  carried  them,  he  drew
out  his  sword  to  kill  him  ;  but  he  of  the  Tyger
II  o


7S

came  down  on  him  with  one  of  his  wonted
blows,  which  finding  the  head  unarmed,  en-
tered  into  the  brain,  and  laid  him  dead  ;  then
turning  to  the  others,  -who  now  beset  him  on
all  sides,  he  began  to  do  wonders.  The
damsel  seeing  him  in  this  press,  and  doubt-
ing that  he  would  be  able  to  atchieve  so
great  an  adventure,  and  moreover  afraid
lest  they  should  kill  her,  gave  her  palfrey
the  bridle,  and  struck  into  the  thickest  of
the  forest.  The  knight  of  the  Tyger  per-
ceiving this,  and  fearing  that  some  mishap
might  befall  her  if  he  did  not  come  up  with
her  in  time,  quickened  his  strokes  in  such
sort,  that  when  he  had  slain  three  of  them,
the  rest  fled,  and  he  with  the  lame  horse,
came  and  humbly  yielded  himself,  desiring
that  he  would  not  remember  what  words
had  passed  from  him.

The  lady  seeing  her  enemies  so  happily  van-
quished, received  in  her  heart  unspeakable
joy  ;  but  when  she  looked  about,  and  could  not
see  her  daughter,  her  joy  was  turned  into
sorrow;  she  fell  down  before  the  knight  of
the  Tyger,  giving  him  thanks  for  his  noble
succour,  and  beseeching  him,  since  he  had


79

with  such  peril  delivered  her  from  her  ene-
mies, he  would  now  lend  her  his  assistance
till  she  had  found  her  daughter,  lor  without
her  this  victory  would  be  a  thing  of  small
contentment  to  her.

Madam,  quoth  the  knight  of  the  Tygcr,
thank  the  deeds  of  your  enemies  for  this
victory  against  them;  such  ill  ones  do  al-
ways receive  their  righteous  recompencc,
for  divine  justice  faileth  m  nothing  of  per-
fection. Your  daughter,  I  saw  strike  into
yonder  part  of  the  wood,  and  she  cannot  be
far  o  If;  let  us  therefore  leave  the  dead  and
go  in  search  of  her,  and  wheresoever  else
you  please  ;  for  as  long  as  you  are  in  fear  I
will  not  leave  you,  nor  till  you  think  your-
self secure:  whereto  the  lady  replied,  Ah,
sir  !  I  see  well,  that  virtue  and  courage  are
united  in  you  !  I  would  that  my  poor  power
were  of  sufficiency  to  requite  your  bounty  :
nevertheless,God  will  repay  y  our  good  deserts.

Then  they  rode  on  which  way  they  judged
the  damsel  had  taken.  They  journeyed  all
the  rest  of  the  day,  and  most  part  of  the
night,  yet  were  they  never  able  to  find  any


80

traces  of  her;  and  it  is  not  to  be  marvelled
why,   for   the    fear   she    had   was   so    great.
They   having  travelled  thus  long    searching
the  wood,  and  over  hill  and  dale,  were  at,  last
constrained  to  alight  and  case  their  hor
which   Selviam  did  presently  unbridle,  that
they  might  refresh  themselves  in  the  pasture  ;
then  gave  he   to  his   lord  and   the  sorrowful
lady  such  provision   for   their  sustenance  ar
he  carried  with  him.    And  at  such  time  as  th
morning  began  to  open,  they  presently  re-
mounted on  horseback,  and  rode  about  every
part  of  the  forest  which  they  thought  they  had
not  yet  searched,  yet  not   finding  her  they
so  gladly  looked  for  ;  which  made   the  ladv
conceive  so  great  grief,  as  the  knight  of  the
Tygerby  no  persuasion  could  appease  :  at  last,
hoping   that  the  palfrey  might  have   taken
the  road  home,  for  they  had  lost  all  other
fcope,  they  rode   to  her  castle,  where  they
arrived  about  the  hour  of  vespers;  but  there,
instead  of  finding  her  daughter,  she  found
Felistor's  four  knights  in  possession  of  the
castle,  who  refused  to  open  to  them.    At  this
the   dame   was    full    sorrowful,   seeing   her
daughter  lost,  and  her  castle  in  possession
of  her  enemies;  and  what  with  this  trouble,


81


and  weariness  of  long  travel,  she  let  herself
Fall  from  lier  palfrey,  in  such  wretched  plight,
that  none  could  have  seen  her  without  par-
taking of  her  grief.

The  knight  of  the  Tyger,  seeing  her  in  so
great  affliction,  became  full  of  anger  and
melancholy  that  he  could  not  enter  the  cas-
tle ;  and  approaching  to  the  foot  thereof,
began  to  revile  the  knights  in  language  not
according  with  his  wonted  condition  :  for
overcharged  hearts  are  wont  to  relieve  them-
selves with  bitter  words  when  they  are  said
to  those  who  deserve  them.  I\ow  thou  eh
the  knights  of  Felistor  had  been  charged  by
no  means  to  go  out  from  ihe  castle  without
his  orders,  neither  to  open  to  any  except
himself,  or  some  certain  messenger  from  him  ;
they  held  it  for  so  great  an  injury,  that  one
only  knightshould  dare  so  to  abuse  them,  that
they  resolved  to  go  out,  holding  their  vic-
tory  and  vengeance  to  be  certain,  and  having
chastised  him,  to  return  to  their  ward.  With
this  determination,  being  armed  and  having
mounted  on  horseback,  they  ordered  the
bridge  to  be  lowered  over  the  moat,  that
they  might  issue  out.


But  be  ùm.  the  bridge  was  fairly  down,  he
of  the  Tyger,  not  causing  to  wait  for  them
without,  sprung  upon  it,  and  found  them  all
lour  in  the  castle-yard,  ready  to  come  forth.
One  of  them  seeing  this  great  boldness,  ex-
claimed; Certes,  great  is  your  folly  to  come
and  seek  the  punishment  which  it  de-
serves. And  because  there  was  not  room  in
the  castle-yard  for  them  to  fight  on  horse-
back, they  alighted.  He  of  the  Tyger  was
too  full  of  wrath  to  waste  any  time  in  words,
and  before  they  were  well  clear  of  their
horses,  he  laid  at  them  with  such  force  and
fury,  as  in  short  time  to  make  them  repent
that  they  had  opened  the  gate.  There  was
little  to  do  iu  this  battle,  and  for  that
reason  it  is  not  written  of  more  largely  ;  it  is
enough  to  say,  that  he  defeated  them  all  four
with  the  death  of  two,  giving  life  to  all  the
rest  of  their  people,  who  yielded  themselves.

The  lad}'  then  entered  into  her  castle,  greatly
abashed  at  the  prowess  of  the  knight,  and
sorrowful  beside,  because  she  knew  not  how
to  recompence  so  great  services.  And  that
her  joy  might  be  complete,  presently   she


83

beheld  her  daughter  coming,  conducted  by
five  knights,  who  were  bringing  lier  from  the
castle  of  an  aunt,  some  tour  leagues  distant,
whither  she  had  betaken  herself  in  her  flight.
When  she  entered  and  saw  the  yard  strewn
with  broken  arms  and  blood,  she  began  to
fear  again,  thinking  that  even  there  she  was
not  secure.  But  from  this  fear  her  mother
speedily  relieved  her,  embracing  her  and
weeping  over  her,  and  bidding  her  give
thanks  to  him  who  had  so  signally  re-
dressed their  cause.  Then  went  they  to-
gether to  the  kfiight  of  the  Tyger,  who  cut-
ting short  their  words,  that  he  might  not
hear  his  own  praises,  with  others  of  fitting
courtesy,  they  went  to  rest.  There  he  abode-
three  days,  and  then  having  the  lady  and
her  daughter  in  security,  and  as  much  bound
to  him  as  his  services  merited,  he  departed
thenee,  taking  his  journey  toward  the  place
where  his  heart  desired  to  be,  and  offering
his  arms  and  person  to  any  peril  which  pre-
sented itself;  not  giving  room  to  idK  n<  --.
which  giveth  room  to  vic< -,  but  believing
that  whoso  is  assailed  by  it  will  at  length
be  overcome.


84


CHAPTER     103.


Because  it  is  a  longtime  since  the  historj
hath  made  mention  of  Florian  of  the  Desert,
it  will  row  leave  Palmerin  on  his  way  to
Constantinople,  and  return  to  him,  who  being
departed  from  the  court  of  the  emperor  Ver-
nao  after  his  coronation,  armed  in  green  ar-
mour, and  bearing  in  his  shield  a  §avage
man  leading  two  lions  in  a  leash,  even  ac-
cording as  he  did  before  he  was  known  to  be
the  son  of  Don  Duardos.  He  rode  without
a  companion,  still  calling  himself  the  knight
of  the  Savage  Man,  whose  fame  struck  fear
into  all,  when  they  remembered  the  feats
which  he  had  performed.

So   it  befell,  that   having  roamed    through


85

many  pîaces,  every  where  leaving  immortal
fame   behind  him,  fortune  conducted    liim
into  the  realm  of  Ireland,  even  to  the  place
where  the  castles  were  of  the   three  sisters,
daughters  of  the  marquis  Beltamor,  and  that
which  had  been  the  giant  Calfurnio's,  whom
he    slew  at  such  time  as  he  had  taken   these
els   prisoners.     But  as    time  in   short
space  maketh   great   changes,    these  castles
were  now  inhabited  by  new  masters  :  where-
fore, inquiring  concerning  this  of  a  hermit
with  whom  he  took  up  his  lodging  that  night,
he  learnt  that  Calfurnio  had  at  the  time  of  his
death  two  brothers  who  had  never  then  borne
arms,  the   one  called    Bracolan,    the   other
Baleato,    who   lived    in  the   Profound   Isle,
with   their   mother  Colambar.     They,  when
they  v, ere  given  to  understand   the  death  of
the  giants  Calfurnio  and  Camboldam  of  Mur-
cella,  their  brethren,  got  themselves,  contrary
to  the  will  of  their  mother,  armed  knights,
vowing  to  take  vengeance  or  to   die  in   pur-
suit of  it.  And  in  as  much  as  they  felt  them-
selves equal  to    great    things,  this  doubled
their  desire  to  put  their  purpose  in   effect:
so  after  some  days   and    years    had   passed
vol.  in.  i


80"

away,  their  fnotheT  still  detaining  them,  for
rear  of  the  disasters  which  might  chatice;  at
last  they  embarked  in  a  galley  with  certain
knights  of  their  household,  and  took  the  way
to  Ireland,  where,  before  any  danger  was  ap-
prehended, they  took  the  castles  of  the  three
sisters,  as  also  that  which   belonged   to  their
brother,  patting   all  to    the  sword  that
found  within  ;  for  the  duke  of  Orlam  and  the
other  lords  thereof,  thinking  them  secure,  had
placed  in  them  but  slender  guard,     it  was
only  ten  days  since  they  had    completed  the
conquest;  and  as  at  that  time  there  were  few
knights  in  the  court  of  England,  none  as  yet
had  come  against  them  ;  but  it  seems,    said
the  hermit,   that  they   arc  fortifying    them-
selves like  persons  who  expect  to  Le  attacked.
Can  you  tell  me,  said  he  of  the  .Savage,  if  they
ever  come  out  into  the  forest:  That  question,
quoth  the    hermit,    1   would   fain   not    have
heard  from  you,  for  it  seems   to  spring  from
a  desire  to  do  battle  with  tliem,  and  which  I
would  be  sorry  you  should  do,  in   that   the
meanest  of  them  is  of  ability  to  resist  three
of  the  best  knights  in  this  realm.  Therefore  Í    '
desire  you,  if  your  affection  be  bent  that  way,


87

that  at  my  request  you  would  bridle  it  within
limits  of  discretion,  and  remember,  that  it  is
dishonour  to  a  noble  mind  to  adventure  life
more  wilfully  than  wisely,  under  the  title  of
seeking   renown.      1  must  judge   him   alto-
gether  void  of  knightly  regard,  which  sees
th<-   danger  to  be  beyond   his  eompass,   and
yet  will  desperately  throw   himself  into   the
hazard  :  trust  me,  if  such  a  one  be  thus  by  his
own  folly  brought  to  death,  he  dies  out  of  the
divine  mercy,  and  his  deeds  are  condemned
for  ever.  Good  sir,  let  no  such  mind  remain
in  you,  but  witness  your  valour  in  occasions
which  present  more  hope  of  victory,  and  arc  of
better  equality  with  your  force  ;  for  in  doing
otherwise,  you  shall  give  cause  to  think,  that
either  brutal  hardihood    or  desperate   hope
have  conducted  you  hither,  rather  than  any
confidence  of  victory.     The  giants  sally  out
every  day,  either  going    his   own   way,    and
their  knights  another,  killing  some,  robbing
others,  and  exercising  their  accursed   intents
with  such  force  and  cruelty,  that  if  God  doth
not    speedily    send    them    the    punishment
which  they  deserve,  this  land  will  be  utterly
d<-rroyed.     They  think  themselves    sec
i  2


AS


because  the  sons  of  Don  Dnardos  are  fat
abandon  the  other  hand,  they  wish  for
no  others,  having  determined  either  to  die  or

revenge    the  death  of  their  brethren    i

them.

According  to  the  deeds  which  you  tell  me
ofthèse  men,  replied  he  of  the  Savage,  yon
should  not,  methinks,  marvel  that  any  one
should  adventure  his  life  to  save  so  many
innocents  from  their  -cruelty  ;  the  order  ot
knighthood  is  given  us  to  this  end,  nor
mast  we  wait  lor  such  adventures  as  show  the
accomplishment  to  he  easy,  for  then  it  would
not  be  worthy  either  of  thanks  or  ol  praise.
Therefore,  God  willing, to-morrow,  if  fortune
will  give  me  the  opportunity,  I  shall  try  it,  L
doing  what  I  can,  and  she  what  she  pleases.

Much  was  the  hermit  troubled  at  this,  and
with  many  persuasions  he  strove  to  remove
him  from  his  determination;  but  finding  this
to  be  in  vain,  he  confessed  him,  and  com-
mended  him  to  God.  And  when  he  and  -
stood  who  he  was,  he  had  yet  more  pity  upon  ,1
his  youth  and  courage,  fearing  that  it   mad*


99

him  venture  more  than  was  needful  ;  and  he
counselled  him  with  good  and  holy  speeches,
such  as  his  judgment  presented  to  him  at
that  time;  and  so  they  past  a  part  of  the
night,  and  another  part  they  slept.  But  as
that  sleep  was  no  repose,  as  soon  as  it  was
day  the  hermit,  after  he  had  told  his  beads,
said  mass,  at  which  the  knight  was  present,
having  all  his  armour  on,  save  the  helmet.
When  it  was  ended,  and  the  father  was  dis-
robing himself,  they  heard  the  tramp  of
horses  on  the  side  towards  the  mountain.
He  of  the  Savage  went  to  the  door,  and  there
almost  ran  against  a  damsel,  who  threw  her-
self from  off  her  palfrey,  like  one  dead.  Anon
up  came  Bracolan,  one  of  the  giants,  who
was  in  fair  white  armour,  and  well  mounted
on  a  lusty  courser.

He,  when  he  saw  the  night  of  the  Savage
had  taken  the  damsel  by  the  hand,  and  was
asking  her  what  she  fled  from,  alighted  from
his  horse,  saying,  I  do  not  think  you  have
taken  a  safe  port.  And  you,  Don  Cavalier,
give  her  to  me,  unless  you  would  feel  my
strength.  Mcthinks,  replied  the  knight,  no
1  3


90

one  need  stand  in  fear  of  one  who  employa
it  so  ill  ;  ami  then  letting  go  the  damsel*
who  fled  into  the  hermit's  cell,  he  lnul  leisure
to  lace  his  helmet  on,  fur  Bracolap  was
doing  the  same.  Then  making  against
each  other j  the  Hist  stroke  which  he  of  the
Savage  receivedwas  dealt  with  such  force,
that  it  cut  away  good  part  of  his  shield  ;  and
the  sword  was  of  such  fine  temper,  that
holding  on  through  to  the  armour,  it  de-
molished a  part  of  the  lappet  of  his  mail  ;
whereat  the  knight  was  nothing  pleased,
thinking  that  if  he  received  many  such,
his  life  would  he  in  danger.  The  hermit,
terrified  at  the  might  and  fierceness  ofBra-
colan,  was  upon  his  knees  praying  to  God
to  help  his  own.  He  of  the  Savage,  placing
his  last  hope  in  the  divine  mercy,  availed
himself  of  his  nimbleness,  thinking  that  of
more  avail  than  his  strength  ;  for  nothing
could  withstand  the  devilishncss  of  his
enemy's  blows.  This  slight  and  wariness
stood  him  in  good  stead,  and  as  Bracolan
began  to  wax  weary,  he  availed  himself  well
of  the  advantage,  and  laid  his  blows  with
such  good  aim  and  good  will,  that  the  giant


91

having  lost  much  "blood,  was  fain  to  draw
back  for  breath.  Then  the  giant,  seeing  his
blood  trickle  down  his  armour,  while  his
enemy  was  in  far  better  plight,  being  over-
come with  rage  and  melancholy,  began  to
say,  What — is  it  possible  that  one  only
knight  can  stand  so  long  against  me,  and  that
my  might  and  main  are  not  sufficient  to
confound  such  a  feeble  resistance?  Certes,
the  less  is  now  my  hope  of  vanquishing  those
who  slew  my  brethren  Calfurnio  and  Cam-
boldam  ;  and  would  to  the  gods,  that  he  who
is  here  before  me  were  one  of  them,  that  if  I
must  needs  ends  my  life,  it  might  be  at  one
of  their  hands  by  whom  my  brethren  ended
theirs.

Thus  concluding,  he  began  to  charge  the
knight  of  the  Savage  Man  with  rough  and
forcible  strokes,  who,  besides  that  he  stood
in  fear  of  those  terrible  blows,  had  another
cause  of  fear,  which  was,  that  if  he  were
hardly  handled  in  this  battle,  he  knew  not
where  he  should  find  remedy,  and  that  he
must  needs  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  other
giant   and  his  knights.    This  made  him   so


.<J2

watchful  and  alert,  that  flie  greater  number
of  his  enemy's  blows  were  delivered  in  vain,
while  he  on  the  contrary  delivered  h
well,  that  at  length  the  great  Bracolan,  l<
all  strength,  fell  at  the  feet  of  his  conqueror.
He  of  the  Savage,  remembering  that  to  give
life  to  the  wicked  is  for  the  hurt  of  the  good,
out  off  his  head  without  delay,  and  gave
thanks  to  God  for  so  signal  a  victory.

The  hermit  came  out  to  him,  blessing
him,  and  amazed  to  behold  that  monstrous
body  dead  ;  and  the  damsel,  whose  heart
Avas  now  ,not  such  as  it  had  been  when
she  entered,  and  who  was  a  lair  woman,
threw  herself  at  his  feet,  saying,  1  know  not
how  I  can  pay  you  for  so  great  a  service,
but  by  lauding  your  knightly  deeds  in  the
court  of  the  emperor  Vernao,  whither  at  this
present  time  I  direct  my  course  :  in  truth
they  are  such,  that  it  would  be  an  error
to  be  silent  any  where  concerning  them.  I
beseech  you  therefore  to  tell  me  your  name,
which  I  the  more  earnestly  desire  for  two
causes,  the  one,  that  1  may  praise  your
noble  valour,  the    other  that  I  may    know


93

to  whom  I  owe  the  salvation  of  my  ho-
nour.

Fair  damsel,  quoth  he  of  the  Savage,  if  you
desire  to  know  my  name  that  I  may  do  yon
service  to  the  uttermost  of  my  power,  1  will
declare  it  unto  you  ;  hut  for  any  other  cause,
my  deeds  are  of  so  small  estimation,  that  I
do  not  wish  it  should  be  known.  This  I  can
tell  you,  that  the  sight  of  you  can  oblige
men  to  do  much,  and  me  more  than  all,  since
in  so  short  a  time  1  iind  that  I  have  yielded
up  my  inclinations  to  you  with  such  ardent
love,  that  Í  beseech  you  let  your  pity  be
as  ready  to  relieve  me,  as  your  beauty  was  to
wound  me.

Jesu  deliver  thee,  my  son  !  cried  the  hermit.
This  is  a  worse  danger  than  the  one  which
thou  hast  just  escaped;  for  if  that  vas  hurtful
to  the  body,  it  might  have  profited  the  soul  ;
but  this  leads  to  perdition.  Remember  that
these  are  diabolical  temptations,  which  the
Devil  lays  for  thee,  and  into  which  the  weak-
ness of  the  flesh  daily  falls.  Fatlvr,  replied
he  of  the  Savage,  they  are  the  works   of  hu>


94

man    nature,  and  cannot  be    avoided  ;  and

if  you,  father,  were  well  to  note  the  merits  of
this  lady,  that  beauty  in    her  count  nance,

that  life  in  her  eyes,  and  that  grace  in  hot
whole  form,  you   would    presently   perceive

that  he  who  did  not  yield  himself  to  then
altogether,  must  cither  he  good  for  nothing,
or  have  his  spirit  so  dead  that  he  can  feel
nothing.  Therefore,  lady,  since  you  see  how
it  is  with  me,  treat  me  as  you  please;  for  I
desire  nothing  more  than  to  gain  your  will,  in
order  to  do  it  in  all  things.  Such  is  the  power
of  the  world,  quoth  the  hermit,  that  its  plea-
sures make  the  preciousness  of  the  soul  for-
gotten !  Turn  thyself  to  God,  my  son,  for  the
world  favours  thee,  because  thy  deeds  are
worldly.  Father,  replied  he  of  the  Savage,
satisfy  me  that  you  are  free  from  these  hu-
man accidents  in  your  cell,  and  that  the  flesh,
never  rebels  under  that  habit  of  yours,  and
then  I  shall  think  more  of  these  dangers.  But
I  fear  me  we  are  all  able  to  reprove  the  vices
of  others,  but  when  we  should  withdraw  our-
selves from  them,  which  with  little  effort
might  be  done,  our  inclinations  will  not  con-
sent, and  we  lay  the  blame  upon  the  weak-


95

of  the  flesh.  My  miad  is,  that  he  who
fairly  gives  himself  up  to  it,  neither  offends
any  body  nor  hurts  himself;  and  1  am  such  a
one.  Change  your  discourse,  father,  for  to
waste  words  is  a  vice  also.  Certes,  replied
the  hennit,  1  will  shut  myself  up  in  my  cell  ;
follow  you  the  world,  it  will  give  you  that  re-
ward at  last  which  none  who  have  followed  ir.
have  ever  failed, sooner  or  later,  to  find.  And
so  he  went  into  hi^  cell,  and  fastened  the
doors  after  him,  just  as  il'  lhe  giant  Bracolan
had  been  alive  again,  and  was  following
him.

Lady,  then  *aid  the  knight  to  the  damsel,
what  will  yen  do  with  me,  or  what  shall  Í  do
for  you,  to  shew  you  that  1  am  at  your  ser-
vice ?  Sir,  she  replied,  since  you  have  de-
livered me  from  so  great  a  disaster,  do  not
lead  me  into  another,  for  then,  instead  of  re-
maining beholden  unto  you,  I  should  have
whereof  to  complain.  This  country  is  not
safe;  1  should  be  glad  if  you  would  accom-
pany me  a  day  or  two's  journey,  and  then  do
what  you  please,  as  I  have  no  farther  favour
to  request.     In  this,  replied  he,  I  receive  a


96

CTSr)  great  one,  and  for  the  rest,  T  would  fain
have  your  good  will  certain,  for  without  it  I
have  neither  health  nor  life  secure.  Where-
with he  presently  took  his  horse,  causing
his  squire  to  mount  the  damsel,  who  by  the
way  recounted  to  him,  how  by  a  tempest
she  was  cast  on  the  coast  of  Ireland,  coming
from  Denmark,  and  carrying  letters  from
the  queen  to  the  empress  Basilia.  And  when
1  perceived,  quoth  she,  that  I  was  in  this
country,  where  my  cousins,  the  daughters  of
the  marquis  Beltamor  remained,  I  intended
1o  bestow  a  little  labour  in  seeing  them,
thinking  to  find  them  in  these  castles  ;  but  on
the  way  Bracolan  assaulted  me,  who  not  con-
tented with  murthering  my  two  squires  that
bare  me  company,  pursued  me  to  have  his
villainous  will.  Certes,  lady,  said  he,  Í  would
you  would  relieve  me  from  the  force  which
you  do  my  affection,  for  from  all  such  I  will
deliver  you.

By  this  time  they  came  to  the  ford  of  a  brook,
whose  clear  and  gentle  waters  flowed  under
the  shade  of  some  spreading  trees  ;  and  here,
because  it  was  full  hot,  they  resolved  to  take


the  sata,  sending  the  squire  to  see  if  he
could  rind  any  place  where  to  procure
food.  The  knight  took  off  his  helmet,  and
being  young  as  lie  was,  and  his  face  now  red
with  travel,  he  seemed  a  goodly  person  to  the
damsel,  who  though  she  said  nothing,  let  him
perceive  it  ;  and  settled  her  head-dress,  and
adjusted  her  garments,  and  now  became
angry  and  now  pleased,  and  now  sorrowful,
and  then  p'eased  again.  He  of  the  Savage
understood  all  this,  and  easily  won  her  to  lu3
wish  before  the  return  of  the  squire.


VOL.  III.


CHAPTER  104.


The  knight  of  the  Savage  Man  spent  all  that
day  in  company  with  the  damsel  under  the
trees  by  the  brook-side  ;  and  when  night
came  on,  as  they  saw  no  place  where  they
could  be  harboured,  they  thought  it  best  to
continue  where  they  were.  The  squire  made
a  heap  of  grass  on  which  they  laid  them-
selves down,  and  he  of  the  Savage  fell  fast
asleep,  like  one  who  had  nothing  to  keep
him  waking.  The  damsel  had  more  reason  to
think,  and  less  to  be  satisfied  ;  and  this,  with
the  carelessness  of  the  knight,  made  her
remain  awake,  displeased  with  herself,  re-
penting her  folly,  and  striving  to  forget  what
she  could  not  help  remembering.  Great
part  of  the  night  was  past,  when  two  squires


.99

came  by  about  a  stone's  throw  from  her,  and
a  knight  behind  them  in  white  armour,  so
white  and  shining  that  it  was  seen  through
the  darkness.  He  was  of  such  huge  stature,
as  he  seemed  to  exceed  the  giant  Bracolan  ;
and  as  he  walked,  many  times  he  would  give
such  groans  as  if  his  soul  were  issuing  with
them.  Now,  as  it  was  }*et  some  time  till
day,  he  called  to  his  squires  to  stop,  saying,
that  he  would  repose  himself  under  the
trees.

Fear  now  made  the  damsel  forget  all  other
troubles,  and  she  pulled  the  knight  of  the
Savage  Man  by  the  arm,  and  awoke  him,
saying,  that  there  was  another  Bracolan  at
hand.  Startled  at  this,  he  rose,  and  going
towards  him  as  softly  as  he  could,  saw  the
squires  securing  the  horses,  and  their  master
lying  on  his  face,  and  lamenting  aloud.

t  see,  said  he,  it  is  great  folly  for  me  to
repose  any  credit  in  the  gods,  who  either
want  power,  or  else  are  wilfully  bent  to
overthrow  him  that  hath  most  trusted  them  ;
and  good  cause  have  I  to  think  so,  my  bre-
k  C


100

than,   Calfurnio    and    Camboldam,    betas

vanquished  by  one  only  knight,  and  now
Bracolan  also,  who  to  revenge  them  left  his

own  country,  and  offered  up  so  man}'  great
and  costly  sacrifices,  believing  that  by  their
merits  he  should  attain  the  certain  guerdon
of  victory.  And  now  they  make  so  small
estimation  of  me  in  their  favour,  as  they  will
not  suffer  me  to  meet  with  him  who  slew
Bracolan,  that  I  might  either  bear  my  bre-
thren company,  or  take  such  cruel  revenge
as  might  somewhat  lighten  my  great  grief  :
how  then  can  I  chuse  but  blaspheme  your
names,  and  deny  to  give  you  the  honour  I  have
done  ?  I  will  honour  your  altars  with  no  more
testimonies  of  my  affection,  but  that  trust
I  had  in  you  I  will  repose  in  myself;  so  for
ever  henceforth  I  despise  you.

By  these  words  he  of  the  Savage  knew  that
this  was  Baleato,  who  having  intelligence
of  his  brother's  death,  sought  to  find  him
that  had  done  the  deed  ;  and  well  pleased
he  was,  in  that  he  found  him  without  any
of  his  knights  to  aid  him  ;  so  returning  to
where    the  damsel  was,  he   began   to   arm


101

himself;  but  before  he  could  finish,  he  was
perceived  ;  for  the  horse  of  the  giant,  as  he
was  grazing,  encountered  his,  and  then  began
a  fierce  battle  between  them,  so  that  each
going  to  part  them,  of  necessity  they  met.
Baleato,  whose  custom  it  then  was  to  grant
life  to  nobodv,  seeing  an  armed  man  in  the
valley,  cried  out  in  a  terrible  voice,  What
is  he  that  dares  imagine  himself  so  hard\r,
as  to  trouble  me  in  my  silent  purposes  ?
Thou  art  but  little  beholden  to  fortune  for
conducting  thee  hither,  in  the  time  of  my
liny.  And  for  this  wretched  damsel,  I  will
offer  her  as  a  sacrifice  with  all  kinds  of  tor-
ments :  and  so  will  I  deal  with  all  damsels
that  Í  can  meet,  for  that  Bracolan,  the  best
knight  in  the  world,  was  slain  in  following
one.

Baleato,  replied  he  of  the  Savage  Man,  keep
thy  words  for  one  who  is  afraid  of  thy  deeds  ;
neither  the  one  nor  the  other  can  dismay
me;  the  damsel  I  will  defend,  and  I  will
humble  thy  pride  for  ever.  And  in  order
that  thou  mayest  fight  with  me  with  the
better  will,  know  that  Í  am  he  who  slew  GJal-
k  3


102

furnio  ia  time  past,  and  I  am  he  who  slew
Bracolan  yesterday,  and  I  am  he  who  is  now
to  slay  thee  ;  for  neither  thy  strength  nor
thy  courage  shall  save  thee,  nor  still  less  the
power  of  thy  gods.  Take  thy  helmet,  for  I
want  no  advantage  of  thee.

Such  was  the  passion  of  the  giant  at  hearing
these  words,  that  it  took  away  from  him  all
power  of  speech,  and  all  his  limbs  shook
with  anger.  So  taking  his  helmet,  he  made
at  the  knight  without  delay,  crying  out,
Thou  destroyer  of  my  blood,  here  thou  hast
before  thee  thy  greatest  enemy  in  the  world  :
therefore  shew  the  uttermost  of  thy  man-
hood, for  I  carry  that  hope  with  me,  to
bathe  these  hands  of  mine  in  thy  blood,  and
to  rent  thy  cursed  heart  in  pieces,  and  throw
it  for  food  to  the  fowls  of  the  air.

Then  coming  down  with  a  blow,  the  knight
deliverly  avoided  it,  and  dealt  him  one  in
return  upon  the  top  of  his  shield,  which  was
"bound  round  with  rims  of  iron  so  strong,
that  the  blow  was  of  no  avail.  The  giant,
who  was  too  wrathful  to  fight  leisurely,  laid


103

on  such  mortal  strokes,  that  wherever  they
had  lit  they  would  have  done  no  little  hurt  ;
but  he  of  the  Savage  still  shifted  so  warily,
that  he  made  him  lose  them  all.  The  shield
which  lie  bore  was  Bracolan's,  for  his  own
had  been  destroyed  in  that  battle  ;  and  it
was  so  heavy  that  he  could  not  well  lift  it
with  one  hand  to  protect  himself  :  this  made
him  fear  the  combat  more,  and  use  this
slight,  thinking  to  weary  out  the  giant.
But  Baleato,  who  perceived  this,  used  ano-
ther practice  ;  for  aiming  a  blow  at  one  part,
he  quickly  turned  it  to  another,  and  in  this
manner  gave  him  two  or  three  wounds  of
great  hurt,  especially  one  in  the  right  leg,
which  bled  so  last,  that  the  damsel  and  his
squire  were  in  such  great  fear  that  they
knew  not  what  to  do.  lie  of  the  Savage,
seeing  his  life  in  this  extremity,  thought
lhe  safest  way  was  to  venture  it  at  once  :
and  making  a  blow  at  Baleato,  which  he
thought  would  take  him  unguarded,  the
giant  received  it  on  his  shield,  and  it  was
of  such  force  that  the  sword  entered  a  little
way  in,  and  brake  in  three  pieces,  of  which
the  shortest   remained   in  his  hand.     The


104

moon  was  up,  and  the  battle  could  be  seen
distinctly;  and  the  damsel  seeing  this  great
misfortune,  gave  herself  up  for  lost  :  it  being
natural,  when  fear  is  at  the  height,  that  de-
spair should  accompany  it,  especially  in
v/omen,  whose  courage  is  so  little  that  their
presence  of  mind  fails  in  every  thing,  except
in  things  of  appetite  ;  for  then  their  sudden
determinations  fire  better  than  what  the
wisest  man  in  the  world  could  devise  after
long  reflection.  He  of  the  Savage,  great  as
his  resolution  was,  and  his  heart  able  to  with-
stand any  fear,  yet  could  not  but  fear  this
great  danger  ;  and  seeing  that  Baleato  made
another  stroke  at  him  with  full  force,  he  took
the  shield  of  Bracolan  in  both  hands,  and
caught  it;  the  sword  bit  in  so  deep  that  it
reached  through  to  the  handle  ;  he  let  it  fall,
and  Baleato  drew  it  to  him,  hanging  on  his
sword.  He  of  the  Savage,  seeing  him  thus
clogged,  thought  with  the  piece  of  his  sword
to  dig  at  his  head.  Baleato  drew  back  to
avoid  this:  now  the  hank  had  been  hollowed
by  lhe  freshes  of  many  years,  and  as  in  step-
pi'!  ■•  back  he  trod  near  the  brink,  it  gave
way  ua j<_r  him  ;  it  was  steep  in  that  part—


105

down  he  fell,  and  came  upon  the  stones  with
such  force  that  there  was  an  end  of  lii.s  days.

The  knight  went  down  to  him,  and  seeing
him  lie  dead  was  greatly  rejoiced  ;  then  he
looked  to  his  wounds,  which  stood  in  need
of  remedy,  and  the  damsel  and  his  squire
bound  them  up  as  well  as  they  could.  Ba-
leato's  squire  fled  to  one  of  his  castles,  to
tell  the  news'.  The  knight  mounted  the
giant's  horse,  for  his  own  had  had  his  leg
broken  in  fighting,  and  they  returned  to  the
hermitage.

When  they  were  come  io  the  cell,  the  good
old  hermit,  albeit  he  was  somewhat  oifended
with  him,  yet  he  received  him  lovingly,  as
his  order  required,  and  on  such  a  poor  bed
as  he  had  for  guests,  for  his  own  was  far
poorer,  he  caused  him  to  lie  down,  using
good  regard  unto  him,  as  one  who  knew
something  of  that  art  and  mystery.  This  done,
he  gave  thanks  to  God  that  the  land  was
rid  of  these  enemies  to  all  mankind.  When
it  was  day,  one  of  the  things  which  he  most
avoured  was   to    send  away  the  damsel,


106

seeing  she  might  now  travel  without  danger.
At  this  the  knighi  v\as  nothing  sorry,  his
condition  being,  when  he  wa^  satisfied  with
one  presently  to  wish  for  another  ;  but  she
was  much  troubled,  that  of  women  being,
when  they  have  once  given  themselves,  not
to  wish  to  part.  How  belt,  when  thai  the
moment  of  her  departure  came,  they  took
leave,  she  with  tears,  and  he  with  amorous
speeches,  feigned  after  his  wonted  way.


307


CHAPTER  105.


On   the   next    day  following,   the   knights

which  belonged  to  the  giants,   seeing  their

lords  dead,  and  no  hope  of   succour,  took

counsel  together  what  they  should  do,  and

held  it  best  to  ço   to  the  kniçht  of  the  Sa-
cs 3

vage  Man,  and  of  their  own  accord  give  him
the  keys  of  the  castle,  in  this  determination
they  came  to  the  hermit's  cell,  where  they
found  him  lying  on  his  bed,  for  that  he  was
still  weak  and  not  well  disposed  ;  they  com-
paring his  young  years  with  the  aqbleoess
of  his  exploits,  received  great  cause  of  ad-
miration. At  last,  he  that  was  judge  I  t>  be
most  eloquent  among  them,  entered  into
these  speech-


Certes,  sir  knight.,  it  would  now  seem  an
error  to  deny  the  power  of  fortune,  since
we  see  the  puissance  of  Bracolan  and
Baleato  brought  to  utter  confusion  bv  your
hand — a  thing  little  to  have  been  looked
lor.  Hereby  doth  it  appear  not  only  that
your  courage  is  surpassing  great,  but  also,
that  she  favours  you,  or  that  God  fighteth  for
you  :  great  folly  then  would  it  be  for  others
to  attempt  to  oppose  you,  and  better  do  they
areed  in  yielding  themselves  to  your  mercy
than  in  resisting  your  might;  for  it  is  to
be  believed,  that  mercy  will  not  be  found
wanting  in  him  who  aboundeth  with  other
virtues.  In  this  opinion  we  present  our-
selves before  you,  believing  that  lie  who
hath  so  well  known  how  to  conquer  the
guilty,  will  willingly  pardon  them  in  whom
there  is  no  guilt.  Though  we  have  been
servants  of  your  enemies,  we  now  yield  our-
selves as  friends;  and  for  the  more  security,
behold,  here  are  the  keys  of  the  castles,  which
have  cost  j'ou  so  much  blood  ;  do  with  them
what  you  please,  and  with  us  also,  accord-
ing to  your  pleasure  ;  though  cruelty  ought
not  to  be  used  towards  men  who  submit
themselves.    To  this  he  returned  this  answer  :


109

Your  speeches  are  so  honest,  and  so  well  re-
pleted  with  courtesy  that  I  am  sorry  the
little  Í  can  do  will  not  suffer  me  to  let  yon
understand  how  much  I  account  of  your
gentleness  ;  but  I  will  ask  the  king  my  grand-
father to  reward  your  service.  Then  took
he  the  keys  of  the  castles,  wherewith  he  was
right  well  contented,  seeing  the  issue  so
fortunate,  where  the  beginning  seemed  so
doubtful.

The  knights  remained,  keeping  him  com"
pany,  in  respect  of  the  honourable  promise;
he  had  made  them,  whereof  they  were  not
a  little  glad,  in  that  they  hoped  to  gain
good  favour  in  the  court  of  England.  By
this  time  the  report  of  this  noble  conquest
was  blazed  there,  where  it  moved  a  general
consent  of  gladness,  as  much  for  the  reco-
very of  the  castles,  which  had  been  consi-
dered as  almost  hopeless,  as  that  they  were
won  by  his  hand.

The  good  king  Fadrique,  for  joy  of  this
good  hap,  sent  Pridos,  the  duke  of  AVale,>,
m   all  speed  that    might  be,  to    seek   him  :

VOL.  III.  L


110

who  taking  a  galley,  in  short  time  arrived  a1
the  coast  of  Ireland,  where  finding  him,
and  declaring  the  sum  or  his  me
the  knight  of  the  Savage  concluded  to  de-
part thence,  notwithstanding  his  wounds
were  not  thoroughly  healed:  so  taking  leave
of  the  gentle  hermit,  and  desiring  the  .other
knights  to  accompany  him,  they  committed
themselves  to  the  seas,  whereon  they  had
not  long  sailed  before  they  arrived  at  a  port,
from  whence  he  was  carried  to  London  in  a
litter.  Tidings  being  come  to  the  king,  that
they  were  arrived  in  the  court,  he  came  to
meet  them,  and  casting  his  arms  about  the
neck  of  Florian,  the  tears  ran  down  his
white  beard,  for  the  inward  joy  he  conceived
at  his  presence.  Don  Duardos,  though  he
bore  that  joy  with  greater  moderation,  did
not  feel  it  less  ;  and  Flerida  would  not  de-
part, day  nor  night,  from  his  bed-side,  as  one
who  could  take  no  rest  till  he  was  whole  of
his  wounds.

The  king  did  very  honourably  entertain  the
knights  of  the  giants,  for  his  sake,  and  en-
tered them  among  those  of  his  household  ;


Ill

for  which  great  bounty,  they  witnessed
themselves  not  unthankful,  proving  trusty
and  loyal,  qualities  which  men  Sometimes
have  by  nature,  and  lose  by  habit.

When  the  knight  of  the  Savage  was  reco-
vered  from  his  wounds,  news  came  into  the
English  court  of  the  imprisonment  of  king
Poleados,  Belcar,  and  his  company,  in  the
court  of  the  Great  Turk;  which  unhappy
tidings  moved  the  king  and  his  whole  court
to  great  grief.  And  when  it  was  told  them
that  the  GreatTurk  had  sworn  to  put  them  all
to  death,  except  the  emperor  would  send  him,
the  knight  who  had  carried  away  his  daugh-
ter Targiana,  Certes,  said  Florian,  if  that  is
to  be  the  only  remedy  of  their  lives,  1  will
rather  go  render  myself  into  his  hands,  than
see  so  many  srood  knights  perish  for  my  sake.

I  cannot  believe,  said  Don  Duardos,  that
while  his  son-in-law  Albayzar  is  in  these
parts,  he  will  do  any  thing  which  might
endanger  him.  The  emperor  should,  in  my
judgment,  lay  hands  on  him,  thai  they  might
be  released  in  exchange.  Nay,  replied  he  oi
i  2


112

the  Savage,    Ï  know   this   of  the  emperor,

that  if  it  were  to  save  the  whole  world  ht
would  not  act  otherwise  than  whal  he  had
always  thought  beseemed  him.  The  more
certain  therefore  do  J  hold  their  destruction  ;
I  will  go  to  his  court,  for  it  is  not  fitting  that
when  all  his  house  are  adventured  in  such
great  danger,  I  only  should  be  away  from
it.  Neither  the  king  nor  Florida  could  dis-
suade him.  Don  Duardos  put  a  stop  to  their
intreatics,  for  he  approved  of  his  son's  de-
termination. So  contrary  to  their  wills  he
departed,  taking  his  journey  towards  Con-
stantinople, being  armed  after  his  accus-
tomed manner,  and  bearing  in  his  shield  his
usual  device,  to  which  he  was  now  become
affectionate.

Here  the  history  leaveshim,  and  returneth  to
Florendos,  who  holding  on  his  way,  is  by
this  time  near  the  castle  of  Almourol,  hav-
ing in  his  journey  done  many  noble  deeds
deserving  commendation,  which  are  re-
hearsed in  the  ancient  Chronicles,  and  in
which  prince  Floraman  hore  no  small  part.
At  length  they  reached  the  city  of  Riocraro,


113

which  at  this  present  is  called  Tomar;  but
was  then  so  named,  because  of  the  clear
river  which  passeth  it  by.  Andnow,  seeing
himself  so  near  the  castle  of  Almoufol,  he
began  to  be  assailed  by  many  fears,  from
which  he  could  not  free  himself;  in  these
careful  thoughts  lie  passed  the  night  without
renove,  and  in  the  morning  they  rid  toward
the  castle  ;  but  then  Aibayzar,  in  that  he
knew  women  were  more  revengeful  in  their
r  than  men,  began  to  have  more  fear
than  he  had  conceived  before;  and  the  more
so,  because  he  knew  that  Miraguarda  was  as
extreme  in  rigour  as  in  beauty;  but  in  this
he  erred,  for  she  was  not  so  cruel  to  strangers,
as  to  her  dearest  and  best  friends.  Floren-
dos  had  no  sooner  discovered  the  trees  be-
side the  Tagus,  and  through  them  the  walls
of  the  castle  of  Alinourol,  but  his  heart  was
touched  with  greater  fear;  and  then  came  to
mind  recollection  of  days  that  were  past,  and
fears  of  present  danger,  and  remembrances
of  the  cruelties  which  he  had  endured,  all
now  to  torment  him.  Aibayzar  too  was
greatly  abashed  at  that  hour,  not  only  from
the  thought  that  he  had  been  vanquished,

L   3


114

but  also,  he  felt  the  shame  of  what  had  here
taken  place.

When  they  were  come  to  the  castle,  they
found  all  the  gates  fast  locked,  and  the  Tree
of  the  Shields  still  hung  with  those  which  had
there  been  lost  ;  but  the  colour  of  some  were
now  faded  by  the  sun  and  by  the  rain.  Floren-
dos  looked  at  them,  and  beholding  his  own
shield  and  armour  among  the  spoil,  his  eyes
were  filled  with  tears,  and  he  stood  thinking
how  he  might  sufficiently  reward  his  squire;
-Armello,  who  had  since  his  departure  so  well
watched  them.  But  in  sooth  he  was  not  so
much  beholden  to  his  squire  as  he  did
esteem  himself,  because  Armelio  was  fallen
amorous  of  Lademia,  and  could  have  rested
1n  no  other  place.  He,  though  he  looked  at
Florendos,  knew  him  not,  by  reason  of  his
different  armour  ;  but  perceiving  Floramaii;
lie  presently  suspected  whom  it  might  be,
and  when  he  saw  the  shield  of  Miraguarda,
was  assured  that  it  was  he,  Jand  went  to  him,
saying,  Now,  sir,  you  may  discover  yourself  ,«
to  him  from  whom  you  have  so  little  reason
to  conceal  yourself,  especially  coming   with


115

that  prize  which  occasioned  your  loss.  It
cannot  be  that  the  lady  Miraguarda  should
not  now  feel  herself  beholden  to  you  for  su
great  a  service.

Florendos  then  opened  his  helmet,  and  em-
braced Amiello  with  the  love  which  he  had
ever  borne  him  ;  then  he  delivered  him  the
shield  of  Miraguarda,  and  bade  him  set  it  jn
the  place  where  it  was  wont  to  be,  and  to
place  that  of  Targiana  under  it,  a  thing  which
Albayzar's  heart  could  hardly  brook.

At  this  time  came  forth  of  the  castle  the
giant  Almourol,  armed  at  all  points,  and  gal-
lantly mounted  on  a  bay  courser,  supposing
these  knights  came  to  demand  the  joust  ;  but
when  he  beheld  the  shield  of  Miraguarda  in
the  [dace  where  it  was  wont  to  be,  he  stopt,
and  then  knowing  Florendos,  by  reason  that
his  aventavle  was  open,  he  cast  his  lance  to
the  ground,  and  with  stretched-out  arms
came  and  embraced  him,  saying,  1  never
doubted  of  what  I  now  see;  and  if  from
henceforth  the  lady  Miraguarda  doih  not
change  her  temper  towards  you,  1  shall   feel


116

your  wrongs  as  one  who  resent  a  part  of  them
for  your  sake  ;  and  then,  without  staving  to
hear  answer,  he  went  in  to  bear  the  tidings.
And  though  nothing  could  have  given  Mira-
guarda  more  joy,  yet  she  knew  so  to  dissemble
her  contentment,  as  though  she  felt  none  ;
whereat  Almourol  was  so  displeased,  that  not
being  able  to  bear  it,  he  manifested  his
wonder  in  the  best  words  he  could  ;  for  in
truth  acknowledgment,  where  it  is  due, ought
not  to  be  withheld,  But  such  was  her  free
condition,  that  neither  his  reasons,  nor  the
worthy  deservings  or'  Horendos,  could  bend
her.  Almourol  went  awav  discontented  and
melancholick  at  beholding  such  ingratitude
towards  deeds  which  merited  a  different
guerdon  ;  and  though  he  would  have  hidden
his  passion  from  Florendos,  yet  as  that  when
it  is  great  cannot  be  dissembled,  he  gave  him
occasion  to  understand  how  it  was  ;  at  which
he  nothing  marvelled,  because  he  was  wont
to  have  no  other  entertainment.  But  as  to
what  regarded  Albayzar,  he  gave  account  to
Almourol  of  what  had  been  the  engagement
between  them, and  that  Albayzar  was  com;
there  for  no  other  purpose  than  to  be  at  her


117

:  posai,  according  to  the  conditions  of  their
battle  ;  wherefore  he  besought  him  to  go  to
her,  and  know  what  she  would  please  to
have  done.  Almourol  returned  to  Mira-
guarda,  and  told  her  that  Florendos,  besides
bringing  back  her  shield,  had  brought  him
prisoner  who  had  carried  it  away,  that  she
might  do  with  him  as  seemed  good  unto
her.  Miraguarda  delayed  awhile,  consider-
ing what  she  should  do  ;  for  wilful  as  she  was*
she  was  discreet.  At  length,  having  taken  her
determination,  she  commanded  that  Albay-
zar  should  be  brought  into  her  presence*
and  that  Florendos  should  abide  in  the  field.
And  as  she  had  heard  of  the  imprisonment
of  king  Polendos,  Belcar,  and  their  com-
panions, she  ordered  him  to  go  yield  him-
self prisoner  unto  king  Recindos,  and  remain
at  his  pleasure  until  the  Great  Turk  had  set
them  at  liberty.

For  more  security,  she  made  him  plight  his
faith  with  all  necessary  ratifications,  telling
him  that  she  was  contented  with  this  light
punishment,  though  his  ofTenee  deserved,  a
far  greater.     Albayzar  would  have  kissed  her


118

hands  forso  great  a  mercy, as  in  truth  it  was
to  him  who  had  feared  worse,  by  reason  of
what  he  had  heard  of  her  nature.  So  he  took
leave  of  her,  and  of  Florendos,  and  Flora-
man.  But  seeing  as  he  was  about  to  de-
part the  shield  of  his  lady  hanging  among
the  vanquished,  he  desired  Ahnouro!  to  in-
treat  Miraguarda  that  she  would  bestow  it
upon  him,  in  order  that  the  days  of  his  ill
fortune  might  be  somewhat  consoled  by
sight  of  her  picture  ;  but  she,  who  in
things  which  related  to  her  glory  was  less
liberal  than  in  others,  would  not  consent.
Albayzar  then  departed,  so  sorrowful,  that
be  had  never  at  any  time  been  more  so  ;  in
three  days  he  reached  the  court  of  king
Recindos,  where  having  presented  himself  on
tbe  part  of  Miraguarda,  even  as  she  had  en-
joined him,  he  remained  in  his  court  the
whole  time  that  Polen  !os  was  prisoner.  The
king  received  him  v  ith  very  princely  cour-
tesy, arising  from  th<  joy  he  felt  at  having
him  in  his  power.  And  because  one  of  his
sons  was  prisoner  amongst  the  other  knights,
he  secretly  ordered  good  watch  to  be  set
over  him,  not  trusting  so  much  to  the  pro-


119

mise  which  he  had  made  Miraguarda.  as  to
this  caution.  Forthwith  he  sent  the  news  to
the  emperor,  in  whose  court  great  rejoicings
were  made,  every  one  prai  ing  the  discretion
and  policy  of  Miraguarda.  And  among
other  things  which»  the  emperor  did  to  her
praise,  he  wished  to  see  lier,  and  have  her
company  in  his  court,  as  well  to  regard  her
with  honour  equal  to  her  worthy  deserts,  as
also  to  mitigate  the  afflictions  ol  his  grandson
Florendos.  But  when  he  perceived  that  his
lady  made  no  account  of  his  travails,  he  deter-
mined to  guard  her  shield  again,  and  if  any
knight  should  arrive  whom  he  could  not  over-
come, he  vowed  never  to  bear  arms,  nor
prove  his  chance  more;  though  it  is  but  il]
counsel  to  try  fortune  many  times.


ICO


CHAPTER    106.


When  Flo  rend  os  had  passed  one  day  before
the  eastleof  Ahnourol,  on  the  second,  as  soon
as  it  was  day,  he  went  before  the  shield  of
his  lady,  since  he  might  not  seethe  original,
and  fixing  his  eyes  upon  it,  he  uttered  his
complaints  after  this  manner.

I  know  certainly,  lady,  that  he  which  bestow-
eth  his  time  in  your  service,  recciveth  great
recompense,  by  having  the  means  to  behold
your  image  in  this  portraiture,  were  it  not
that  this  is  dumb.  But  you  have  placed
it  here  as  a  net,  to  entangle  the  minds  of
them  which  are  free  from  such  thraldom  ;  in
which  extremity,  the  party  so  inveigled
desireth  as   well  to  be  comforted   bv  youi


121

gracious  speech,  as  to  be  tormented  by  your
silent  counterfeit.  As  for  me,  Í  fix  mine  eyes
upon  your  image,   and    behold   in    it  many
things   which    destroy,  but  none  to   relieve
me  :  it   hath  all  the  show  of  life,  to  kill  me,
but  when  it  should  hear  me,  is  utterly  dead.
I  could  be  contented  with  my  sufferings,  if  you
saw  that  you  occasioned  them  ;  but  you  have
so  committed  me  to  forgetfulness,  that  not
even  for  this  am  I  remembered.  If  I  have  de-
served this,  it   is  well  that   it   should  be  so  ;
but  because  I  do  not  so  deem   of   myself,    I
have    cause    to    complain.      AVhile    he    was
speaking,  Miraguarda  beheld  him  from    the
battlements,    for  being  summer,  it  was  her
wont  to  arise  in  the  cool  of  morning,  that  she
might  enjoy  the  early  songs  of  the  nightingale,
and  other    birds  who    disported  among   the
trees  beside  the  Tagus.

And  though  she  perceived  that  his  grievous
lamentations  proceeded  from  the  depth  of
his  heart,  yet  never  the  more  did  she  pity  his
dolorous  estate:  for  such  a  proud  opinion
she  held  of  herself,  that  the  greatest  deserts
in  the  world  were  not  sufficient  to  answer  her

VOL.  III.  M


122

beauty,  neither  that  Florendos  could  endure

loo  much  grief  for  her,  such  was  her  m»

less  judgment  of  the  passions  of  love.    While

he  was  thus  complaining,  and  she  listening,

three  knights  came  riding  through  the  \

attired  in  rich  and  costly  armo

of  them  was  in  green  and  white  armour,

linnets  of  silver,  and  in  his  shield  he  bi

a  while  field  the  word  Normandy,   hi  black

letters.

The  armour  of   the   second    was   while  and
azure,    mingled    together    artificially,    with
streams    of   green    interchangeably    figured
thereon,  and  in  his  shield,  in  a  Held  of  si;
he  had  lively  pictured  the  god  Apollo.
armour  of  the  third    was    carnation   c
all  beset  with  croslets  of  gold,   and   in    liis
shield,  in  a  field  of  gules,  lie  bare  for  his  de-
vice flames  so   ingeniously   made,   as    they
seemed  rather  natural  than  fantastic,
came  on  with  their  helmets  open,  singing  a
virelay  in  three  parts  ;  and  they  accorded  in
such  good  music   together,  that  Flo'raman
who  was  himself  well  seen  in  that  art,   comt
mended  it  above  ail  that  ever  lie  hoard  in  his


123

fife   so   sweetly  did  their  voices  consent  to-
ide,  the  echo  of  the   river,  the

trees  and  the  mountains,   did  answer'their
notes   so   familiarly,    that  it    was   almost  a,
commendable  as  aninstrume.it.  Miraguarda
siding     on    the   battlement,    took    great
pleasure  to  hear  them:  but  FJoraman,  being
delighted  with  the  song,  took  a   knife  and
engraved  the  same  on    the    bark  of  a   tree,
that  for  the  worthiness  thereof,  it  might  there
'emam  till  time  had  consumed  the  tree,  and
as  the  tree  grew  in   bigness,  so  the  letters
might  be  seen  in  more  legible  manner,     h
was  in  this  form  foliou  in rr-

Fair  madam,  if  you  can  vouchsafe  to  see,

the  lively  picture  of  a  careful  mind
Forlorn  with  grief,  do  you  but  look  on  me

and  judge  if  fortune  be  not  most  unkind,
That  he  winch  sues,  and  scrveth  faithfully,
bhould  be  repay'd  with  extreme  era.

What  greater  torments  to  a  gentle  mind,
than  to  bo  scorned  where  he  liketh  mosl  ?

What  state  of  refuge  can  he  hope  to  find,
*here  each  thing  doth  at  his  misfortune  bo;   •

M    'J


124

Condemn'*, confounded,  with  rebuke  and  blame  ;
Yet  ignorant  from  whence  the  causes  came.

So  heavy  is  the  weighty  yoke  of  love,
when  quaintest  looks  afford  disco

That  wise  is  he  that  doth  the  passions  prove,

and  vet  can  keen  himself  at  liberty.
But  he  whose  wits  are  ravished  by  stealth,
Had  need  of  physic  in  his  greatest  health.

Some  men  in  love  commend  their  happin.   í

their  quiet,  sweet,  and  delicate  dell
And  I  can  boast  of  fortune's  frowardn-

her  extreme  rigour,  and  sevei  ■■     ;   -ht.

But  for  the  sweetness  other  men  have  felt,
I  came  too  lale,  my  part  was  elsewhere  dealt.

Yet  can  I  say,  no  man  hath  been  move  just,
nor  served  his  lady  with  more  due  regard  :

But  she,  being  governed  by  her  own  mistrust,
denies  her  servant  his  deservM  rew  ird  ;

This  my  misfortune  waxeth  more  and  more,

Yet  will  I  sutler,  though  I  die  therefore.

The  knights  had  no  sooner  espied  armed
men  before  the  castle,  but  they  left  their
singing,  and  pulled  down  their  beaver.,    lest


they  should  be  known  ;  and  when  they  came
before  the  tiee  where  the  shields  were  hansr-

o
ing,   they  began    greatly    to    commend   his

valour  who  had  won  them.  The  knight  in
the  green  and  white  armour  then  advanced
a  little_,and  lifting  his  eyes  to  the  portrait  of
Miraguarda,  said  in  a  loud  voice,  This  is  a
countenance  which  might  change  any  affec-
tion more  free  than  mine.  I  rejoice  that,  hav-
en it,  the  intention  which  led  me  hither
is  not  changed  ;  but  if  any  of  those  knights
which  guard  this  pass  wish  to  break  a
couple  of  lances  with  me,  J  will  do  my  en-
deavour, on  condition  he  bind  me  not  to
more  ;  because  I  fear  these  beauties  will  dis-
comfit him  who  offends  them,  and  favour  him
who  is  their  champion.  Do  not  deceive  your-
self in  that,  said  Florendos,  who  was  by  this
time  ready,  for  it  is  only  towards  her  servants
that  this  lady  is  rigorous.  Take  your  ground,
as  you  desire  to  iou.-r,  and  I  will  to  the  best
of  my  power  satisfy  you.

"With  these  words  they  parted  to  fetch  their
course,  and   met   together  with  such    force
that  their  lances  flew  up  into  the  air  in  pi
m   3


126

and  so  passed  on  bravely,  not  being  any
thing   shaken   at  the  first  encounter.    The

giant  .Almourol  seeing  tliein  destitute  of
lances,  caused  some  to  be  brought  forth  of
the  castle,  which  being  deiivi  red  to  their
squires,  they  went  au  d  served  their  lords:
the  second  time,  as  they  ran  with  yet  greater
violence,  their  encounter  was  so  forcible,  that
Florendos  lost  one  of  his  stirrups,  taking
a  iv,  eise  u  Inch  was  sonievi  hat  unseemly  ;  and
the  other  went  to  the  ground  over  his  horse  s
heels;  but  he  fell  on  his  feet,  like  one  who
was  ready  at  all  times,  and  being  out  or
measure  displeased  at  his  fall,  drew  his  sword
with  these  >vords  :

Sir  knight,  though  I  requested  nothing  more
than  lo  joust,  I  beseech  you  let  us  do  battle
with  our  swords  ;  if  in  the  end  it  be  your
good  hap  to  vanquish  me,  your  valour  shall
have-  the  larger  estimation.  1  know  not,  an-
swered Floren  los,  if  your  companions  would
hold  themselves  aggrieved,  for  1  see  them
ready  lor  the  joust  ;  let  me  accomplish  it
with  them,  there  will  be  lime  enough  after-
wards.    And  without  delav,   taking  another


127

•

lance  from  Armello,  he  ran  against  the
knight  in  the  white  and  gray  armour,  with
Apollo  in  his  shield.  The  encounter  was
such, that  the  horse  of  Florendes  fell  upon
his  knees,  and  he  lost  both  his  stirrups;  but
the  other  received  such  a  shock,  that  his
horse  and  he  fell  together,  and  the  horse
falling  upon  him,  did  somewhat  hurt  one  of
his  leg?.

Florendos  having  righted  himself  in  the  sad-
dle, called  to  the  third  knight,  who  being
somewhat  moved  at  the  misfortune  of  his
companions,  put  himself  upon  the  adventure;
at  the  first  offer  they  missed  in  their  meeting,
whereupon  they  took  their  second  career  so
worthily  against  each  other,  as  they  brake
their  lances  bravely,  and  passed  on  to  a  third
encounter.  Floraman  and  Almourol  made
great  estimation  of  the  noble  behaviour  of
these  three  knights.  Miraguarda  for  many
days  had  seen  neither  joust  nor  battle  before
her  castle,  and  this  therefore  brought  to  me-
mory the  things  past  ;  but  it  was  not  for  her  to
requite  the  deserts  of  any  one.  They  now,  as
each  from  his  wonted  confidence  was  melar.-


128

cholick   that  he   had   not    overthrown   the
r,  met  in  the  third  career  with  su

that  both  shields  and  armour  failing,  the
knight  went  to  the  ground  ;  and  Florendos,
losing  his  stirrups,  caught  hold  of  his  h
neck,  but  speedily  recovered  himself,  !
somewhat  abashed  thereat,  lie  with  whom
he  first  jousted,  then  came  to  him,  sword  in
hand,  saying,

Such  is  my  earnest  desire,  sir  knight,  to  try
myself  with  you,  that  1  should  he  grieved  not
to  do  it.  1  beseech  you  do  not  deny  me
this,  for  I  perceive  that  few  things  can  make
you  fear.  \  ou  know  so  well  how  to  a-ik,
replied  Florendos,  that  it  would  be  ill-breed-
ing  in  me  to  refuse.  So  alighting  from  his
horse,  he  drew  his  sword  ;  but  the  knight
which  bare  in  his  shield  the  device  of  Apollo,
and  from  whom  nothing  was  hid,  stepped  be-
tween them,  saying,  Sir  Florendos,  this  is  vic-
tory "enough  over  your  friends,  and  though  you
gain  honour  with  us,  ue  lose  none  with  you,
for  defeat  from  your  hand  is  not  to  be  held
injurious.  This  man  who  is  so  earnest  in
provoking  you  to  the  combat,  is  your  friend


12£

prince  Beroldo,  wlîo  knows  not  whom  he  is
provoking;  the  other  is  your  brother,  Platir ,
and  I  am  your  servant,  Daliarte,  who  though
i  knew  you  at  first,  yet  would  I  not  make  any
shew  thereof,  to  the  end  that  the  lady  Mira-
gttarda  might  behold  your  deeds  anew;  for  I
fear  she  has  forgotten  the  past.

Florendo.^  took  oil*  his  helmet,  and  taking
Daliarte  in  his  arms,  complained  against
him  for  having  permitted  those  jousts;  and
then  ho  embraced  prince  Beroldo  and  Platir,
and  the}'  all  did  the  same  to  Floraman,  who
was,  as  ye  have  heard,  one  of  the  men  whose
company  and  friendship  was  esteemed  the
most  in  those  days  ;  so  they  sitting  down  all
together,  passed  away  the  greatest  part  of
the  day  in  talking  over  their  affairs,  with  that
love  which  there  was  between  them,  the  three
companions  greatly  desiring  to  see  Mira-
guarda  ;  but  so  dainty  was  she  in  shewing
herself,  that  she  never  came  to  the  window
except  when  she  could  see  the  field  dyed
with  blood,  and  strewn  with  arms,  and  lives
in  danger;  a  sight  which  she  did  oftentimes
behold  before  tin  castle.


i  30

At  length,  when  it  was   c.
their    leave  of  them,   taking  their  journey
towards  the  city   of  Constantinople,    •
was   the  cause    why  they   left  the  kin
Spain's  court.    Florendos,  accompanied  with
his  careful  passion,  and  his  friend  Flor  aman,
remained  still  to  keep  the  pass  which  he  had
so  long    maintained,  not  lamenting    his    ill
fortune,  though  he   had  cause;  for  he    who
tries  his   fortune  should  know  how  to  suffer
all  things,  wondering  at  few  things,  and  being
impatient  at  none.


131


CHAPTER    107.


The  three  knights  which  jousted  against  Fio-
rendos,  did  not  linger  or  loiter  in  any  place
till  they  came  into  Greece;  where,  by  chance
as  they  travelled,  they  mcl  with  the  princess
of  Thrace,  being  worthily  guarded  by  many
noble  gentlemen,  some  that  employed  them-
selves in  knightly  service,  to  gain  the  good
opinion  of  the  princess,  and  others  that  ut-
tered  many  amorous    conceits,    to   inveigle
her  fancy  towards  them  in  marriage;  and  so
they  passed  awav  the  time  till  they  arrived  at
Constantinople.   But  because  the  history  doth
make  mention  hereafter  of  her  royal  receiv-
ing into  the  city,  it   now  returns  to  Floren
dos,  who,  on  the  second  day  after  they   had
left  him,  as  he  was  walking  along  the  river-


side  with  Floraman,  armed  at  all  pom:
cept  tlie   bead,  espied   two   boats   well  fur-
nished with  oars  coming  down   the  stream,
in    the   foremost  whereof  sate  tour  dam
at  the  poop,  attired  alike,  and  tuning  their
lutes,    whereto    their   voices  delivered
pleasant  ditties,  as  they  might  well  have  I
compared  with   the  three  knights  that
taken  their  way  to    Constantinople,  if
had  stayed  still  at  the  castle  of  Almourol,  to
to  have  made  trial  ;  and  the  oars  were  moved
so  silently  that  they  made  no  disturbance  to
the  sounds.     The    other   boat  was    coi
with  a  tilt  oi'  surpassing  richness,   and  there,
under  a   pavilion  of  inestimable  vaine,    sate
a  damsel  on  cushions  of  velvet  embroidt
richly  with  gold,  whose  countenance    being
marvellous  beautiful,  shewed  her  to  be  the
lady  of  that  Hotilla.   She  was  gallantly  attirer,
in  garments  of  a  new  invention,    and  over
all  she  wore  a  cloak  of  black   taffeta,  for  it
was  in  the  heat  of  summer,   and  slashed    i:i
the  sleeves  and  in  other  tit  places,  and  the
slashes  gathered   with  clasps    of  gold,    «  ...
melled  with  birds  and  other  gay  devic<  -    <  I
divers  kinds;  and  that  she  might  be  better


133

discerned,  the  heat  of  the  day  heing  par.
and  the  sun  declining,  she  gave  command-
ment,  that  the  curtains  of  the  tilt  should  b<
lifted  tip;  when  Florendos  and  Floraman,
might  at  will  behold  her,  and  at  her  feet
they  might  see  sitting  two  dames  and  a
damsel,  and  between  them  a  knight  reclining
upon  cushions  of  dark  velvet  :  his  arms  were
diapred  with  green  and  gold,  and  he  bare  for
his  device,  in  a  Held  vert,  Cupid  fast  linked
in  chains,  his  bow  and  arrows  lying  before
him  broken  in  pieces,  and.  himself  like  one
vanquished,  lying  on  his  face,  while  a  fair
damsel  set  her  feet  upon  him.  The  boatmen
were  clad  in  the  same  gay  livery,  that  in
that  company  there  might  appear  nothing
sad  ;  they  brought  the  prow  of  the  boats
to  the  foot  of  the  castle  rock,  the  music  still
continuing,  which  being  on  the  water,  and
echoing  in  the  hollows  of  the  rock,  became
more  delightful.

Florendos  and  Floraman  stood  eying  them
awhile,  and  Florendos,  touched  with  envy
at  the  happiness  which  the  knight  of  the
boat  seemed  to  enjoy,  could  not  conceal  his
vol.  in.  N


134

grief,  these  being  in  truth  the  things  which
should  be  grieved  for  :  and  he  said,  I  know-
that  all  misfortunes  me  reserved  for  me,
and  for  that  reason  1  see  them  in  no  other.
13j  this  then;  came  a  damsel  out  of  the  prin-
cipal boat,  and  out  of  the  oilier  two  so,
to  accompany  her,  who  as  they  past  the
knights  made  a  slight  courtesy  towards  them,
and  went  on  to  the  Tree  of  the  Shields,
where  they  stopt  awhile,  and  the  damsel,
beholding  the  portrait  of  Miraguarda,  turned
to  the  squires,  saying,  1  fear  our  lady  will
return  with  less  contentment  than  she  eaim  *.
So  she  proceeded  on  towards  the  castle,
where,  after  her  bidding  had  been  conveyed
to  Miraguarda,  she  was  admitted  into  au
apartment  which  overlooked  the  river;  and
though  in  the  works  and  adornments  of  the
castle  there  was  much  to  see,  yet  when  she


*  Anthony  Munday  adds,  the  base  stone  of  St.  I'incent's
Rock,  may  not  presume  to  paragon  itself  uith  a  pure  and  perfect
diamond.  The  simile  is  noticed,  because  it  shows  that  Bristol
stone,  as  it  is  commonly  called,  was  better  known  then  than
it  is  at  present.  I  think  I  have  seen  somewhere,  that  orna-
ments weie  made  of  it,  as  indeed  seems  here  ta  be  implied.


135

had  fixed  her  eyes  upon  the  lady  thereof,
she  forgot  all;  and  albeit  her  discretion  wwã
great,  remained  for  a  while  so  abashed,  that
she  knew  not  what  to  say.  Howbeit,  when
she  had  recovered,  being  ashamed  to  have
been  so  confused,  she  said,  Lady  Arnalta,  the
princess  of  Navarre,  my  mistress,  by  me
kisceth  your  hand  for  the  desire  she  hath  to
do  you  service  and  converse  with  you;  and
for  this  love  she  hath  left  her  house  to  see
you,  with  a  lesser  train  than  bescemeth  her
estate.  She  is  at  the  foot  of  your  castle  in  a
boat,  waiting  for  me,  having  willed  that  you
should  first  know  of  her  coining,  that  you
may  with  the  less  displeasure  receive  her.

Damsel,  she  replied,  it  lieth  not  in  me  to
grant  your  lady's  request,  which  is  no  small
grief  to  me  ;  and  the  coming  of  the  princess
of  Navarre  is  as  acceptable  to  me,  as  the
greatest  good  fortune  and  honour  in  the
world  beside,  that  might  happen  tome;  but
the  custom  of  this  castle  is  flatly  against  it,
m  that  the  entrance  is  as  well  defended
against  women  as  men.  And  though  1,  for
N  2


136

the  good  affection  I  bear  to  your  lady,  should
wish  to  break  the  custom,  the  giant  Almou-
rol,  whose  authority  here  strctcheth  further
than  mine,  would  nowise  agree  thereto.  He
hath  only  permitted  your  entrance  inasmuch
as  you  come  with  the  bidding  of  another.
Kiss  her  hands  for  me,  and  excuse  me,  I  be-
seech you,  with  the  best  words  you  can;  for
I  am  so  troubled  at  being  able  to  do  so  little,
that  I  know  not  what  to  say.  Lady,  replied
the  damsel,  Í  well  believe  so,  and  if  the
princess  will  believe  me,  she  will  not  be
offended  ;  for  certes,  a  greater  discontent
would  she  receive  if  she  should  enter  here.
Then  took  she  her  leave  and  went  to  her
lady,  who,  as  it  is  the  nature  of  women  to
listen  to  no  excuse  in  things  which  displease
them,  grew  into  so  great  melancholy,  that
she  could  neither  listen  to  her,  nor  to  any  one.
Her  knight,  seeing  her  thus  discontented,
arose,  saying,  Lady,  in  my  judgment,  you
should  resent  this  less  ;  for  if  Miraguarda
maketh  refusal  of  your  entry  into  her  castle,
it  is  that  she  may  not  be  undeceived  by  the
difference  which  there  is  between  your  beauty
and  hers  ;  and  this  fear  which  she  hath,  is  a


137

sufficient  testimony  of  the  truth.  Be  not
offended  therefore,  for  yon  ought  to  re-
turn with  the  greatest  glory  in  this  world.

These  words  were  of  such  force  with  her
vanity  that  she  contented  herself:  and  be-
cause she  would  not  presently  depart  thence,
without  seeing  some  of  the  things  of  that
land,  >he  Lade  her  knight  go  to  the  place
where  the  shields  hanged,  and  from  thence
bring  her  that  of  Miraguarda,  because  she
wished  to  see  it,  and  to  carry  it  away  with
her.

The  knight  esteemed  this  commandment
highly,  and  as  a  favour;  and  speaking  to  the
damsel,  she  presently  went  to  Tiorendos
and  Floraman,  saying,  .Sirs,  yonder  knight
of  the  Boat  desireth  you  to  send  him  the
shield  with  the  portraiture  of  Miraguarda,
that  his  lady  may  do  with  it  what  she  estcem-
eth  best  ;  and  if  you  deny  his  demand,  he
shall  be  constrained  to  fetch  it  away  by  force,
which  he  would  be  loth  to  do,  as  he  would
not  willingly  have  any  difference  with  the
knights  of  this  country.
N  3


138

Fair  damsel,  replied  Florendos,  this  knight,

)t  well  appears,  knows  not  how  dear  this
shield  costs  him  who  only  enjoys  it  with  his
eyes,  much  more  him  who  would  carry  it
away  so  lightly.  Tell  him  to  come  out  of
the  boat  and  fetch  it.  I  wait  here  to  defend
it,  and  if  he  conquers  me.,  he  may  bear  it
away.  If  he  hath  no  horse,  we  will  do  battle
on  foot;  if  at  the  end  he  wins  it,  I  shall  lose
my  life,  and  rest  from  my  miseries.  But  as
peradventure  his  confidence  may  deceive
him.  let  him  tell  me  what  he  will  leave  in
token  that  he  hath  been  vanquished  ;  for  the
shield  which  he  demandetli  will  alway  have
some  trophy  of  its  victory.

The  damsel  returned  with  this  answer,  and
the  knight  without  delay  took  leave  of  his
lady,  and  leaped  ashore,  being  so  gallant  and
well-made  a  personage  that  his  appearance
was  much  to  be  dreaded  ;  and  accompanied
with  two  squires,  he  came  towards  Florendos
with  a  haughty  step,  to  whom,  when  he  drew
somewhat  near,  he  said  with  a  loud  voice,
I  see  well,  sir  knight,  that  good  counsel  is
n©t  to  be   used  towards  them  who  are  of  so


139

small  discretion,  as  they  cannot  take  it  when
it  is  offered:  I  willed  you  to  send  me  the
shield,  that  you  might  not  oblige  me  to
come  and  take  it  :  but  I  perceive,  you  had
rather  lose  it  to  your  cost,  than  give  it  with
honour; — you  shall  now  see  what  you  have
gained  by  this.  The  pledge  which  you  re-
quire I  have  not;  conquer  me,  and  then
take  what  satisfaction  you  will.  Í  perceive,
replied  Florendos,  there  is  nothing  to  be
.said.  By  this  time  the  window  was  making
ready  for  Miraguarda  to  behold  the  battle
from  it.  At  this  Florendos  paused  a  little,
lor  he  had  not  seen  her  before  since  his
coming  to  the  castle;  and  having  fixed  his
eyes  upon  her,  he  remained  gazing  till  he  had
forgotten  himself,  and  the  combat  was  quite
and  clean  out  of  his  mind  ;  which  the  strange
knight  perceiving,  he  took  him  by  the  arm
and  thus  awaked  him  :

Sir  knight,  he  that  hath  to  enter  combat
with  me  must  not  pass  the  time  in  these
musings.  Come  to  yourself,  or  1  shall  carry
off  this  shield;  for  1  cannot  tarry  long  in
time   of  haste,      Florendos  feeling  himself


1  to

taken  by  the  arm,  remembered  presently
•what  he  had  to  do:  whereupon  he  withdrew
his  eyes  from  the  place  where  they  were  so
greatly  affectioned,  and  being  angry  that  he
had  forgotten  himself,  replied,  It  doth  di  -
please  nv  , sir,  to  enter  the  combat  with  you,
for  vou  lake  mo  in  an  hour  when  [  have  arms
of  vantage.  He  of  the  Boat  answered,  that
vou  may  perceive  what  small  succour  these
imaginations  can  afford  you,  defend  yourself.

With  these  words  he  struck  him  such  a  blow-
on  the  crest  of  his  helmet,  as  the  weighti-
ness  thereof  constrained  him  to  bow  down
his  head  to  his  breast;  whereat  Florcndos
A\a->  little  pleased,  and  thought  more  of  his
enemy  ;  but  he  was  not  slack  in  requital
thereof,  which  was  so  worthily  given,  that
the  knight's  shield  was  cleft  in  two  :  whereat
he  was  offended  without  measure,  beholding
the  image  of  his  lady  so  martyred,  and  he
began  to  rage  like  one  who  was  void  of  judg-
ment.

Florendos,  who  stood  in  fear  of  his  force,  gave
good  heed  to  his  strokes,  waiting  till  part  of


141

ury  should  be  spent,  when  they  would
fall  lighter,  and  he,  being  wearied,  would  be
the  easier  subdued.  It  was  as  he  expected  ;
the  knight  seeking  to  take  vengeance  for  the
displeasure  which  he  resented  at  the  deface-
ment of  his  shield,  laboured  and  gave  so
many  blows,  that  at  length  he  could  scarcely
move;  and  though  Florendos  made  him  de-
liver the  greater  number  in  vain,  yet  he  could
not  avoid  them  so  well  but  that  he  was  some-
what wounded.  Seeing,  however,  that  his
enemy  waxed  faint  and  he  was  in  full  strength,
he  began  anew  to  strike  him,  laying  on  the
edge  of  his  sword,  which  every  time  eut
through  his  arms  and  entered  into  the  fleshy
so  that  in  short  time  he  brought  him  to  such
Weakness  that  he  could  hardly  continue  on
foot;  and  knowing  this,  he  quickened  his
blows  with  such  force  and  fury,  that  there
scarcely  seemed  to  be  any  interval  between
them.  The  knight  would  fain  have  taken
breath  ;  but  as  this  was  not  allowed  him,  he
put  out  all  Ins  strength  to  defend  himself,
till  at  length  losing  all  strength,  he  fell  sense-
less to  the  ground,  more  for  weariness
than  for  his  wounds.     Arnalta.   who  v,


142

light  to  leave  as  to  love,  when  she  sow  liim
conquered,  commanded  her  boatmen  to  row
up  the  river,  forsaking  her  knight,  and
making  no  more  account  or  estimation  of  him,
th. m  as  if  she  had  never  seen  him  before.

Florendcs  opened  his  helmet,  and  giving  him
air,  he  recovered;  and  being  greatly  discon-
tented with  himself,  besought  him,  when  he
had  taken  what  revenge  he  pleased,  to  let
him  depart,  for  his  heart  could  not  endure
to  remain  in  that  place  which  had  cost  him
so  dear.  What  Í  would  have  of  you,  he  re-
plied, is,  that  you  should  do  whatever  the
la«ly  Miraguarda  may  command,  lor  I  am
her  prisoner,  and  a  prisoner  can  impose  no
commands.  Desire  sir  Almourol,  therefore,
to  go  and  learn  what  is  her  pleasure,  and
when  that  is  known,  1  have  nothing  more  to
require.

The  giant,  at  the  entreaty  of  the  knight,  went
to  know  the  pleasure  of  Miraguarda,  who,
as  she  delighted  in  extremes,  returned  this
answer:  That  he  should  rake  oath  never  to
serve  other  lady  than  Arnalta,  and  that  he


143

should  bear  the  device  in  his  shield  reversed,
in  respect  she  did  think  it  unreasonable,
that  Jove  should  be  held  captive  under  lhe
power  of  his  vassal  :  therefore  he  should
cause  Cupid  to  be  painted  there,  holding  a
knight  bathed  in  blood  under  his  feet.

Albeit  this  judgment  Was  sharp  and  rigorous,
yet  the  knight  could  not  gainsay  :  so  causing
some  regard  to  be  used  to  his  wounds,  the
next  day  he  departed  thence,  very  sorrow-
ful to  think  in  what  displeasure  his  lady  so
suddenly  went  away.

Florendos  remained  awhile  at  the  curing  of
his  wounds,  and  in  the  mean  time  Flor  aman
maintained  the  custom,  accomplishing  numy
haughty  and  noble  (!ee:ls  for  him  ;  but  Mira-
guarda  never  vouchsafed  to  manifest  any
satisfaction  at  what  was  atehieved  for  her
sake;  and  this  was  well,  for  if  at  any  I  ne
she  should  yield  herself,  the  victory  would
be  more  delightful,  inasmuch  as  he  who  ob-
tains any  glory  with  little  cost,  never  greatly
delighteth  therein.


Í44


CHAPTER  108,


That  you  may  understand  who  the  knight
was  that  came  in  company  of  Arnalta,  it  is
related  how  Drapos,  duke  of  Normandy,  the
son-in-law  of  Frisol,  king  of  Hungaria,  had
to  issue  two  sons,  whereof  one  was  named
Frisol,  after  his  grandfather,  and  the  other
Dragonalte,  who,  for  that  it  was  not  long
since  he  was  reported  a  knight  at  arms,  was
as  yet  not  known.  This  Dragonalte  being  a
gallant  youth,  and  meetly  endued  with
strength  to  bear  arms,  beside  the  Great  fame
of  the  noble  exploits  of  his  father  and  grand-
father, did  so  embolden  him  in  courageous
desire,  as  he  loathed  to  spend  his  life  in  ease
or  slothful  idleness  ;  whereupon  he  left  the
place  where  he   had    been   nourished   and


145

brought  up,  addicting  his  mind  to  the  search
of  knightly  adventures,  and  would  not  go  to
the  court  of  the  emperor  Palmerin  till  first
the  renown  of  his  deeds  might  give  the
greater  grace  to  his  person.

In  this  haughty  desire,  accompanied  with
one  squire  to  bear  his  shield  and  helmet,
he  took  his  way  towards  die  realm  of  Spain,
meaning  to  find  the  castle  of  Almourol,  that
he  might  approve  his  valour  against  the
knight  that  kept  the  shield  of  Miragaarda  ;
but  as  he  journied  thitherward,  through  the
realm  of  Navarre,  he  happened  to  the  pas-
sage which  was  guarded  by  Arnalta's  knights,
whereof  two  we*e  vanquished  by  his  noble
valour.  She  well  noting  lus  worthy  beha-
viour, as  also  that  he  was  young  and  fair,
welcomed  him  into  the  castle,  where  she  en-
tertained him  with  such  honour  as  she  was
accustomed  to  use  towards  them  who  re-
sembled him  ;  and  he  beholding  Arnalta  en-
riched with  so  great  beaut  v,  and  understand*
ing  that  her  dowry  was  to  be  queen  of  Na-
varre, being  also  young,  and  having  a  heart
unoccupied,  began  to  wax   amorous  of  her,

VOL.  III.  o


146

to  that  on  her  he  thought  depended  his  de*
siruction  or  his  glory.  And  finding  that  she
was  desirous  to  go  see  Miraguarda,  he  made
offer  to  hoar  her  company  in  lier  journey.
And  as  the  way  of  most  women,  when  they
are  not  under  subjection,  is  to  waste  their
time  in  pilgrimages,  especially  such  as  are
little  fond  of  being  at  rest,  she  would  make
no  longer  delay  than  was  necessary  to  pro-
vide adornments  for  the  journey  ;  nor  was  it
much  that  A  malta  should  thus  hastily  depart,
gjnee  one  who  so  lightly  resolves,  lightly  puts
her  resolutions  in  effect.  So  she  set  forward,
accompanied  with  the  dame.-.,  and  damsels,
and  squires,  as  you  have  heard  before,  as  also
with  Dragonalte,  who  many  times  by  the
way  e  sayed  knightly  occasions,  wherein  for-
tune, did   still  afford  him  the  victory.

Thus  'hey  went  on  till  they  came  to  a  city
on  the  Tagus,  which  was  two  leagues  above
ih-  ca  itle  of  Almourol,  where  they  stayed  till
tbey  had  provided  boats,  wherein  they  came

to  tin    CUStle,   and    sped    there   as  you    have

d  ;  and  Amaha  seeing  Dragonalte  con-
quered, converted  her  love  into  hatred,  and


147

angrily  departed  towards  Navarre,  intending
never  to  see  himao;ain.

But  as  she  could  be  easily  intreated  to  anger,
even  so  could  she  be  as  easily  won  to  forget
her  anger,  her  unstaidness  was  such,  and  her
good  will  to  love  so  great.  In  this  manner  it
chanced  to  Dragonaite,  who  continuing  his
affection  to  her,  who  long  time  abhorred
him,  yet  in  the  end  he  obtained  her  good  will
in  marriage,  she  making  him  king  of  Na-
varre :  therefore  let  no  one  despair  in  these
matters,  for  perseverance  is  all.  Now  then
leaving  rhem  for3  things  of  more  importance
in  this  chronicle,  the  history  saith,  that  the
princess  of  Thrace  being  ready  to  depart
towards  the  court  of  the  emperor  Palmerin,
the  queen  Carmelia,  her  grandmother,  sent
her  away,  worthily  accompanied  with  ladies
and  damsels  and  lords  of  the  realm,  with
such  pomp  as  beseemed  her  person  ;  and  so
many  errant  knights  came  to  meet  h-er  and
accompany  her  on  the  way,  that  when  she
approached  Constantinople  all  the  fields
shone  from  afar  with  glittering  arms  and
singular  devices,  so  that  it  rather  seemed  t&
o  2


us

be  an  nrmy  prepared  for  war,  than  the  gallan-
tries of  peace  Some  among  them  came  to  see
her,  others  to  serve  her,  and  others  with  hope
to  win  her  in  marriage,  confiding  in  the  merit
of  their  deeds,  and  in  the  greatness  of  their
states.  There  came  with  her  prince  Graciano,
Bcroho  with  his  companions  Ualiarte  and
Platir,  and  all  the  other  young  knights  of
the  emperor's  household.  He  himself,  with
all  the  others  whom  he  had  in  the  cicy,  went
three  leagues  out  to  receive  her.  Primaleon,
went  before  him.  Lionarda  being  advertised
of  their  coming,  left  her  litter,  and  mounted
on  a  goodly  white  palfrey,  adorned  for  that
day  with  harness  full  rich  and  costly  to
behold  :  she  herself  was  attired  in  the  greek-
ish  fashion,  that  she  might  the  better
ileliybt  the  eves  of  them  which  did  behold
her  ;  her  robe  was  of  carnation  velvet,
fairly  embroidered  with  parchment  lace  of
gold  ;  lier  cloak  was  of  scarlet,  closed  be-
fore with  diamond  buttons,  and  all  the  com-
pass of  the  cloak  was  likewise  garnished
with  diamonds,  having  between  every  dia-
mond a  rank  of  very  glorious  orient  pearl,
set  in  such  order  as  they  did  marvellously


149

deck  and  set  forth  lier  costly  vesture  ;  so
that  all  this  in  aid  of  her  natural  beauty,
she  seemed  so  fair,  that  many  whose
thoughts  were  free  before,  were  now  so
changed,  that  from  thenceforth  they  past
their  time  less  at  ease  than  they  had  been
wont  to  do.

The  emperor,  albeit  he  was  far  in  years,  yet
he  had  attired  himself  youthfully.  After  he
had  received  Lionarda  with  that  welcome
which  he  was  accustomed  to  bestow,  he  took
place  of  Primaleon  his  son,  who  was  talk-
ing with  her,  and  came  on  accompanying
her,  so  channel  with  her  that  he  suffered
none  else  to  approach,  neither  looked  at
any  of  those  princes  who  had  taken  olF
their  helmets,  and  came  near  him  to  kiss
his  hand.  Lionarda,  when  the  emperor  ap-
proached her,  seeing  his  great  age,  and  the
authority  of  his  presence,  thought  that  all
which  she  had  heard  of  his  fame  was  little
in  respect  of  him  ;  and  with  all  the  courtesy
and  reverence  she  could,  she  stooped  to
kiss  his  hand  for  the  favour  which  he  had
vouchsafed  her  in  permitting  her  to  reside
o  3


150

in  his  house  and  court.  But  he,  who  thought
it  was  he  who  received  the  favour,  repaid
her  with  other  words,  arising  from  the  sin-
cerity of  his  deeds.  So  they  proceeded  on
their  way  towards  the  city,  and  he  kept  his
eyes  still  fixed  upon  her,  being  amazed  at  her
beauty.  But  as  they  went,  he  met  with  some-
thing which  made  him  take  them  off;  for
about  a  quarter  of  a  league  from  Constanti-
nople, by  the  hermitage  of  St.  Louis,  which
stood  hard  by  the  public  way,  and  under  the
shade  of  some  ash  trees  which  surrounded  it,
they  saw  a  knight  in  carnation  coloured
arms,  so  thick  beset  with  little  shrubs  of
gold,  as  the  whole  armour  was  gallantly
set  forth  therewith,  his  helmet  likewise  after
the  same  manner  ;  and  in  his  shield  he  bare
for  his  device  in  a  field  of  azure,  a  cypress
tree  hung  with  nuts  of  gold.  He  was
mounted  on  a  lusty  bay  courser,  having  at-
tending on  him  two  squires,  one  of  them
carrying  a  shield  covered  over  with  cloth,  so
that  the,  device  thereof  could  not  be  discern-
ed ;  the  other  went  before  the  emperor,  and
having  reined  his  palfrey,  began  to  salute
him  in  this  order  :


151

Sir,  the  knight  whom  you  behold  under  yon-
der ash  trees,  being  desirous  to  try  himself
against  the  knights  of  your  court,  of  whose
fame  the  whole  world  is  envious,  says  that  it
is  but  short  time  since  he  bare  armour,  and
now,  to  make  proof  of  himself,  he  is  deter-
mined this  day  to  guard  this  passage  as  long
as  his  strength  sufficeth.  "Wherefore  he
humbly  desireth  your  highness  that  you
would  command  your  knights  to  joust  with
him,  for  he  defies  them  all  one  by  one,  ex-
cept the  prince  Primaleon,  your  son,  againsl
whom  he  will  not  take  a  lance.

The  emperor  was  joyful  at  this,  for  that  it
was  a  mean  whereby  Lionarda  might  receive
some  pleasure,  and  perceive  the  valour  and
prowess  of  the  knights  of  his  court  ;  and
having  opinion  that  the  knight  which  had
enterprized  to  guard  the  passage  was  some-
what confident  of  himself,  he  returned  the
squire  this  answer,  with  a  chearful  counte-
nance and  a  smiling  :  Say  unto  the  knight,
that  I  freely  give  him  leave,  and  I  am  sorry
that  my  aged  years  will  not  suffer  me  to  be
one  among  the  challenged  to  free  the  way


1.52

for  lhe  lady  Lionarda's  passage.  I  promise
him  not  to  pass  till  one  of  my  knights  has
freed  it,  or  till  all  are  overthrown,  since  in
my  own  kingdom  I  find  strangers  who
maintain  the  road  against  me.  Then  look-
ing at  her  when  the  squire  was  gone,  he  said,
Think  you  not,  lady,  that  he  who  keeps  the
road  against  me  at  my  own  gate,  and  with
you  in  my  company,  would  not  do  it  better
where  I  had  not  you  for  my  helper  ?  Certes,
the  knight  is  either  one  of  no  small  eourage,
or  he  doth  embolden  himself  by  means  of
your  beauty;  and  hoping  to  move  you  toward-
him  in  good  conceit,  doth  offer  his  person  to
endure  a  doubtful  trial*

Scantly  had  the  emperor  concluded  his  in-
tent, when  hesawRoramonte,  who  in  his  court
was  esteemed  for  an  especial  knight,  come
flying  over  his  horse's  heels,  the  other  sitting
as  firm  in  his  saddle  as  if  he  had  not  been
touched.  This  encounter  struck  a  great  doubt
into  the  others,  who  began  to  fear  the
mishap  which  might  befal  them.  But  as
the}'  who  seek  things  of  honour  do  not  fear
danger  to    their  persons,  every   one  strove


153

not  lo  be  the  last  in  adventuring  himself.
The  first  among  them  who  couched  his  lance,
was  Frisol,  and  he  fared  like  the  former  ;  he
of  the  Ash  Trees  passed  by  as  steadily  as  in
the  former  encounter  ;  and  then  turning  the
reins,  took  another  lance  from  many  which
were  against  the  trees,  having  been  placed
there  by  his  order,  that  there  might  be  no
want  of  them.  Having  taken  his  post,  he
saw  that  Graciano  was  coming  against  him
with  all  the  force  which  his  horse  could
carry  ;  and  giving  his  own  the  spur,  he  met
him  in  the  midst  of  the  shield  with  such
might,  that  piercing  through  that  and  all
his  other  arms,  he  bore  him  to  the  ground,
and  certes  had  slain  him  if  the  blow  had  not
been  something  aslant.  Beroldo  came  after
him;  but  as  he  of  the  Ash  Trees  was  that  day
showing  all  his  strength,  Beroldo  went  like
the  rest  to  the  ground,  whereat  the  emperor
had  much  to  think.  Then  Dramiante  came»
and  because  in  their  encounter  the  horse
tripped  upon  the  root  of  one  of  the  trees
which  rose  a  little  above  the  soil,  and  fell
with  him,  he  would  not  acknowledge  him-
self to  be  overthrown  ;    and  though  some


154

held  this  not  a  sufficient  reason,  the  other
told  him  to  mount  again  as  often  as  he
pleased,  for  he  would  he  sootier  tired  with
mounting  than  himself  in  overthrowing  him.
These  words  were  judged  by  some  to  be
haughty  ;  others  affirmed  that  they  sprang
from  the  confidence  which  he  had  in  him-
self. Drain ian te  went  again  to  horse,  being
melancholick  at  his  disaster  ;  but  better  had
it  been  for  him  to  have  put  up  with  it,  than
to  return  to  the  joust,  for  the  knight  gave
him  such  an  encounter,  that  he  went  through
shield  and  armour,  and  bore  him  to  the
ground  badly  wounded  in  the  attaint  ;  and
even  as  it  was,  he  favoured  him  by  not  giving
the  blow  full,  or  else  he  had  surely  been  in
great  danger.  This  encounter  made  the
emperor  take  less  delight  in  the  joust  than
he  had  manifested  before,  for  he  now  dread-
ed the  strength  of  this  knight,  and  began  to
fear  some  displeasure.  Then  Don  Rosuel
advanced,  who  was  held  an  excellent  one
among  the  good  ;  and  though  his  confidence
made  him  lose  all  fear,  nevertheless  he  was
undeceived;  for  at  the  second  career,  he
went  to  keep  his  fellows  company,  he  of  the


155

Ash  Trees  losing  his  stirrups,  at  which  he  was
troubled,  in  that  it  had  befallen  him  at  such
a  time.  Howbeit,  righting  himself  in  his
seat,  he  resumed  bis  place,  and  saw  that  the
doughty  Piatir  advanced  against  him  ;  their
spears  brake,  and  they  met  together  shield
and  body;  Piatir  and  his  horse  went  to  the
ground,  and  the  other  was  dizzy  with  the
shock.

The  emperor  was  so  amazed  that  he  knew  not
well  \shat  to  say  ;  Primalcon  was  as  much  so:
some  suspected  that  it  was  Palmerin,  for
from  no  other  was  such  prowess  to  be  ex-
pected ;  but  satisfying  themselves  that  it  wa>
not  he,  they  knew  not  what  to  think  ;  for
that  it  should  be  him  of  the  Savage  was  not
to  be  believed,  because  they  knew  that  he
remained  in  the  king  of  England's  court.  So
that  the  more  they  were  assured  that  it  was
neither  of  these,  the  more  they  held  it  for  a
great  thing  that  such  feats  should  be  at-
chieved  by  one  unknown.  And  as  they  who
had  been  overthrown  were  among  the  best
of  the  court,  and  those  in  whom  there  might
have  been  most  confidence,  they  lost  all  hope


156

that  any  one  would  now  be  able  to  overthrow
him;  for  Estrelante,  Belisarte,  and  Francian,
had  already  jousted.  And  now  when  there
were  none  to  advance,  Pompides  and  Blan-
didon  happened  to  arrive.  The  emperor  hav-
ing afforded  them  a  gracious  welcome,  ac-
cording to  what  they  were,  and  the  love
which  he  bare  them,  told  them  how  the  ad-
venture stood,  and  requested  that  they  would
do  their  endeavour  to  free  the  passage  for
the  lady  Lionarda,  since  there  were  no  other.»
from  whom  it  could  be  expected.

We  will  'try  our  strength,  answered  Pom-
pides, to  serve  your  highness,  but  not  with
any  belief  that  we  can  atehieve  that  wherein
these  renowned  knights  have  failed.  And
no  sooner  had  he  uttered  these  words,  than  he
gave  the  spurs  to  his  horse  against  the  strange
knight,  who  came  to  meet  him.  And  not  to
dwell  for  ever  upon  encounters,  suffice  it  to  say,
that  Pompides  and  Blandidon  went  to  keep
the  others  company,  he  of  the  Ash  Trees  re-
ceiving some  reverses,  and  losing  his  stirrups.

Then  when  he  saw  that  there  was  no  more  to


157

be  done,  he  took  off  his  helmet,  and  came
tinto    the    emperor   to    kios  his  hand;  bu*
when    the  emperor  perceived    that    it    was
his  grandson  Florian,  he  was  then  as  joy-
ful of  his  happy  victory,  as  before  he  was
aggrieved  to  see  his  knights  so  vanquished  :
yea,  themselves    did  think    it  no  dishonour
to  them  to  be  overthrown  by  him  ;  so   that
what  they  had  before  held  as  a  disparage-
ment, they  now  received  contentedly.     Ho-
rian    having    kissed  the  hands   of  the  em-
peror and    Primaleon,    offered    to    do    the
like  to  the  princess  Lionarda  ;  but  she  see-
ing one  of  such  young   years,    to    be    ac-
companied with  such  singular  prowess,  could
not  but  in  some  degree  yield  him  her  good
v\  ill  and  the  freedom  of  her  heart;    howbeit
with  that  grace  and  beauty  with  the   which
nature  had  endowed  her,  she  received  him
with  the  best  and    most   becoming    words
that  could  be.     And  he,  though  his  liberty
till  then  had  been  full  hard  to  be  subdued
by  amorous  passions,  felt  himself  then    as-
sailed  by   them,   the  presence   of  Lionarda
being  powerful    in    occasioning    such     ex-
tremes.

VOL.  Ill-  V


158

The  emperor,  seeing  the  passage  free,  said
to  the  princess,  Lady,  he  who  kept  the
road  against  us,  now  leaves  it  open  ;  let
us  proceed  before  another  may  impede  it,
though  having  such  a  champion  on  our
side,  I  know  not  of  "horn  wo  need  stand
in  fear.


159


CHAPTER     Wj,


When  they  were  come  into  the  city,  they
were  received  by  the  people  marvellous
triumphantly,  who  presented  many  rare  in-
ventions, thinking  thereby  to  please  the  em-
peror, though  there  were  some  who  censured
these  rejoicings  in  a  time  of  general  grief,
because  of  the  imprisonment  of  king  Polea-
dos, Belcar,  Onistaldo,  and  the  other  good
knights  who  were  in  the  power  of  the  Turk.
Vi  hen  they  reached  the  palace,  the  empress,
with  Gridonia  and  Poliuarda,came  to  receive
Lionarda  in  the  outer  room  of  their  apart-
ments, treating  her  with  courtesy  as  an
equal,  and  showing  to  her  all  possible  love
and  welcome  ;  whereat  she  received  great
contentation,  thinking  that  they  which  r<
P  2


100

ceived  her  with  such  ceremony  at  lier  first
arrival,  would  contiuue  to  entreat  hex  thus
honourably.

After  the  empress  and  Gridonia  had  ended
their  salutations,  Polinarcla  next  embraced
lier,  holding  in  much  her  beauty  and  appear-
ance. Whoso  had  then  seen  them  could  ill
have  determined  whether  there  was  any  ad
vantage  between  them.  Each  touched  with.
envy  at  what  she  saw  before  her,  feared  that
the  person  of  the  other  might  throw  some
shade  on  her.  But  the  sight  of  Lionarda
greatly  heightened  Polinarda's  love  towards
Palmerin,  seeing  that  the  faith  with  which
he  served  her  was  so  sincere,  that  it  could
"not  be  shaken  by  such  an  especial  treasure,
which  he  had  won  by  so  great  pain  and  tra-
vail.

So  holding  one  another  by  the  hand,  they
followed  the  empress  into  her  chamber,
where  having  seated  themselves  side  by  side,
all  who  were  present  fixed  their  eyes  upon
them  to  behold  the  perfection  of  nature,
jfjorian  having  kissed   the  empress's  hand,


161

who  embraced  him  many  times,  in  that
lie  was  the  son  of  chat  daughter  whom  she
had  alway  loved  the  best,  would  have  done
the  same  to  Gndonia,  but  she  would  not
suffer  him,  and  embraced  him.  From  her
he  went  to  Polinarda,  to  whom,  kneeling
upon  one  knee,  he  offered  the  some  courtesy;
bat  she  taking  him  by  the  hand,  said,  This
is  tin-  time,  sir  Florian,  when  you  should
]jay  for  the  offence  which  you  have  this
day  given  to  the  lady  Lionarda,  by  hinder-
ing her  of  the  liberty  of  the  way,  if  I  did
not  persuade  myself  that  you  are  able  to
make  her  recompence  by  your  knightly  ser-
vice, for  the  fault.  To  which  words  he
replied,  The  will  to  serve  her,  certes,  I  have,
and  though  my  power  is  but  for  little,
yet  if  favoured  by  her,  there  is  nothing
which  would  be  impossible  to  it.  And  that
I  may  bear  with  me  some  confidence  which
will  make  me  adventure  any  thing,  I  be-
seech you  persuade  the  princess  to  accept
me  as  hers.  Polinarda  replied,  The  prin-
Lionarda  shall  gain  so  much  in  this,
that  I  believe  there  is  little  to  reqnest.  1  take
the  hazard  upon  myself,  and  kiss  her  hand
p  3


162

foi  accepting  you,  as  a  favour  vouchsafed  to
both,  I  alone  remaining  bound  for  it.  At
all  these  words  Lionarda  remained  silent  and
abashed,|being  as  yet  so  young  in  that  house  ;
and  she  now  turned  to  Poliaarda  with  this
answer  :  Lady,  you  cannot  wish  or  command
me  the  thing  standing  with  my  honour,  that
I  would  be  so  forgetful  of  myself  as  not  to
perform  it,  and  feel  honoured  therein.  Il  is
sufficient  to  make  me  receive  this  knight
as  mine,  that  he  is  brother  to  Palmerin,
to  whom  I  am  so  highly  bound,  and  cousin
to  your  highness,  whom  I  so  greatly  de-
sire to  serve.  If  he  conceit  that  this  name
can  avail  him  in  any  thing,  I  consent  that  he
take  it;  but  one  who  per  for  me  th  such  atchiev-
ments,  can  have  no  need  of  any  aid  so  trifling,
to  which  he  should  attribute  afterward  the
honour  of  his  deeds.  Polinarda  was  well
pleased  with  this  reply,  as  well  to  content  the
knight  of  the  Savage,  whom  she  much
esteemed,  as  also  to  remove  the  suspicion  she
had  of  her  singular  beauty  ;  and  to  remove
this  fear,  she  would  willingly  have  had  Lio-
narda give  her  affections  to  him,  that  so  she
might  be  secure  of  Palmerin  :  for  in   these


163

cases  none  are  ever  so  secure  as  not  to  fee]
some  distrust.  Florim  thought  so  much  of
what  had  past,  that  he  knew  not  how  to  con-
tain himself  tor  joy  ;  and  rising  up,  he  went
to  the  emperor,  who  called  him,  and  who
seeing  the  talk  which  he  held  with  these
ladies,  suspected  what  it  might  be.  And
from  thenceforward  he  determined  in  his
own  mind  to  marry  him  with  Lionarda,
thinking  that  s-uch  marriage  would  suit  the
deserts  of  both.  Polinarda  begged  that  the
princess  might  be  her  guest  as  long  as  she
remained  in  the  court  ;  and  from  this  time
these  two  lived  and  loved  so  entirely  toge-
ther, as  the  one  could  never  be  without  the
other's  company  ;  and  what  occasion  soever
happened  of  secret  sorrow  or  of  joy,  it  was
imparted  to  the  other  ;  for  this  is  true  friend-
ship, and  where  there  is  not  this  confidence.,
that  friendship  cannot  be  called  perfect.

At  length  the  emperor,  accompanied  with
Florian,  withdrew  himself  to  his  chamber
where  he  questioned  with  him  about  the
king  of  England,  and  Don  Duardos,  and  his
dear   daughter  Flerida,  desiring,  if  it  might


104

be  possible,  to  sue  them  before  his  death»
which  by  reason  of  his  great  age  he  now  daily
expected.    After  he  had  communed  with  him

about  these  things,  he  gave  orders  that  he
should  be  lodged  in  the  palace  as  he  was
wont  to  be.  lie  of  the  Savage  could  nor
pass  the  night  so  quietly  as  he  w;
corned,  the  remembrance  of  Lionarda  keep-
ing him  awhile  from  sleep.

On  the  next  day,  after  mass,  the  emperor
dined  in  the  garden  of  Flerida  with  the  em-
press, Gridonia,  Polinarda,  and  her  guest,
giving  them  the  noblest  banquet  that  ever
was  seen  ;  and  well  it  was,  as  that  was  to
be  the  last.  After  that  the  tables  were
withdrawn,  there  entered  a  damsel  attired
all  in  black,  with  a  head-dress  of  the  same
colour,  and  two  squires  attending  on  her.
Before  she  spake  to  the  emperor,  she  kissed
the  hand  of  the  empress,  Gridonia,  and  Po-
linarda,  who  embraced  her,  for  that  she
knew  her  to  be  one  who  had  been  with  Tar»
giana,  at  such  time  as  she  was  there  abiding
in  the  court  ;  then  she  went  to  the  emperor
to  kiss  his  hand,  but  he  withheld  it,  and  re-


165

ceived  her  with  his  wonted  courtesy,  and  in-
quired of  her  coneer  ing  the  welfare  of  her
lady.  Sir,  said  she,  if  Í  did  not  first  ofTV-i
obeisance  to  your  highness,  it  was  because
I  am  sent  to  the  lady  empress  with  the  bid-
ding of  the  princess  Targiana;  but  as  you
ask  how  she  fareth,  it  is  so,  that  she  hath
never  come  forth  of  her  chamber  since  the
day  that  Poleados,  your  son,  and  the  other
princes  and  knights  were  committed  to  pri-
son, during  all  which  time,  she  hath  not
ceased  grievously  to  weep  and  lament,  inso-
much as  her  beauty  is  marvellously  changed.
The  Turk  her  father  laboureth  as  much  as
may  be  to  dissuade  her  from  this  mournful
kind  of  life,  but  all  in  vain  he  wasteth  his
endeavour,  for  she  hath  said  that  she  would
never  give  over  continual  sorrow,  until  your
knigbts  were  set  at  liberty.

The  Turk  seeing  his  daughter's  life  in  this
extreme  point,  and  that  the  grief  which  hath
brought  her  to  it  can  in  no  other  way  be
remedied    than    by  yielding   to  her  desire,

consents  to  exchange  them   foe  his   son-in-


166

law,  Albayzar,  whom  they  of  Babylon  I
requested  of  him,  that  they  may  enjoy  hi  in,
among  them  again  :  for  this  cause  the  G
Turk  hath  sent  hither  an  ambassador,   who
will  be  here  either  this  day  or  to-morrow.

And  for  that  the  princess  Targiana  remem ber-
eth  well  the  great  honour  you  bestowed  on
her  in  your  court,  and  doubteth  that  in  this
proposal  there  may  be  some  secret  guile  ;  she
hath  sent  me  to  bring  these  tidings  unto  the
empress,  in  whose  presence  I  have  made  3*011
acquainted  with  that  I  had  in  charge,  be-
cause it  toucheth  you  more  than  it  doth  any
other  person.  She,  knowing  the  old  hatred
which  her  father  beareth  towards  you,  which
made  him  seize  your  knights,  at  a  time  when
they  deserved  other  guerdon,  doth  not  hold
this  resolution  to  be  so  certain,  but  that  pcr-
adventure  it  eloaketh  some  design  of  farther
revenge.  And  though  she  desire  the  liberty
of  Albayzar  her  husband,  above  all  other
things  in  the  world,  she  adviseth  you  not  to
deliver  him  till  your  knights  are  in  lull  safety ,
that  if  any  evil  should  chance  afterwards,
she  mav  be  without  blame.


167

Certes,  damsel,  answered  the  emperor,  I
always  believed  that  there  was  such  virtue  in
the  princess  Targiana  ;  and  though  the  ser-
vices which  she  received  in  my  court  were
but  small,  I  knew  they  were  well  bestowed.
This  advice  which  she  gives  me  I  hold  in
great  esteem,  nor  indeed,  could  any  thing
else  be  expected  from  one  of  her  royal  con-
dition; and  I  shall  follow  it,  for  as  coming
from  such  a  person,  and  given  with  such  in-
tent,  it  is  not  to  be  rejected.  When  he  had
said  this,  the  damsel  went  to  Polinarda,  to
whom  she  had  another  message,  and  having
d(  hvered  it,  she  fixed  her  eyes  upon  Lio-
narda;  when  not  knowing  her,  and  seeing
her  rare  and  singular  beauty,  she  asked  Po-
linarda if  it  were  not  Miraguarda,  for  whom
Albayzar  was  vanquished.

It  is  not,  answered  Polinarda;  this  lady  is  the
princess  of  Thrace,  whom  Palmerin  disen-
chanted. 1  know  now  who  she  is,  said  the
damsel,  for  I  have  not  forgotten  the  adventure
of  the  cup  ;  and  in  truth,  if  Palmerin  rejected
such  surpassing  beauty  and  so  great  a  realm,
gr<  ally  is  she  bound  unto  him,  for  whose  sake


1(>8

he  hath  undervalued  them.  But  then  Poli-
narda,  desirous  to  move  her  from  talking  on
that  matter,  because  she  would  fain  not  re-
member how  greatly  she  was  bound,  asked
lier  many  questions  concerning  Targiana
But  at  this  time  tidings  were  brought  to  the
emperor,  that  the  ambassador  of  the  Turk
was  arrived  ;  upon  which  he  sent  the  chie  ft  St
princes  and  knights  of  his  court  to  meet
him,  and  waited  when  he  was  to  receive
him.  The  damsel  then  took  her  leave,  having
to  proceed  to  see  Albayzar,  and  she  promised
Polinarda,  who  would  not  otherwise  have
suffered  her  to  depart  so  soon,  to  return  by
Constantinople.

The  emperor  desired  her  to  present  the  mes-
sage of  his  good  will  to  king  Recindos,
as  also  to  Albayzar  ;  and  after  that  he  had
bestowed  divers  rich  and  costlv  gifts  on  her,
dismissed  her.  The  ambassador  of  the  Turk
was  received,  not  as  he  were  an  enemy,  but
as  became  him  to  whom  he  was  sent;  and  in
sooth,  though  these  things  were  thanklessly-
received,  yet  none  could  deny  them  their
value,  nor  that  they  proved   that  such  hu-


169

inanity,  virtue,  and  greatness  of  mind  were
to  be  found  in  only  the  emperor  Palmerin,
who  received  even  his  very  enemies  with
love.

The  ambassador  having  entered  the  city,
surrounded  by  such  noble  chivalry,  dis-
mounted at  the  gate  of  the  garden,  where
the  emperor  then  was.  Being  in  his  pre-
sence, after  lie  had  glanced  around  at  the
things  which  amazed  him,  he  somewhat  in-
clined his  head,  displaying  in  that  gesture
less  courtesy  than  pride  and  presumption  ;
but  the  emperor,  however  he  disesteemed
such  contempt,  spake  unto  him  and  received
him  with  a  glad  semblance,  as  he  was  ever
wont  to  do.  The  Moor  then  delivered  into
his  hands  a  letter  sealed  with  a  seal  of
gold,  hanging  by  a  cord  of  green  silk.  The
emperor  having  viewed  the  tenor  thereof,
said,  he  perceived  it  was  his  credentials:
on  the  morrow,  if  he  pleased,  lie  might  deli-
ver his  embassage,  and  might  now  go  take
his  rest.

Sir,  he  replied,  this  business  is  not  of  a  na-

"V'OL.  Ill,  Q


170

turf;  which  will  allow  of  rest,  nor  can  I  take
it  till  I  have  said  that  with  which  Í  am  come  :
when  Í  have  received  your  answer  I  will
go  rest  in  mine  own  tents,  without  the  walls;
for  if  1  should  do  otherwise,  the  Turk  my
lord  would  perad venture  he  displeased.  The
emperor  replied,  Do  what  you  imagine  con-
venient in  your  own  conceit  ;  I  should  not
for  mine  own  part  he  any  whit  aggrieved  if
an  ambassador  of  mine,  being  with  the  Turk,
accepted  his  hospitality,  so  being  that  he
fulfilled  his  duty  in  the  charge  committed  to
him.  Sir,  said  the  Turk,  letting  these  things
pass,  I  say,  you  well  know  that  an  hundred
knights  of  your  court  are  held  as  prisoners
by  the  Turk,  among  whom  are  your  son,  Po-
leados, and  Belcar,  and  Onistaldo/with  others
of  ecmal  count.  And  though  my  lord  the
Turk  hath  received  some  injuries  from  your
vassals,  which  he  might  well  revenge  by
putting  these  prisoners  to  death,  never-
theless, to  witness  his  noble  nature,  he  is
content,  at  the  earnest  entreaty  of  his  daugh-
ter, to  give  them  their  lives,  and  to -restore
them  in  change  for  his  son-in-law  Albayzar,
who  is  kept  prisoner  in  the  court  of  the  king


171

of  Spain,  by  the  commandment  of  Mira»

guarda.  For  this  you  are  to  thank  the  prin-
cess Targiana,  who  with  many  tears  obtained
it;  otherwise  your  knights  would  never  have
been  released  until  you  had  sent  him  the
knight  of  the  Savage  Man,  who  stole  the
princess  away.

Certes,  replied  the  emperor,  I  confess  my-
self greatly  bound  to  the  princess  Targiana,
and  next  to  her  to  Miraguarda;  for  had  she
not  laid  hold  of  Albayzar,  and  there  had
been  only  the  virtue  of  the  Turk  to  trust  to,
I  well  see  how  the  matter  would  have  ended  :
for  I  would  never  have  delivered  up  to  him
the  knight  of  the  Savage  Man,  though
all  the  world  should  have  perished.  How-
beit,  I  am  content  with  the  proposed  ex-
change ;  but  I  know  not  what  security  is  to
be  given  me  that  1  need  not  doubt  its  per-
formance.

The  manner  in  which  it  must  be  ordered,
replied  the  ambassador,  is,  that  every  thing
be  trusted  to  the  truth  of  my  lord  the  Turk.
Your  highness  must  release  Albayzar,  and  he


172

will  send  3'oû your  knights.  T  know  not  what
better  security  can  be  given  than  this  that
is  proposed  by  the  Turk,  whom  nothing
could  tempt  to  falsity  his  faith.

The  emperor  leant  upon  his  hand,  and
paused  awhile,  thinking  what  answer  he
should  make;  but  he  of  the  Savage,  being
better  acquainted  with  this  race,  and  fearing
least  the  goodness  of  the  emperor  should  in-
duce him  to  trust  those  who  were  not  to  be
trusted,  rose  and  said,  Sir,  in  so  clear  a  mat-
ter what  need  is  there  to  hesitate  for  a  reply  ?
Let  your  majesty  remember  why  he  detain-
eth  your  knights  in  prison,  and  you  shall
well  perceive  the  trust  you  ought  to  repose
in  him  ;  and  if  you  rely  upon  Albayzar's  vir-
tue, I  must  remember  you,  how,  not  acting
as  might  have  been  expected  from  such  a
person,  he  stole  the  shield  of  Miraguarda
from  Dramuziando,  who  defended  it.  My
opinion  is,  that  if  king  Recindos  hath  hi-
therto kept  watch  upon  him,  he  should  watch
him  yet  more  warily  from  henceforth  ;  for
in  this  manner  the  safety  of  your  knights  will
be  certain,  and  in  any  other  I  hold  it  very


17  o

doubtful.  If  the  Turk  or  his  ambassador  say
that  this  which  hath  been  proposed  proceeds
from  his  virtue  and  roval  inclination,  I  know
that  it  proceeds  from  necessity  ;  for  the  sub-
jects of  Albayzar  require  him  so  to  do  for
the  deliverance  of  their  lord.  Knight,  re-
plied the  aniba-sador,  now  I  know  thee!  and
if  the  bidding  on  which  1  come  did  not  pre-
vent me  from  taking  arms,  I  would  not  fail
to  make  thee  know,  with  what  reverence
thou  ojighti  .t  to  entertain  the  unreprovcablc
word  of  the  Turk.  But  there  will  yet  come
a  time  when  thou  shalt  pay  for  this,  and  for
the  rest  of  thy  deserts.  Little  contented
should  I  be,  replied  he  of  the  Savage,  to  do
battle  with  you,  for  where  so  little  would  be
gained  as  in  conquering  you,  so  much  ought
not  to  be  risqued,  as  tbe  wa^te  of  time  upon
things  so  insignificant.  At  this  the  emperor
held  out  the  sceptre  which  he  held  in  his
hand,  to  the  end  it  should  proceed  no  further,
being  somewhat  inwardly  sorry  for  what  Flo-
rian  had  said,  though  he  esteemed  well  of  his
counsel,  and  was  minded  to  pursue  it.  Then
turning  to  the  ambassador,  he  said,  You  ought

not  to  be  offended,  when  my  knights  assist
Q3


174

me  with  their  good  advice  in  a  matter  of
such  weight,  and  especially  Florian,  who  is
my  grandson,  and  whom  it  so  nearly  touch-
eih.  I  will  believe  that  the  truth  of  the
Turk  ought  to  be  regarded  as  the  best  secu-
rity in  the  world  ;  but  inasmuch  as  the  greater
number  of  the  prisoners,  by  reason  of  what
hath  past,  would  not  be  satisfied  therewith,  I
dare  not  give  you  the  reply  which  you  desire.
And  though  I  were  so  to  do,  king  Reciodos
of  Spain,  I  know,  would  not  so  willingly
consent  with  me,  whose  son  is  amongst  the
princes  as  a  prisoner,  and  who  hath  Albayzai
in  his  power:  wherefore  give  the  Turk  to
understand,  that  when  he  shall  have  sent
me  home  my  imprisoned  knights,  then  I  will
send  him  Albayzar  ;  and  if  it  be  not  suffici-
ent assurance  to  him  that  I  say  this,  1  give
him  as  security  his  own  daughter,  the  lady
Targiana,  who  will  make  answer  for  me,  for
the  knowledge  she  hath  of  me  ;  and  as  she
winneth  or  loseth  more  than  any  other  per-
son in  this  matter,  having  her  husband  pri-
soner, she  will  not  refuse  the  terms.  This  is
my  reply.


its

Sir,  replied  the  ambassador,  I  know  that
sometimes  ill  counsels  pervert  good  inten-
tions, and  thus  it  is  with  you.  I  shall  de-
part, since  there  is  nothing  more  to  be  done.
You  will  do  as  pleaseth  you.  As  for  the  lady
Targiana,  she  I  know  will  adventure  her
life  to  do  your  will;  which  she  should  not
do,  because  you  retain  in  your  house  him
who  did  so  'great  disservice  to  her  father.
In  so  doing,  said  the  emperor,  he  did  good
service  to  me,  inasmuch  as  thereby  I  have
gained  her  friendship.  I  pray  you  on  my  be-
half, and  with  my  hearty  commendations,
kiss  her  princely  hand,  and  tell  her  she
hath  power  to  dispose  of  me,  in  any  thing
she  taketh  pleasure  to  employ  me.

The  ambassador  made  promise  to  fulfil  his
commands,  and  took  his  leave  little  content
with  the  success  of  his  embassv,  because  its
deceit  had  been  frustrated.  The  emperor,
after  his  departure,  sate  and  conferred  with
his  knights,  well  pleased  with  the  course
which  had  been  taken,  and  still  more  with
Miraguarda,  who  had  been  the  cause  x    all.


176


CHAPTER  lia


The  next  day,  after  the  ambassador  was  de-
parted in  the  afternoon,  as  the  emperor  sate
accompanied  with  divers  and  sundry  of  his
princes,  lords,  and  knights,  he  perceived  to
enter  the  great  hall,  an  aged  man,  so  much
weakened  and  over-spent  with  years,  as  it
seemed  he  was  ready  to  fall  to  the  earth:
He  seemed  a  person  of  some  authority,  and
his  goodly  grey  locks,  and  his  long  milk-
white  beard,  might  have  obtained  belief  for
any  thing  which  from  such  a  seemly  and
father-like  man  proceeded.  All  turned  their
eyes  upon  him  to  hear  his  demand.  When
he  was  come  before  the  emperor,  he  stooped


177

down  to  kiss  his  hand  ;  but  he  not  suffering
this,  assisted  him  to  rise,  and  asked  of  hiw,
what  he  would  have.

Sir,  said  Uiis  aged  man,  with  a  voice  so  faint
and  low  as  very  hardly  could  be  understood,
for  that  your  court  is  always  so  fortunate  as
to  entertain  noble  and  adventurous  knights,
who  arc  ever  ready  to  succour  them  that  be
destitute,  I  have  good  hope  that  they  will
not  refuse  to  afford  me  their  aid,  in  deliver-
ing me  out  of  the  great  affliction  whereinto
by  misfortune  1  am  brought.  These  heavy
and  sad  speeches  he  accompanied  with  such
abundance  of  tears,  as  seemed  sufficient  to
give  colour  to  what  he  said.  I  beseech  your
highness,  said  he,  that  with  that  royalness  of
mind  wherewith  you  ever  assist  the  unhappy,
you  would  at  this  time  aid  me  in  an  injury
the  most  great  and  grievous  that  ever  man
endured.  But  because  the  matter  is  of  such
a  nature  that  I  cannot  say  more  without
great  danger,  I  pray  you  to  bestow  on  me
the  knight  in  whom  you  have  most  confi-
dence, and  1  will  bring  him  into  the  place
where  he  may  not  only  remedy  my  sorrow.


m

but  a-No  atchieve  such  rare  renown,  as  per»
adventure  he  hath  nor  yet  attained.  The
emperor  replied,  Good  sir,  albeit  in  such
affairs,  no  person  ought  lightly  to  be
trusted,  yet  such  is  the  pity  which  I  take
to  see  your  tears,  and  great  old  age,  that
it  maketh  me  depart  somewhat  from  my
wonted  way  ;  for  I  do  not  think  there  can
be  deceit  in  those  grey  hairs.  This  knight
which  you  see  standing  by  me  is  called  Flo-
rian  of  the  Desert  :  some  name  him  the
knight  of  the  Savage  Man,  he  is  my  grand-
son, and  one  in  w  horn  I  put  the  gr<
trust  ;  let  him  accompany  you  upon  this
clanger,  the  greater  it  is,  the  more  you
will  need  him.

The  aged,  man,  seeing  the  marvellous  cour-
tesy of  the  emperor,  fell  down  before  him,  and
would  have  kissed  bis  feet,  saying,  It  is  not
in  vain  I  see,  most  famous  emperor,  that  your
surpassing  bounty  is  so  blazed  abroad.  The
uttermost  1  have  heard  in  its  commendation,
hath  rather  been  sparing  speech,  than  suffi-
cient. He  of  the  Savage  kissed  the  emperor's
band  for  having  charged  him  with  the  adven-


m

ture,  and  as  the  old  nian  urged  Kim  to  be
gone  aimed  himself  presently,  and  depart-
ed '  from  the  court  in  such  great  has'te'as
he  had  not  leisure  to  take-  leave  of  the
empress  and  his  other  friends.

The  emperor  fell  into  questioning  with  the
knights'  of  his  court,  if  any  of  them  did  know
that  anci<  nt  man;  but  not  one  of  them  all
could  report  of  whence,  or  what  he  was.
Primak  on  marvelled  at  the  trust  which  he
had  reposed  in  him,  not  knowing  first  what
thejidvent lire  was.  That  same  day  Beroldo,
the  prince  of  Spain,  Platir,  Blandidon,  Pom-
pides,  Graciano,  Polihardo,  Roramonte,
Al  banis,  Don  Rosuel,  and  the  other  re-
nowned knights  who  were  present,  departed
to  follow  Florian,  for  that,  they  feared  least,
any  evil  should  happen  tó  him,  under  the
guileful  dealings  of  this  aged  man.

With  this  the  court  remained  desolate,  and
the  emperor,    perturbed    in   mind,    fearing
some  sinister   chance.     He   of  the   Sa
rode  on,,  in  the  company  ol"  his  aged   guide,
all  the  remainder  of  the  Jay,  and  all  night.


180

till  toward  day-break,  when  they  let  their
boises  feed,  and  took  a  little  rest  ;  but  the
old  man,  to  whom  all  repose  was  irksome,
made  him  presently  mount  again.  When
the  clay  was  far  spent  they  came  in  sight  of
a  castle,  on  the  top  of  a  rock,  a  strong
and  goodly  fortress  in  the  eyes  of  them  that
did  behold  it,  at  the  foot  whereof  a  river
of  much  water  had  its  course;  there  was  no
Ford,  and  they  must  cross  it  in  a  little  boat,
wherein  two  men  could  hardly  pass  at  one
time.  The  old  man  alighted  from  his  horse,
and  said,  You  see,  sir  knight,  if  we  venture
ourselves  together  in  this  little  boat  we
should  expose  ourselves  to  needless  danger,
from  which  it  behoves  me  especially  to  save
you,  that  you  may  be  reserved  for  that
whereto  I  am  conducting  3-ou,  wherefore  I
pray  you  that  you  will  alight,  and  you  for
the  most  security  shall  pass  over  alone  ;  then
your  squire  and  I  will  come  one  after  ano-
ther, and  bring  with  us  the  horse.s;  otherwise
the  peril  is  certain,  and  the  passage  doubtful.
It  is  so  much  more  fitting,  replied  he  of  the
Savage,  to  err  by  the  advice  of  one  whose
long  age  bath  had  experience  of  many  things.


181

than  to  do  right  by  that  of  those  who  have
had  none,  that  were  there  no  other  reason  I
would  follow  your  counsel  ;  especially  as
there  seemeth  no  other  remedy  :  though  in
this  haste  with  which  vou  make  me  travel  I
am  sorry  to  rind  so  slow  a  passage.  At  these
words  he  dismounted,  and  entered  into  the
little  boat,  bidding  the  boatman  row  across;
but  seantly  had  he  attained  the  middle  of
the  water,  when  suddenly  such  a  black  and
ugly  cloud  overshadowed  him  that  lie  lost
sight  of  those  on  land,  and  they  of  him,
which  when  tiie  squire  perceived,  he  was
about  to  lea[)  into  the  water  to  follow  his
lord;  but  as  he  was  in  this  desperate  intent,
he  espied  a  great  hill  before  him,  covered
with  snow,  which  seemed  to  rise  between
him  and  his  master.  Upon  this  he  turned  to
the  old  man,  but  he  was  gone,  he  knew  not
how  ;  then  the  squire  knew  that  the  tears
which  this  aged  man  shed  in  the  presence  of
the  emperor,  were  to  no  other  end  but  only
to  shado.v  the  treason  which  he  went  about.
So  there  he  stood  musing  a  great  while,  and
after  he  had  canvassed  out  a  thousand  ima-
ginations, he  concluded  to  search  his  ma
VOL.  III.  k


182

about  all  those  parts,  and  if  it  were  not  his
fortune  to  find  him,  he  would  then  return  to
the  emperor's  court  to  make  known  the  un-
fortunate loss,  to  the  end,  that  his  friends
might  take  upon  them  to  go  in  quest  of  him.

When  ho  ol  the  Savage  had  past  the  river,
the  cloud  which  before  had  covered  him,  re-
mained upon  the  boat  and  concealed  it  from
his  sight.  "But  as  nothing  could  make  him
fear,  though  he  was  well  aware  that  here
there  was  something  to  be  feared,  he  began
to  advance  himself  towards  the  castle,  every
thing  being  clear  on  that  side;  the  rock  was
high  and  troublesome  to  climb,  and  the  ar-
mour he  had  on  being  weighty  withal,  he
was  constrained  to  rest  himself  three  or  four
times  by  tbe  way,  so  that  it  was  night  before
he  reached  the  top.

Then  the  castle  gates  were  opened,  and  four
damsels  came  out  with  lighted  torches,  who
took  him  between  them  and  led  him  in  ;  and
as  they  were  fair  women,  and  received  him
with  courteous  welcome,  and  he  was  wçll
inclined   to  disport  with  such  companions,


183

he  went  in  gladly,  never  remembering  dan-
ger, nor  deeming  that  there  could  be  any.
Sometimes  he  fixed  his  eves  on  one,  some-
times on  another,  his  inclination  leading  him
to  all,  as  is  natural  to  men  of  so  free  a  con-
dition. Thus  talking  with  them,  he  entered
the  castle  court,  which  was  paved  with  black
stones,  and  from  thence  ascended  to  a  large
and  ill-built  hall,  made  after  the  ancient
manner,  where  a  damsel  came  to  receive
him,  who  was  accompanied  by  other  dames
and  damsels.  She  was  of  giantly  appear-
ance not  only  in  height  of  stature,  but  also
in  the  greatness  of  her  limbs,  for  all  was  in
proportion  ;  about  the  age  of  sixteen,  ugly,
and  yet  withal  graceful;  in  the  dress  and
adornments  of  her  person,  ef  much  manne1*
and  yaiety.  She  approached  the  knight  of
the  Savage  and  took  him  by  the  hand,  re-
ceiving him  with  as  honourable  a  welcome
as  could  be  shewn  to  the  person  in  whose
hand  was  her  life's  remedy,  and  led  him  into
a  chamber  of  the  same  faâhioQ  as  the  hall,
and  hung  with  rich  tapestry.

lie  of  the  Savage  then  took  eft  iiis  helmets
r2


184

and  being  somewhat  heated  with  the  ascent,
he  appeared  so  fair  a  person,  that  the  lady
could  not  help  resenting  an  amorous  incli-
nation towards  him;  whereat  she  was  greatly
offended  with  herself  that  she  should  feel
such  weakness  in  her  towards  a  man  who
had  done  her  so  much  evil.  Yv'ith  this  in-
dignation, and  calling  her  strong  heart  to  aid,
she  subdued  that  first  emotion,  and  feigning
words  to  content  him  and  dissemble  hatred,
said,  Sir  Knight,  my  heart  till  now  hath
always  been  troubled,  for  a  grievous  injury
which  hath  been  done  me,  whereof  I  had  no
hope  to  be  revenged  :  now  that  I  have  you,
methinks  1  have  all.  I  pray  you  that  you
will  now  go  rest  yourself,  for  your  travel  doth
require  some  ease — to-morrow  I  will  recite
the  cause  wherein  1  stand  in  need  of  you.

Lady,  replied  he  of  the  Savage,  fixing  his
eyes  upon  her,  if  I  ever  at  any  time  thought
myself  indebted  to  any  one,  most  especially
do  I  feel  bound  to  him  that  conducted  me
hither  ;  for  that  it  should  be  my  good  fortune
to  do  you  any  service  I  account  of'  so  great
honour, -^at  it  grieves  me  my  life  should  be


1S5

of  no  greater  value  than  it  is,  to  hazard  it  in
any  peril  for  your  sake  :  though  in  sooth,
the  greatest  peril  which  could  betide  me  I
see  present,  and  hold  all  others  as  little
when  compared  with  it.

The  lady,  who  was  little  pleased  with  such
language,  said  in  reply:  Now,  sir,  it  is  hue;
sup,  and  retire  to  rest  ;  in  the  morning  we
will  discourse  of  what  is  to  be  done  ;  and
then  she  took  leave  with  all  the  courtesy
which  hatred  and  deceit  could  feign,  and  left
him  and  went  to  her  apartment.

The  knight  of  the  Savage  remained  well
contented,  seeing  how  well  she  had  suffered
his  speeches  ;  hoping  that  thus,  by  little  and
little,  he  should  compass  his  desires;  for
though  the  damsel  was  not  a  fair  woman,
yet  the  disposition  of  her  person,  the  form
of  her  limbs,  the  greatness  of  her  body,  and
her  singular  grace  and  air,  made  him  affect
her,  thinking  that  if  he  might  have  a  son
by  her,  Tic  would  needs  be  capable  of  great
things.  W  nil  these  thoughts  be  seated  him-
■f'.ï  at  the  table,  where  he  was  served  by  the
R  3


166

damsels  that  gave  him  entertainment  at  the
castle  gate:  one  among  them,  who  served
him  with  the  cup,  was  so  much  fairer  than
the  rest,  that  she  presently  made  him  forget
the  lady  of  the  castle,  it  bemg  his  way  al-
ways to  love  her  who  was  present.  So  talk-
ing with  her  and  with  the  others,  the  supper
past;  and  that  being  done  they  led  him  into
a  rich  and  well  concerted  bed-chamber,
where  they  all  assisted  him  to  undress  ;  and
at  last  when  they  took  their  leave,  she  who
had  served  the  cup  approached  him,  saying,
Sir  Knight,  if  time  and  place  did  not  pre-
vent, you  should  well  perceive  the  good  will
J  have  to  serve  you  ;  but  since  at  present  I
can  do  no  more,  receive  from  me  this  ring,
a  jewel  which  I  greatly  esteem,  and  let  it  be
the  pledge  of  another  which  I  desire  to  give
you,  of  far  greater  value.

So  concluding,  she  left  the  ring  in  his  hand,
and  not  attending  answer,  departed  after
the  other  damsels.  He  remained  well  pleased
with  this  language,  and  when  he  had  lain
down  put  the  ring  on  one  of  his  fingers  on
his  left  hand  ;  but  incontinently  he  was  de-


187

prived  of  all  sense,  for  the  ring  had  heen
made  for  this  purpose,  and  there  was  a  stone
in  it  of  such  virtue,  that  he  could  not  reco-
ver his  senses  till  it  were  taken  olf.  Imme-
diately Arlanza,  for  so  the  damsel  giantess
was  called  who  was  the  lady  of  the  rest,  cam.
with  them  all  into  the  chamber;  and  seeing
him  in  this  mortal  plight,  she  said,  Methinks,
my  friends,  our  journey  is  not  in  vain  ;
henceforward  my  mother  Colambar  may
live  contented,  having  it  in  her  power  to
take  such  full  revenge  and  satisfaction  for
the  death  of  her  sons  Bracolan  and  Baleato,
and  Calfurnio  and  Camboldam  also,  all  my
brethren.  Then  she  cast  her  eyes  upon  him,
and  seeing  how  young  lie  was,  said,  Certes  I
know  not  how  such  feats  can  have  been  per-
formed in  such  tender  years,  nor  can  1  be-
lieve it  possible,  unless  the  favour  of  the
gods  had  been  on  his  side  :  nor  is  this  to  be
doubted,  for  the  nature  of  this  man,  accord-
ing to  his  beauty,  is  conformable  to  theirs  ;
wherefore  I  believe  he  hath  some  affinity  with
them;  and  I  could  pardon  him  if  the  injury
which  he  hath  done  inc  were  any  thing  Je?s
than  it  is.     But  who  could  resent  so  little  the


188

death  of  four  such  brethren,  and  the  joy
which  my  mother  and  theirs  will  receive,  at
seeing  in  her  power  the  slaver  of  her  sons?
Of  a  truth,  old  hatred  and  pit  scut  love,
arising  from  the  sight  of  his  beauty,  were  at
that  hour  struggling  within  her.  And  though
love  had  on  its  side  her  green  youth  and  the
presence  of  Florian,  yet  long  hatred,  and
the  blood  of  her  brethren  which  was  then
present  to  her  memory,  prevailed.  And  as
women  for  the  most  part,  when  they  have
once  determined  upon  a  thing  are  eager  to
put  it  in  effect,  she  would  without  delay  have
given  orders  to  cut  off  his  head  ;  but  at  this
time  the  old  man  came  in,  and  dissuaded  her
from  this  intent,  saying,  There  is  nothing,
lady,  now  to  fear  ;  this  knight  is  in  your
power;  do  not  let  the  pleasure  of  his  death
be  yours  alone,  but  reserve  it  for  your  mo-
ther, and  deprive  not  her  of  the  joy  she
will  take  in  seeing  him  die  that  ha: h  cut  off
the  flowers  of  her  honourable  lineage  ;  let  us
embark  him  for  the  island,  and  deliver  him  to
her  alive  as  he  is,that  she  may  determine  how
and  in  what  manner  he  shall  die,  as  her  grief
and  passion  may  teach  her.


189

Albeit  ray  mind  was  otherwise  bent,  answered
Arlanza,  yet  I  will  follow  your  counsel  ;  where-
fore I  desire  you  early  in  the  morning  to  see
that  the  ship  be  ready,  for  my  heart  will  not
suffer  me  to  be  at  rest  in  this  business.  Hav-
ing thus  determined,  they  left  him  senseless
in  the  chamber,  lying  at  the  mercy  of  his
enemies,  far  from  knowing  his  danger,  and
still  farther  from  being  able  to  remedy  it.


190


CHAPTER   111.


The  history  saith,  that  Colambar,  the  mo-
ther of  the  giants  Bracolan  and  Baleato,
whom  he  of  the  Savage  slew  in  Ireland,  as
hath  been  before  related,  as  she  had  no  other
sons,  and  loved  these  with  the  perfect  love
of  a  mother,  when  she  was  certified  of  their
death,  made  no  shew  of  sorrow,  as  women
commonly  are  wont  to  do,  but  with  a  manly
heart  concealed  so  great  a  griet,  b<  .ng  de-
termined alway  to  seek  all  ways  of  ven-
geance which  time  and  chance  might  offer.
With  this  determination,  she  cast,  about  in
her  mind  a  thousand  devices  to  accomplish
it;  but  when  she  could  find  none  which
seemed  effectual,  she  applied  for  help  to  an
old   knight,  who  had  been  bred  up  by    the


191

giant  her  husband,  and  now  lived  in  another
island,   in   whom   she  trusted  to   find    good
counsel:  for  beside  being  full  of  experience
by  reason  of  his  years,   lie   was    by  nature
wise,  crafty,  and  also  something  of  a  magi-
cian.    When  Alfernao,  as  lie  was  called,  saw
Colam  bar,  he  was  moved  to  take  compassion
on  her,  and   promised    to   help    her    in  any
thing  lie  could  to  take  revengement  on    the
knight  of  the  Savage  Man,  whom  he   knew
by  his   art   to  be  in  the  court  of  Constanti-
nople ;  whereupon  he  said,  Madam,  if  sobe
it  shall  like  you  to  follow  my  counsel,  I  dare
promise  to  make  you  contented.  She  replied,
I  would  not  have  come  to  you  from  so  far  oil",
if  I  had  not  persuaded  myself  on  your  virtue
and  assured  friendship,  being  altogether  mind-
ed to  follow  your  counsel.     Then,  lady,  said
Alfernao,  you  shall  perceive  what  a  platform
I  have  laid.     The  knight  of  the  Savage  Man
is  at  this  present  in  the  court  of  the  emperor
of  Greece,    his    grandfather,   where   he    is
grown  so  amorous  in  love,  that  he  intendeth
not  to  depart  of  a  long  time  from    Constan-
tinople ;  yet    is  he   so  haughty  minded,  that
no  adventure  can  oiler   which   he    will  not


192

lightly  accept.  I  will  go  to  the  court,  and
there  prostrating  myself  before  the  emperor,
in  speeches  very  sad  and  pitifully  couched,
and  with  many  tears,  I  will  earnestly  request
him  to  succour  me  in  affairs  of  great  danger,
whereout  it  is  impossible  for  me  to  escape,  or
help  myself,  without  the  aid  of  one  of  his  best
knights,  even  he  that  is  esteemed  the  hardi-
est amongst  them  all.  I  will  desire  that  1
may  have  no  other,  but  only  him.  This  re-
quest I  know  he  will  not  deny  me,  shadowing
my  intent  with  such  behaviour  of  virtu-  as
I  can  well  enough  ;  and  he  of  the  Savage
will,  I  believe,  of  his  own  courage  ofVer  him-
self; but  though  the  emperor  should  give
me  another,  I  will  so  manage  as  to  have  him  :
and  having  once  gotten  him,  I  will  conduct
him  to  a  castle  which  is  upon  the  frontiers  of
Greece  and  Hungary  ;  but  your  daughter,
the  lady  Arlanza,  must  be  there,  and  1  will
tell  him  that  the  succour  which  I  have  im-
plored is  for  her  ;  and  when  he  is  in  the
castle,  we  will  so  devise  that  one  of  her  dam-
sels shall  put  into  his  hand  your  ring  of
sleep,  which  the  lady  Arlanza  shall  take
with   her  for  that  purpose  ;  and  when  he   is


193

overcome  by  ir,  and  deprived  of  all  sense
and  all  strength,  we  will  bring  him  to  you,
to  receive  such  due  reward  as  you  shall
think  yourself  contented  withal.

My  friend  Alfernao,  replied  Colambar,  I
knew  well  that  the  remedy  of  my  borrows,  and
the  vengeance  formy  children  Jay  altogether
in  you  :  this  which  you  offer  is  so  great  a
thing,  that  I  know  not  wherewith  to  repay
you  ;  and  since  such  true  loyalty  cannot  be
requited  as  it  deserves,  [  beseech  you  accept
for  guerdon  the  true  desire  which  you  know
I  have  to  be  grateful.  I  consent  to  what  you
propose,  believing  that  such  perfect  prudence
cannot  do  anything  amiss.

Then  she  presently  prepared  a  ship,  wherein
her  daughter  was  embarked,  accompanied
with  four  damsels  and  as  many  knights,  the
wind  and  sea  serving  them  so  well,  as  in  ïcw
days  they  took  landing  not  far  from  the
castle,  in  whioh  the  ancient  knight  Alfer-
nao  left  her  with  her  company,  and  took  his
way  to  the  court  of  the  emperor  of  Greece  ;
from  whence,  by  the  subtle  means  you  have
vol.  in.  s


194

beard,  he  brought  him  of  the  Savage.

then  to  retain  :   That  night  being  past,   on

the  following  morning,  as  soon  as  it  was
break  of  day,  they  put  their  prisoner  in  a
litter,  fearing  lest  he  might  be  seen  anti
known  of  any,  and  carried  him  to  the  port
where  their  ship  was  awaiting  them.  1
having  embarked,  the  mariners  hoisted  their
sails,  and  having  a  pleasant  gale  of  wind,
they  committed  themselves  to  the  mere}7  of
the  seas,  well  contented  that  they  had  sped
so  well,  and  taken  their  prize.

TIerc  the  history  leaveth  him,  and  returneth
to  his  squire,  who,  when  he  had  lost  his
master,  and  perceived  the  deceit  which  had
been  wrought  him,  took  the  way  to  Constan-
tinople, not  meeting  any  person  all  that  day
from  whom  he  could  enquire  any  thing.  On
the  next  day,  as  he  passed  over  a  forest,  he
perceived  a  knight  come  forth  from  under
the  trees,  where  he  had  that  night  >lept  ;  he
was  richly  armed,  having  in  hi;  shield,  which
was  borne  by  his  squire,  a  golden  tyger  in
a  field  of  vert  ;  whereupon  he  presently  rode
to  the  squire,  whom    when  he  beheld,   he


IDS

knew  that  it  was  Selviam,  and  the  knight
before  him  to  be  Palmerin  of  England  :
forthwith  he  went  to  him,  with  the  tears
trickling  down  his  cheeks,  and  said,  Sir.,
albeit  the  news  1  have  to  declare  unto  vou
of  your  brother  Flori  an  be  not  such  as  I
would  they  were,  yet  do  I  rejoice  to  re-
late them  to  you,  rather  than  to  any  other
person,  being  persuaded  that  it  is  in  you  to
remedy  all  misfortunes.  Then  discoursed
he  the  whole  circumstance  of  the  matter.
Palmerin  tuld  him  to  bring  him  presently  to
the  plaee  ;  he  being  grievously  passionate,
as  well  for  die  mishap  which  had  befallen
hi>  brother,  as  also  for  the  interruption  of
his  journey  to  Constantinople,  to  which
place  his  earnest  affection  called  him  :  In
this  troubled  state  of  mind,  he  foil
the  squire,  using  as  speedy  diligence  as
might  he,  for  fear  of  whit  migVu  happen  to
In,  brother;  and  they  arrived  on  the  next
day  about  even  tide,  in  sight  of  the  castle,
and  entered  the  valley  through  which  the
river  ran.  This,  sir,  said  the  squire,  is  th<
lucky  place  w  Ik  re  I  tosl  the  knighl  of  the  Sa-
vage M  an,  my  noble  master.  Cursed,  qnoth  he
s  3


196

ci  the  Tyger,  may  they  be  that  were  the  first
inventors  of  enchantments,  which  have  been
the  overthrow  of  many  a  good  and  hardy
knight,  and  have  made  wretches  and  cowards
to  triumph  in  their  misfortune.

Then  they  came  down  to  the  river,  where
they  could  find  neither  boat  nor  boatman.
So  they  went  along  by  the  river-side,  till
they  came  to  a  place  where  the  water
parted  into  two  channels,  which  presently
joined  again,  leaving  an  islet  in  the  midst.
As  he  of  the  Tyger  was  about  to  try  the
ford,  a  knight  called  out  to  him  from  the
other  side,  who  wore  over  his  armour  skins
of  wild  beasts  which  he  had  slain,  and  a
hunting  sword  suspended  by  a  belt  of  the
same.  Sir  Palmerin,  said  he,  do  not  think  of
passing  here,  the  water  is  deep  and  the
bottom  strong.  Proceed  higher  up  the  river,
and  I  will  shew  you  a  better  ford.  At
this  Palmcrin  stayed  his  horse,  to  think
what  he  should  do  ;  but  noting  the  knight
well,  he  perceived  that  it  was  his  brother
Daliartc.  Then,  not  acquainting  the  squires
with  this,  he  dismissed  Florian's,  who  was


197

no  longer  necessary,  and  whose  presence
was  a  restraint,  upon  him,  bidding  him  go
to  the  emperor's  court,  and  wait  there,
where  he  should  sooner  hear  tidings  of  his
master  than  in  any  other  place.

The  squire  would  have  gladly  kept  hi:n
company,  but  he  would  in  no  wise  suffer
him  ;  so  he  went  his  way,  and  he  of  the
r  went  up  the  valley,  till  in  a  small
time  be  came  to  a  place  where  the  river
spread  itself  widely  over  the  shore,  and  he
of  the  Skins  calied  out  to  him  to  cross,
for  he  would  find  no  better  ford.  And
though  that  was  the  safest  place  of  pas-
sage, yet  the  horses  were  som<  times  fain
to  swim;  but  having  past  the  force  of  the
stream,  they  gained  to  the  other  side  with
little  difficulty,  and  the  knight  of  the  Skins
o  fie  red  to  take  his  horse  from  him  of
the  Tyger,  who  must  needs  dismount  to
dry  himself.  But  he,  who  would  not  per-
mit himself  to  be  treated  with  this  courtesy,
leapt  off,  and  took  him  in  his  arms,  saying,
Who  would  have  thought,  sir  brother,  in
such  a  time  of  need,  and  in  so  uncertain  an

c    n
S    kJ


193

adventure,  to  find  so  good  a  guide  !  Now
do  I  lose  all  fear,  not  thinking  that  i'lorian
my  brother  can  run  any  risk  in  this  land,
seeing  you  are  hen.'.  Sir,  answered  Daliarte,
though  your  heart  teaches  you  to  make  little
account  of  danger,  this  is  not  one  of  those
things  which  are  to  be  lightly  accounted,  for
the  knight  of  the  Savage  -Man  is  in  «neat  and
certain  peril  of  his  life,  and  his  preservation
is  full  doubtful.  I  have  been  so  unlucky  in
this  business,  that  when  I  arrived  here,  he
was  already  carried  away  by  the  strangest
adventure  in  the  world  ;  and  as  by  my  art
I  attained  to  the  knowledge  of  all,  and  there-
by knew  that  his  squire  would  bring  you  to
this  castle,  I  chose  to  wait  for  you,  because
without  me  }Tou  could  have  had  no  informa-
tion concerning  him.  Then  he  said,  howr,
three  or  four  days  ago,  when  he  was  study-
ing his  books,  it  came  into  his  mind  to  look
for  news  of  him  and  of  the  knight  of  the
Savage,  and  how  he  had  discovered  that  an
old  man  had  beguiled  that  knight  from  the
emperor's  court;  and  with  that  he  told
him  all,  even  as  it  had  come  to  pass.


199

It  seems  then,  quoth  the  knight  of  the  Tyger,
that  it  is  needless  to  go  to  the  castle,  or  to  make
any  tarriance  here,  and  that  we  should  -oake
for  the  Profound  Island  without  delay.  l>  't
I  tear  me,  the  hindrances  which  are  thrown
in  one's  way  at  such  a  time  as  this,  and  the
length  of  voyage,  may  give  occasion  for  some
evil  ;  and  if  that  should  betide,  I  know  not
what  after-contentment  could  console  me  for
so  great  a  sorrow.  Sir,  said  Daliarte,  this
is  not  a  thing  which  must  he  left  for  any  ad-
venture which  chance  could  oiler;  for  if  the
knight  of  the  Savage  should  be  lost,  it  would
be  the  greatest  loss  in  the  world,  and  a  grief
which  would  extend  to  many.  There  let  us
go  seek  him,  withotit  resting,  you  by  one
way,  Í  by  another  ;  and  he  who  arrives
first  venture  his  life  for  him,  that  by  one-
danger  we  may  save  another.  I  well  knew,
replied  he  of  the  Tyger,  that  from  so
brave  a  heart  and  so  excellent  a  judgment
as  yours,  nothing  could  proceed  but  en-
couragement and  sjood  counsel  for  those
who  stand  in  need  thereof.  Lot  us  do  as
you  say.  So  they  travelled  along  the  val-
ley till  they  came   to    a    place    where    the


£00

road  divided  into  two,  and  then  tlicy  separ-
ated, as  sorrow  till  as  the  mishap  of  the  knight
of  the  Savage  made  them  ;  for  Jove  when  it
.js  great,  always  occasioned!  great  fear.


iiOl


CHAPTER  112.


After  the  knight  of  the  Tyger  had  parted
from  the  sage  Daliarte,  he  rode  on  all  day
and  all  night,  for  his  trouble  would  not  let  him
rest  ;  and  because  his  horse  at  last,  what  with
the  weariness  of  travelling,  and  the  weight  of
his  armour,  could  go  no  farther,  he  took
Selviam's,  which  was  in  a  state  to  hold  out
something  longer,  saying  to  him,  Sei  viam,
my  friend,  thou  secst  the  fortune  to  which
my  lite  is  offered,  and  as  this  horse  can  carry
ne  no  longer,  I  beseech  thee  go  unto  the
nearest  port  of  the  sea  thou  canst  find,  and
there  take  shipping  to  the  Profound  Isle,
which  in  times  past  belonged  to  the  giant
Bràvorante,  father  to  Caifurnio,  and  there
thou  wilt  find  news  of  me,  if  the  weather  doth


202

not  impede  my  voyage.  If  perud venture  the
news  should  be  bad,  go  then  to  Constanti-
nople, and  say  to  the  lady  Polinarda,  that
though  in  losing  my  life  my  sorrows  would
have  their  end,  yet  would  that  be  no  joy
tome,  for  my  true  contentment  consisted  in
no  other  thing  than  in  the  remembrance
that  I  endured  them  for  her  sake;  and  with
that  thought  I  was  able  to  put  to  flight  all
fears  which  love  or  occasion  presented  to
nie.  But  now,  if  death  should  deprive  me
of  that  good  which  I  enjoy  in  life,  I  know
not  what  consolation  it  would  leave.  I  should
bear  with  me  the  recollection  of  those  sor-
rows witli  the  which  I  was  contented,  and
endure  worse  in  thinking  that  1  had  lost
them.  Howbeit,  if  in  the  other  world  we
retain  the  remembrance  of  what  we  have
left  in  this,  I  will  support  myself  till  Í  shall
see  her  there  ;  for  my  soul  can  enjoy  no  per-
fect rest  while  it  is  not  sustained  by  the  ec*M
templation  of  her  essence.  And  if  souls  be
permitted  then  to  serve  each  other,  mine
shall  wait  for  her; — if  it  be  otherwise,  and
there  be  no  such  custom,  I  will  make  it  so  ;
for  to  so  excessive  a  passion,  this  excess  ought


203

to  be  allowed.     Now  because  my  heart  pre-
sageth  greater  perils  in  this  journey  than  I
have  ever  yet  gone  through,  and  I  know  not
how  it  may  please  fortune  to  dispose  of  me^
I  beseech  thee,   if  this   should  be  my  end,
serve  thou  my   lady  from  that  time  forth,
with  the  same  faith  and  love  wherewith  thou
hast  alway  served   me,    and  expect  from  her
the   guerdon   which  I  cannot  give  thee,  and
the  thought  whereof  troubles  me;  for  affec-
tion so  loyal,  and  faith  so  tried  and  proved,
and  services  of  such  long  time,  ought  not   to
be    recompensed    by  leaving   thee    only  my
wishes  for  thy  requital.     It  cannot  however
be  but  that  she  should  bestow    favours  and
honours  upon  thee,  remembering  what  she
owes  to  me;  and  what  I  owe  unto  you.   E\cn
if  it  should   be  otherwise,    do  not  repine  at
doing  my  will  till  you  see  that  she  marries,
and  another  enjoys  the  meed  of  my  labours,
the  thought  which  of  all  others  makes  me  re-
sent death  the  most.

These  words  brought  with  them  tears,  in  tes-
timony of  what  he  felt  ;  and  though  none  of
his  secret  thoughts  were  hidden  from  Sel-


204

viam,  yet  he  would  fain  not  have  betrayed
such  weakness  at  a  time  when  he  had  need
of  all  his  courage;  and  therefore  setting  spurs
to   the  horse,  he  departed   without   waiting

for  reply.     But  Selviam  him  thus  de-

part, and  remembering  whither  he  went,  and
how  lmle  he  would  regard  any  thing  in  lhe
world  for  the  preservation  of  his  brother,
and  how  doubtful  that  was,  his  heart  was  so
overpowered  with  sorrow,  that  lie  fell  sense-
less upon  the  ground.  Alter  a  \\  hile,  »  hen  that
passion  had  abated,  recovering,  he  L
his  way  ;  and  as  the  weakness  of  his  horse
made  it  slow  travelling,  being  almost  in
despair  of  effecting  the  journey,  he  alighted
and  took  the  reins,  to  lead  him  and  give  hhn
some  relief,  lie  had  not  proceeded  far,  be-
fore he  saw  two  knights  come  across  from
the  left,  whom  he.  knew  by  their  arms  to  be
Beroldo  and  Platir,  and  called  out  to  them
to  wait  for  him.  They  presently  knew  him,
and  seeing  him  in  that  plight,  and  bathed  in
tears,  asked  him  in  fear,  what  the  cause  might
be:  then  he  discovered  to  them  what  had
"befallen  the  knight  of  the  Savage,  and  how
he  of  the  Tyger  was  gone  to  give  him  succour;


205

>nit.  according  to  what  was  known  of  the  land,
if  he  arrived  there  alone  it  would  be  a  miracle
if  he  escaped.  Solviam,  replied  Platir,  the
good  fortune  of  your  lord  is  so  accustomed
to  atchicve  the  impossible,  that  I  do  not  think
he  will  fail  here  :  we  have  seen  things,whereof
other  men  have  despaired,  appear  trifling  in
his  hands.  I  always  thought  ill  of  the  ad-
venture on  which  the  knight  of  the  Savage
left  the  court  ;  but  the  fear  which  I  enter-
tained lor  his  life  is  gone,  now  that  Í  know
who  is  gone  to  succour  him.  Nevertheless
we  will  follow  him  to  see  the  end,  for  if  any
mishap  should  befall,  it  would  not  be  well
that  any  one  should  be  without  his  part
therein.  Come  you  on  as  well  as  you  can,
and  embark  as  soon  as  you  can,  as  we  will
all  do.  W'iih  these  words  they  both  took
of  him,  and  rode  on  luster  than  when
he  met  them.

Now  the  history  saith,  that  the  knight  of  the
Tyger,  after  he  departed  from  Sei  viam,  made
such  dispatch  of  way,  as  at  length  he  came
to  a  little  town  by  the  sea  coast,  where  he
freighted  a  Venetian  galley,  which  had  been
vol.  in.  T


206

Waiting  for  fi  eight  some  days;  and  having
got  on  board  with  nothing  but  bis  arm-.
took  his  way  to  the  island  of  Colam  bar,
whicb  was  much  famed  abroad,  by  reason  of
the  giants  who  formerly  possessed  the  same  ;
forno  vessel  whatsoever  might  take  landing
there  during  the  time  these  giants  lived,  nut
only  because  their  lives  would  have  been  in
danger,  but  also  because  the  duties  which
they  levied  were  insupportable.  Now  afl
there  was  but  little  wind,  this  being  the  be-
ginning of  summer,  they  rowed  alongshore;
but  on  the  third  day  the  wind  arose  so  ex-
treme and  violent,  that  in  the  midst  of  win-
ter it  could  not  be  mote  rigorous;  so  that
the}-  were  driven  to  take  shelter  in  a  bay,
where  divers  other  ships,  being  glad  to
avoid  the  troublesome  tempest,  had  taken
anchor,;  in  one  of  these  ships  was  the  sage
Daliarte,  who  had  been  driven  in  by  the
same  storm  ;  and  this  delay  doubled  their
fear  for  him  of  the  Savage.  Nevertheless,
Daliarte  represented  to  him  that  the  same
wind  which  delayed  them  upon  his  rescue,
must  needs  impede  those  who  were  carrying
him  away  ;  and  so  perad venture  they  might


307

all  at  the  same  time  reach  the  island  of  Co-
lambar.  This  reasoning  somewhat  com-
forted the  knight  of  the  Tyger.  The  tem-
pest endured  all  that  day  ;  on  the  next  it
was  clean  abated,  and  he  left  the  galley,  con-
tenting the  master  thereof  for  his  pains,  and
freigh ted  one  of  those  ships  which  were  in
the  haven  :  but  he  would  not  go  in  the  same
with  Daliarte.  At  this  time  Platirand  Btrol-
do  arrived,  being  on  the  same  adventure  ;  and
they  perceiving  that  the  knight  of  the  Tyger
would  have  none  in  his  company,  embark-
ed themselves  with  Daliarte,  and  setting
forth  of  the  haven  together,  they  kept  com-
pany within  sight  of  one  another  until  the
dark  night  did  separate  them.

Now  inasmuch  as  they  and  their  adventures
will  be  spoken  of  in  due  time,  the  history  re-
turneth  to  the  knight  of  the  Savage  Man,
who  was  carried  away,  as  ye  have  heard,
by  Arlanza,  the  damsel  giantess.  She  and
her  company  sailed  with  a  speedy  pace  OB
tin  sea,  and  with  such  pleasure  as  the  good
success  of  their  adventure  might  occasion.
In    four    days  and    four    nights,    being    su


208

favoured  of  the  wind  and  weather, they  cams
within  the  sight'of  the  island.  But  then,  as  the
good  fortune  of  the  knight  of  the  Savage
would  have  it,  he  being  reserved  for  great
tilings,  the  weather  was  changed  suddenly
with  a  mighty  tempest,  and  many  times  they
were  all  in  doubt  to  be  cast  away  ;  and  in  few
clays  they  were  cast  so  far  from  the  island,
as  the  pilot  could  not  judge  into  what
country  the  wind  had  driven  them,  both
he  and  the  mariners  being  so  overpowered
by  fear,  that  they  knew  not  how:  to  remedy
themselves.  So  they  drove  along  under
bare  poles,  rather  holding  their  death,  for
certain  than  having  any  hope  of  life.  Ar-
lauza,  who  was  in  the  cabin  with  her  dam-
sels, was  in  such  state  that  she  could  not
direct  them  ;  nor  was  there  in  the  whole
ship  one  person  who  could  encourage  the
rest,  except  it  were  Alfernao.  lie,  who  by
reason  of  his  great  age  and  di*cretiou  had
experience  of  many  things,  went  wherever
his  presence  was  most  required  ;  now  to
encourage  the  pilot  to  exert  his  skill,  and
now  urging  the  mariners  to  bestir  them-
selves ;  but  all  was  in  vain,  for  their  hearts


209

did  so  faial,  seeing  so  great  trouble  and  dan-
ger towards  them,  that  the  aid  which  they
should  have  given  to  remedy  it  was  not  of
any  account  at  all  ;  and  their  understanding
did  forsake  them  so  amazedly,  as  they  knew
no  way  to  help  the  perils  extant  before
their  eyes.

Alfernao  seeing  them  so  out  of  heart,  came
to  Arlauza,  and  said,  Take  heart,  lady,  for
all  our  lives  are  in  you.  This  fortune  is  a
thing  of  every  any,  and  as  it  came  sud-
denly, so  it  will  soon  pass.  I  pray  you  come
forth  of  your  cabin,  to  the  end  the  pilot
and  the  mariners  may  behold  you  ;  for  in  see-
ing vou  they  will  receive  a  fresh  encourage-
ment,  and  labour  as  they  ought  to  do.

In  this  order  Alfernao  did  endeavour  himself
to  do  all  things  that  could  be  done  ;  and
Arlaoza  seeing  that  what  he  said  was  good,
wiping  away  her  tears,  would  have  dis-
sembled her  fear,  and  gone  forth  ;  but  when
she  beheld  the  furiousness  of  the  waves
sometime  lifting  the  ship  up  as  it  were  to
heaven,  and  then  throwing  it  down  to  the
t3


CIO

abyss,  the  mast  carried  away,  the  water  like-
wise beating  in  abundantly,  her  heart,  reso-
lutc  as  it  was,  would  not  serve   her,    but  she
went  in  again;  and    being  deadly    pale,  and
not  able  to  sustain  herself,  she  seated  herself
upon  some  cushions,  near  her  damsels,  who
were  bewailing  their  approaching  deaths, and
she    said,  O,   Alfernao,   how    soon    do   evil
deeds  receive  their  reward  !  This  storm  hath
arisen  only  because  of  our  deserts  ;  and  I  be-
lieve certainly,  that  the  divine  powers  aro  de-
termined to  punish   us  for  the   great    injury
and  disloyalty  we  offer,  in  seeking  the  death
of    this   knight,  who,   though    he   slew    my
brethren,  did  only  his  devoir,  slaying  thein
fairly  one  after  another  in    plain  fight  ;   for
which  in   truth    I    do    not   believe   that    his
strength  would  have  sufficed,  if  the  gods  had
not  so  willed  it  to  punish   their   exceeding
cruelty  and  tyranny.     And  we  being  forget-
ful to  sift  the  justness  of  the  cause,  go  about
to  deprive  him  treacherously  of  his  life,  in
revenge  of  whose  innocency   the  anger  of  the
heavens  is  fallen  upon  Us  :  wherefore   1   will
not  let  this  go  farther,  but  will  have  that  ac-
cursed ring  taken  from  him  which  hath  spell"


£11

bound  him,  and  when  he  is  in  his  natural
senses,  let  the  gods  determine  botli  concern-
ing him  and  us,  according  to  their  pleasure,  ~;

So  rising  with  this  determination  before  her
words  were  well  ended,  she  ordered  the  door
of  the  cabin  to  be  opened  wherein  the  knight
of  the  Savage  lay,  littJe  weening  the  peril  in
which  his  life  then  stood  ;  and  taking  the
ring  off  his  finger,  he  awoke,  and  finding
him6elf  in  a  ship  on  the  sea,  surrounded
with  women,  and  with  lamentations  on  all
sides,  astonished  at  seeing  himself  in  such  a
place,  he  went  out.  And  when  he  saw  how
the  furious  waves  of  the  water  did  toss  and
turmoil  their  bark,  and  how  the  pilot,  the
mariners,  and  every  one  in  the  ship,  their
hearts  were  dead,  because  they  knew  no  way
how  to  help  themselves,  he  began  with  noble
words  to»  cheer  and  encourage  them,  and  then
to  drive  them  on  with  threats.  Much  was  he
abashed  to  sec  himself  in  such  a  place,  where
it  was  the  least  part  of  his  thoughts  to  have
conic,  and  how  he  came  so  embarked  from
the  castle,  where  the  damsels  came  and  cn-
t.  named  him.  so  exceeding  friendly  at  the


212

gate.  This  strange  adventure  made  him  de-
mand how,  and  after  what  son,  be  chanced
thither;  but  the  danger  which  he  saw  immi-
nent before  his  eyes,  w<  uld  not  afford  him
go  much  leisure,  but  compelled  him  to  settle
his  thoughts  on  that  which  was  more  neces-
sary. Then  he  continued. urging  them  on
all  day,  and  when  night  came,  the  storm
seemed  somewhat  to  abate,  and  they  b«
to  take  courage.  Ji<  of  the  Savage  then  re-
pared  to  Atlanta's  cabin,  and  seeing  her  still
overcome  with  fear,  seated  himself  by  lier,
and  said,  Tear  not,  lady,  these  little  disasters,
but  leave  fear  for  him  who  is  conquered  by
your  beauty,  and  who  has  therefore  need  to
fear.  The  storm  tx  comes  less  and  less  ;  dry
then  your  tears,  such  eyes  as  yours  ought  not
to  be  dimmed  by  them  :  that  others  should
weep  for  you  were  just,  but  that  you  should
weep  for  any  thing,  is  what  I  cannot  con-
sent to.

Arlanza  did  not  take  her  eyes  from  him  all
the  while  he  was  speaking;  and  though  she
well  knew  that  her  beauty  was  not  worthy
of   such   commendations,  yet  was   she  de-


213

lighted  with  this  flattery,  as  is  the  nature  of
women.  Seeing  too  how  {'air  a  man  he  was,  and
how  he  sought  to  comfort  her,  and  remem-
bering at  the  same  time  how  she  had  de-
ceived him,  and  to  what  end,  the  death  of
her  brethren  had  not  such  power  over  her,
bait  that  hatred  was  converted  into  love.
The  knight  of  the  Savage  perceived  this  by
lier  looks  and  other  symptoms,  whereat  Al-
fernao  became  desperate,  thinking  now  that
his  whole  practice  was  defeated.

The  night  being  spent,  at  the  break  of  day
the  tempest  calmed,  the  morning  became
dear,  and  the  pilot  gave  them  to  understand
they  were  on  the  coast  of  Spain,  which
greatly  displeased  Alfernao.  As  the  day
brightened,  they  found  themselves  in  sight
of  the  city  of  Malaga,,  which  in  those  days
belonged  to  the  Moors.  Then  he  of  the
Savage,  taking  Arlanza  by  the  hand,  led  her
out  of  the  cabin,  and  took  her  upon  the
forecastle  to  shew  her  the  land.  And  when
they  were  seated]  there,  he  besought  her  that
she  would  tell  him  why  he  had  been  put  oa
board  that  L-hip  without  knowing  it,  and  how


214

it  un.-   that  he   had  rei,  I    n   man?

without  recollection, whick)  lie  hsd  not  asked
before  for  fear  of  displeasing  her.

Sir,  quoth  she,  since  my  fate  will  so  have  it
that  I  can  be  no  longer  your  enemy,  I  will
tell  you  the  truth  of  what  you  ask,  for  love
hath  brought  me  into  such  estate,  that  I
cannot  conceal  it.  '1  hen  she  recounted  to
him  who  she  was,  and  the  whole  as  it  had
happened.  Certes,  lady,  he  replied,  the  de-
sire Í  felt  to  do  you  service,  did  not  deserve
this  guerdon  ;  but  I  hold  it  now  still  better
employed,  since  after  having  run  such  extreme
peril,  i  have  your  good  will  on  my  side  to
acknowledge  my  deserving».  Nevertheless,
though  this  be  the  case,  I  know  not  how  I
can  sleep  in  security,  having  Alfernao  here,
who  came  so  far  to  beguile  me  so  craftily,
and  your  knights  who  ate  at  his  obedience.
A\  hat  have  1  to  expect,  but  that  they  will
endeavour  to  destroy  me,  for  your  mother's
satisfaction;  What  then  I  beseech  of  you
is,  that  you  give  me  leave  to  arm  myself,  and
dispose  of  them  as  I  think  good;  and  for
what  respect  yourself,  be  sure,  that  while  my


eu

life  lasts  1  shall  always  acknowledge  what  I
owe  to  vou,  that  I  may  requite  it  and  serve
you  in  whatever  is  most  to  your  honour  and
pleasure.  Sir,  she  replied,  when  I  disclosed
this  deceit  to  you,  it  was  with  no  other  de-
termination than  that  of  being  wholly  at  your
sal.  In  recompense  whereof  I  pray  you
remember,  that  I  lose  my  mother,  my  patri-
mony, and  above  all,  am  exposed  to  the  com-
mon bruit  of  ill  report,  that  1  sold  the  blood  of
my  brethren,  placing  my  affections  upon  him
who  -lew  them,  and  who,  peradventure,  hath
placed  his  elsewhere.  Lady  mine,  said  he  of
the  Savage,  do  not  think  that  in  this  you
have  lost  any  thing;  the  loss  of  your  mother
cannot  be  called  a  loss,  considering  what
her  works  are.  Of  the  patrimony  wl  :  h  you
should  inherit  from  your  father,  none
disinherit  you,  for  if  1  live,  you  shall  enjoy
this  and  greater  than  this;  and  as  time  must
prove  the  truth  of  this,  I  will  not  say  any
farther.

A\  bile  they  were  thus  talking  he  heard  I
in  the  ship  ;  and   leaving  her,   went    into  his
cabin.    Arlanza  followed  to  help  iu  arm  him.
and  ere  he  had  girded  on  his  mail  coat,    Al-


216

fcrnao,  with  four  armed  knights,  came  to
the  door:  for  seeing  him  in  talk  with  the
lady,  and  fearing  what  it  might  be,  he  deter-
mined to  lay  hands  on  him  while  he  was  un-
armed, doubting  that  afterwards  he  might
not  be  able  to  do  it.  He  of  the  Savage  came
forth,  saying,Thc  time  is  now  come,  Alfernao,
wherein  thy  traitorous  dealings  shall  be  wor-
thily reconipenced.

When  lifting  up  his  sword  to  have  smitten
him,  the  others  stepped  before  and  defended
him;  but  as  in  that  hour  the  knight  of  the  Sa-
vage was  full  of  wrath,  and  with  good  cause,
he  gave  no  stroke  but  did  its  business,  so  that
in  short  time  two  were  laid  at  his  feet  ;  the
others  seeing  that  in  flight  there  was  little
safety,  and  despairing  of  obtaining  mercy
from  the  conqueror,  placed  all  their  hope  in
their  own  strength,  converting  despair  into
courage,  fighting  valiantly,  and  believing
that  if  they  did  not  by  main  might  work  out
the  salvation  of  their  lives,  all  other  remedy
was  hopeless.  But  the  might  of  him  of  the
Savage  was  so  much  beyond  that  of  other
men,  that  it  soon  demolished  that  hope;  and


2Î7

having  written  in  his  memory,  and  present
as  it  were  before  his  eves,  the  words  and
tears  with  which  Alfernaohad  beguiled  him,
and  the  damnable  intention  with  the  which
he  had  been  led  away,  he  longed  to  give  him
his  reward.  This  made  him  press  them  so
close  that  he  lopt  off  the  arm  of  one
hard  by  the  shoulder,  and  the  fourth,  for
fear,  leapt  into  the  sea,  and  there  was
drowned,  by  reason  of  the  weight  of  his
annour.

Then  Alfertiao,  «ceing  his  life  in  so  great
danger,  threw  himself  at  the  feet  of  Ar-
lanza,  saying,  Lady,  if  the  faith  and  love
with  the  which  I  have  ever  served  you  and
your  mother,  deserve  this  recompence,  it  is
well  that  you  afford  it  me;  but  if  loyalty
ought  to  be  rccompeneed  as  it  hath  worthily
merited,  then  I  beseech  you  save  me  from
the  fury  of  this  knight,  since  the  same  reason
which  he  hath  for  slaying  me,  you  have  for
preserving  me.

The  damsel  giantess  was  so  amazed  at  the
prowess  of  the    knight  of  the  .Savage,  that

VOL.    III.  I


218

she  had  neither  recollection  left  to  ask  bitty
any  thing,  nor  to  answer  Alfernao.  But  lie,
seeing  him  at  her  feet,  and  her  colour  gone,
forcing  his  inclination  to  content  her,  said
to  her  with  a  smile,  Alfernao  well  knew,
lady,  where  he  placed  his  hope  when  all
others  had  failed  him,  and  since  lie  knew  so
■well,  let  his  discretion  save  him.  Thou  jb  I
trow  that  one  who  hath  spent  all  his  time  in
evil  deeds,  will  yet  commit  some  one  which
will  draw  upon  him  payment  for  all.

Arlanza  thanked  him  well  for  this,  and  Alfei-
nao,  at  her  commandment,  was  put  in  sure
guard,  lest  he  should  practice  any  more
treason.

From  that  time  the  knight  of  the  Savage
treated  Arlanza  with  greater  courtesy  and
love,  being  sensible  of  what  he  owed
her,  and  laying  aside  the  design  with  which
he  had  eyed  her  at  first;  a  change  greatly  to
be  praised  :  for  being  so  given  as  he  was  to
unlawful  desires,  it  was  much  to  be  esteemed
that  he  curbed  them.  And  though  she  had
yielded  up  her  affections  to  him,  yet  was  he


219

minded  to  return  them  not  with  any  short
contentment,  but  with  actions  worthy  of
those  which  he  had  received  from  her,,  as
shall  be  related  hereafter.


U  2


220


CHAPTER  113.


These  things  being  done,  it  was  necessary,
as  there  was  lack  of  water  in  the  ship,  to  go
to  land  ;  whereupon  the  knight  of  the  Savage
not  thinking  that  land  safe,  commanded  the
pilot  to  proceed  farther,  and  the  next  day
ihey  landed  in  a  haven  belonging  to  Recin-
dos  king  of  Spain,  where  they  rested  them-
selves certain  days,  because  Arlanza  and  her
damsels  were  weary  of  the  sea.  Here  Alfer-
nao  desired  leave  of  him  to  return  into  his
own  country,  seeing  he  was  arrived  in  a
place  of  assurance,  and  where  he  had  no-
thing to  fear  from  him.

Alfernao,  replied  he  of  the  Savage,  I  know
that  the  court  of  Constantinople  is  greatly


221

troubled  by  your  means,  and  for  this  trouble
there  is  no  remedy  till  the  truth  concerning,
me  be  known.  You  must  therefore  first  go
to  the  emperor,  to  let  him  understand  what
hath  happened  to  me,  from  the  time  when
you  led  me  away  until  this  present  ;  and
though  your  actions  and  the  dread  of  what
you  deserve  may  make  you  fear  to  do  this,
you  may  go  safely,  for  the  emperor's  cle-
mency is  greater  than  the  crimes  of  any  one.
It  is  moreover  sufficient  for  your  security
that  I  send  you  there,  and  that  it  will  be
known  in  what  I  am  indebted  to  the  lady
Arlanza,  by  whose  merits  you  have  preserved
your  life,  at  a  time  when  you  little  de-
served it.

Sir,  said  Alfernao,  liberty  is  so  highly  es-
teemed, and  so  greatly  desired  by  them  who
are  without  it,  as  sometimes  the  desire  to
recover  it  maketh  him  who  hath  it  not  to
put  his  life  in  great  jeopardy  :  then  seeing
himself  brought  into  such  mishap,  he  cometli
m  Mich  sort  to  repent  himself,  as  he  wisheth
rather  continual  servitude  than  to  recover
liberty  at  such  a  price.

v  3


222

ïn  this  order  it  fareth  with  me  at  this  time*
who  heing  desirous  to  live  out  of  thraldom,
am  content  to  obey  your  command,  vit  not
without  fear?  but  such  is  the  hope  I  have  in
the  emperor's  bounty,  that  I  trust  I  am
then  taking  leave  of  him,  he  said  to  Ar-
Janza,  Lad}*,  what  will  you  that  1  shall  say  to
your  mother,  if  it  should  ever  be  my  fortune
to  appear  before  her  ?

Give  her  to  understand,  she  replied,  that  if
she  will  have  me  to  be  her  daughter,  she
must  lay  aside  her  hatred  to  this  knight,  and
become  his  friend  ;  for  now  she  can  have  no
revenge  for  her  sons,  except  by  losing  her
daughter,  so  that  to  pursue  this  purpose
will  be  to  her  greater  grief.  While  I  am
uncertain  concerning  this,  she  must  not  ex-
pect to  see  me,  but  I  shall  obey  the  com-
mand of  the  knight  of  the  Savage  Man.
Greatly  should  I  esteem  it  if  he  would
place  me  in  the  house  of  the  emperor  his
grandfather,  that  I  might  obtain  the  friend-
ship of  the  many  and  great  princesses  who
are  therein,  and  also  think  that  I  am  then
cleared  of  the  hatred  in  which  I  was  nurst


223

up.  F  rejoice,  answered  he  of  the  Savage
Man,  to  see  you  in  this  mind,  and  shall  fulfil
vour  wish,  if  fortune  does  not  prevent  me.
Vou,  Alfernao,  for  love  of  me,  report  to  the
emperor  in  what  good  mind  thou  didst
leave  the  lady  Arlanza,  and  advise  him  and
the  empress  to  hold  themselves  ready  to  he
her  sponsors,  and  to  look  out  a  hushand  lor
her  against  the  day  of  her  baptism,  such  a
one  as  may  be  according  to  her  deserts  and
my  expectations.

Alfernao  promised  to  fulfd  his  will  and  com-
mandment, and  so  took  his  leave  of  them,
for  his  heart  could  not  bear  to  remain  there
longer.  The  knight  of  the  Savage  Man  so-
journed there  while  he  provided  him  of
arms,  and  then  dismissed  the  pilot  and  ma-
riners, because  he  intended  to  travel  through
the  country  at  leisure,  and  shew  the  things
thereof  to  Arlanza  and  her  damsels.

"\A  hen  all  things  were  in  readiness,  he  set
forward  with  his  fair  company,  and  the  first
day,  somewhat  towards  the  evening,  they
arrived  within  a  fair  and  goodly  valley,  full


224

of  trees  and  fiowco,  where,  coming  near  to
a  pleasant  fountain,  they  espied  where  two
tents  were  pitched,  and  not  far  from  them,
they  beheld  four  damsels  disporting  round
the  fountain,  under  the   shade    of  some  tall
poplars.      Mcihmks,  sir,   said  Arlauza,  yon-
der ladies  pass  their  time  with  greater  plea-
sure than  my  fortune  hath  allotted   me,  who
have  fixed  my  good-will  upon  one  that  hath
placed   his  elsewhere,      lie    of   the   Savage
made  semblance  as  if  he  had  not  understood
her,  and  talking  of  other  things  they   drew
near  the  tents,  which  were  marvellous  rich.
One  of  the  damsels  then  came  up  to  him*
saying,  It  seems  a  strange  thing,  sir  knight,
that  one  man  should  take  upon  him  to  con-
duct tive  damsels.     I  will  give  you  a  piece
of  advice,  if  you  will   take  it,  to  relieve  you
of  this  great  charge.     Even  though  it  were
had  advice,  replied  he,  it  would  not  appear
so,  coming  from  you.     f  beseech  you  do  not
delay  to  give  it,  for  I  cannot  think  it  would
be  reasonable  to  reject  any  thing  from  you.
I  will  tell  you  what  it  is,  quoth  she  :  we  four
are  guarded  here  by  four    knights,  who  will
not  be  long  before  they  come  hither,  with


225

v.hom,  if  you  please,  you  may  try  tlic  joust,
and  which  of  them  shall  hap  to  be  van-
quished, shall  deliver  you  his  lady;  so  that
ir'  you  overthrow  them  all,  you  shall  have  us
all  four;  and  nine,  you  know,  will  be  little
more  trouble  than  five.  If,  on  the  contrary*
they  should  conquer  you,  you  shall  give  them
each  a  damsel,  and  thus  3-011  will  lose  four  of
your  five,  and  still  remain  with  one  ;  so  that
which  ever  way  it  may  fall  out,  you  must  be
a  gainer.

You  have  so  much  grace,  replied  he  of  the
Savage,  that  to  gain  you  I  would  jeopard,
the  adventure  to  lose  myself;  and  time
seems  too  long,  till  I  have  won  you.  See
that  this  confidence  do  not  deceive  you,  she
answered  :  though  I  know  you  so  much  wish
to  lose  your  company,  that  you  would  gladly
compound  for  defeat  to  be  rid  of  them.

At  this  a  dwarf  from  the  top  of  one  of  the
poplars  began  to  sound  a  trumpet,  which  he
did  with  so  high  a  note,  as  it  brought  a  gal-
lant echo  from  the  whole  valley  :  presently
he  of  the  Savage  espied   four  knights  come


226

prancing  along  mv  after  another,  armed  in
white  and  greed  armour,  their  helmets  gilded,
and  upon  them  they  had  fair  garlands  of
flowers,  and  in  their  shields,  which  their
squires  br<  fter  them,  were  pourt rayed

silver  swans  in  a  field  vert.  When  they  were
come  to  ihe  tents,  the  damsel  rehearsed  unto
them  what  had  passed  :  whereupon  one  of
them  answered  her  :  Any  thing,  lady,  should
he  adventured  to  please  you;  but  would  you
have  any  one  risk  the  loss  of  you,  where
nothing  is  to  te  gained?  To  hose  myself  for
you,  and  to  los.'  the  whole  world  for  you,
would  be  but  just  ;  but  to  lose  you  for  no-
thing ought  net  to  be  required,  especially  as
you  have  not  proposed  a  fair  exchange  for
yourself.  If,  replied  she,  yon  wish  to  ex-
cuse yourself  from  the  danger  with  words,
it.  is  well  that  my  terms  be  broken  ;  hut  if
this  be  not  the  ease,  look  how  much  more
yonder  ladies  are  beholden  to  iheir  knight*
who  is  willing  to  accept  the  joust  against
four,  than  we  are  to  the  four  who  refase
to  undertake  it  against  one.  Lady,  said  he,
the  knight  thinks  it  a  worse  grievance  to
have  them  all,  than  to  be  vanquished  and


227

lose  them  ;  and  therefore  he  ventures  upon
the  chance,  because  he  has  so  little  to  lose
and  so  much  to  gain.

It  seems,  cried  he  of  the  Savage,  that  you
do  not  well  know  me.  These  which  1  have
J  shall  keep,  and  those  which  you  have  I
shall  take.  And  the  worse  you  defend  them
the  less  shall  I  be  pleased,  for  I  am  not  con-
tented with  what  costs  little.  Since  you  will
have  it  so,  said  the  knight,  look  to  yourself,
and  I  will  shew  you  your  mistake.

With  these  words  he  clapt  down  the  bearer
of  his  helmet,  and  having  couched  his  lance,
h"  fetched  his  course  against  the  knight  of  the
Savage  Man,  who  welcomed  him  as  he  came  ;
the  knight  brake  his  lance,  he  of  the  Savage
past  on  without  being  in  the  slightest  man-
ner displaced  ;  but  his  encounter  was  given
with  such  force,  that  the  other  went  to  the
ground,  little  pleased  with  what  had  befallen
him,  being  so  greatly  amazed  with  his  fall,
that  he  lay  without  moving  hand  or  foot.
Meihinks,  quoth  he  of  the  Savage  to  the
damsel  with  whom  he  had  made  the  condl-


22b'

tions,  yonder  knight  will  not  defend  his  lad*  j
let  me  know  which  she  is,  and  fulfil  the  con-
dition. She  replied,  You  have  done  vour
devoir  so  well  that  it  would  be  unreasonable
to  deny  you  your  prize,  and  since  the  lot
hath  fallen  on  me,  whom  this  knight  enter-
prized  to  defend,  account  me  from  this  time
yours — I  had  far  rather  be  his  who  know-  to
well  how  to  gain  me,  than  his  who  could
defend  me  so  ill.

By  this  time  one  of  trie  others  cried  to  him
to  prepare  himself,  and  as  his  spear  remained
whole  from  the  first  encounter,  he  employed
it  again  in  this  to  such  effect,  that  the  second
knight  was  sent  to  the  ground,  and  one  of
his  legs  breaking  at  the  ancle,  he  was  unable
to  rise.

The  other  two  knights,  seeing  how  ill  the
joust  turned  out,  and  doubting  they  should
speed  no  better,  ran  both  together  against
him  of  the  Savage  Man,  whose  lance  was
hroken  in  the  last  encounter.  They  both
struck  him  full  on  the  shield,  with  such  force
as  to  pierce  it  with  both  strokes,    but  they


229

could  not  pierce  his  arms.     He  perceiving
his  horse  was  weak,  leapt  off,  and  drawing
his  sword   awaited  them,  saying,  Methinks,
Mrs,  you  do  all  you  can  to  save  yourselves  ;
but  use  whatever  baseness  you  will,  the  dam-
sels will  go  with  ine  at  last,  and  you  will  re-
main with  the  sorrow  of  having  lost  them.     I
wish  you  may  lose   nothing  more! — I  know
not  how  that  may  be,  quoth  one  of  them  ;
but  this  I  knowr,  that   before  you  win  them,
they  shall  cost  you  so  much   that  you   shall
remember  them  as  long  as  you  live,  and  pay
for  the  evil  you   have  done.     And  then  they
alighted  and  came  against  him,  and  began  to
lay  on  on  all  sides.     He  of  the  Savage,  who
thought  little  of  this  danger,  as  one  who  had
gone  through   greater,  received   them   with
such  rigorous    blows,  that  one  of  them  was
soon  brought   to  the  ground,  and  the  other
seeing  his  life  in  such  straits,  thought  rather
of  saving  himself,  than  of  offending  his  ene-
my.     But   now    the  knight   who    had    first
jousted,  and  had  lain  stunned  thus  long,  arose,
ami  mi  ing  such  havock    made   among  his
rompiuiiuus,  and  the  danger  in   which    this
last  stood,  went  to  his  help.     He  of  the  Sa-
vol.  in.  \


830

vage,  seeing  that  he  who  was  hefore  about
to  yield  took  courage  with  this  new  -uc
quickenec^his  blows,  Baying,  I  am  only  sorry
you  bave  not  more  such  succour,  that  I  might
be  belter  pleased  with  my  victory,  and  these
ladies  see  how  ill  they  were-  beí  He

had  scarcely  finished    his  words,  bei'oi
of  them  fell  at  his  feet. with  pnrevrearii
and  the  other  ran  to  tb
them   to  save  him.     Good  coves
taken,  quoth  he  of  the  Savage,  and  it  savel
you;  for  certes   you   would  else  have  p.-
for   the   baseness    which   you   hav.
You, ladies,  mount  your  palfreys,  for  l\
fain  be  gone,  lest  the  love  of  these  men,  and
the  remem!     nice  of  how   much  3
them,  should  make  you  refuse  to  c<
me.    They  who  could  so  ill  d
plied   one,  will  hardly  be  remembered,  ex-
cept to  be   abhorred.     We  are   yours,  and
being  so  will  do  your  pleasure;   deal  with  us
according  to  the  promise  of  your  prowess  ;
and  call  to  mind,  that  it  is  ill  done  to   gra-
tify appetite  at  the  cost  of  another's  honour;
for  the  pleasure  is  short,  and  the  fame  which
is  lost  thereby  can  never  be  recovered.


SSI

Lady,  answered  the  knight  of  the  Savage
Man,  I  am  not  so  accustomed  to  use  discour-
tesy to  women  that  I  should  do  so  by  you.
Win  your  will,  a:)  d  the  wills  of  all  of  yeisw  hat
I  would  fain  do,  and  will  do  you  a  thousand
services  to  win  it.  If'  I  fail,  the  fault  is  my
own.  Then  mounting  them,  he  took  from
the  horses  of  the  vanquished  knights  that
which  seemed  the  best,  and  gave  his  shield
to  one  of  the  squires;  for  every  damsel  had
her  squire.  The  tents  he  left  to  the  four
wounded  knights,  as  some  satisfaction  fos
their  loss.


x  e


232


CHAPTER  114.


After  the  knight  of  the  Savage  Man  had  left
the  valley  where  he  vanquished  the  four
knights,  he  began  his  journey  through  the
realm  of  Spain,  being  well  pleased  with  his
new  company,  though  he  felt  it  some  trou-
ble to  render  due  compliments  to  each  of
them.  His  aim  was  above  all  the  rest,
to  show  most  honour  and  respect  to  Arlanza,
the  damsel  giantess,  bearing  in  memory
what  he  owed  her;  and  for  this  reason,
though  he  had  wicked  intentions  upon  the
rest,  she  was  not  thus  aimed  at.  They  had
not  ridden  far  before,  being  heated  with
exercise  and  with  the  weather,  he  took  off
his  helmet  and  gave  it  to  one  of  the  squires  ;
when  the  damsels  beholding  his  fair  visage,


233

and  how  youthful  and  comely  lie  was  withal,
II  as  of  so  great  prowess,  began  to  feel
new  thoughts  toward  hirn,  far  other  than
what  they  had  first  conceived.  His  eyes  and
words  were  equally  directed  to  them  all,
that  he  might  lose  noue  of  them;  for  they
are  so  jealous  in  these  things  that  any  thing
offends  them,  and  he  was  so  avaricious  that
he  feared  every  thincr.  Anion";  other  things,
he  asked  tlieiu  of  whence  they  were,  and
wherefore  they  had  been  in  the  company  of
those  knights.  One  of  them  replied,  Sir,
since  we  are  to  do  your  will  in  all  things,
we  will  tell  you.  These  ladies  are  named
Armelia,  Julianda,  Sabelia,  and  myself  am
called  Artisia,  all  of  one  city,  called  Arjeda,
which  is  here  hard  by.  Those  four  knights,
whereof  two  were  brethren,  and  so  were  the.
other  twain,  yet  being  so  allied  together  as
they  were  all  cousins  one  to  another,  did  us
service,  with  intent  to  marry  us  ;  and  because
they  knew  that  by  the  licence  of  our  mother,
we  came  oftentimes  to  recreate  ourselves  by
that  fountain,  there  they  came  to  ïcm\  our
eyes  with  such  pleasant  gests  as  they  could
daily  attempt  in  the  forest;  and  that  we  might
x  3


234

be  better  persuaded  of  their  loves,  they
would  oiier  the  joust  to  any  knight  that  passed
through  the  valley,  summoning  them  thereto
by  the  dwarf  which  sounded  the  trumpet;
this  they  did  oftentimes,  and  were  always  the
conquerors,  until  their  fortune  failed  them
upon  your  coming,  and  we  were  unlucky
enough  to  propose  conditions  which  have
made  us  lose  them,  and  also  the  liberty  of
returning  to  our  own  homes.

Ladies,  answered  the  knight  of  the  Savage
Man,  he  who  hath  so  fair  a  show  oi  his  vic-
tory, ought  on  no  account  to  lose  it.  I  well
remember  that  I  may  take  you  with  me,  but
that  I  should  leave  you  behind,  that  is  not
to  be  thought  of.  1  must  wait  till  some  one
conquers  me  and  winsyou  from  me,  though  he
who  is  already  vanquished  by  you,  will  hardly
be  vanquished  by  any  other.  Isow  that  I  am
in  this  country,  I  will  shew  you  the  castle  of
Almourol,  and  the  court  of  Spain,  and  then
any  one  that  is  tired  of  my  company,  may
depart  at  her  own  pleasure.

All  the  damsels  upon  this  thanked  him,  and


a  5o


besought  him  to  do  as  he  had  promised  ;
for  it  is  the  nature  of  women  to  desire  to  see
novelties,  and  go  pilgrimages.  Arlanza,
though  she  also  desired  the  same,  was  sorry
that  it  should  be  with  this  company;  for  her
love  was  great,  and  she  would  lain  not  have
had  it  impeded;

Thus  they  journeyed  till  night  rame  upon
them;  then  they  went  to  a  eastle  near  hand,
where  they  were  entertained.  Here  leave  we
him  and  rheni  together,  and  proceed  to  tell
how  the  knight  of  the  Tyger,  the  fifth  day
alter  he  was  em  harked,  eatne  within  sight  of
the  Profound  Isle  :  the  pilot  knew  the  land,
and  he  gave  thanks  to  God  for  so  fair  a  be-
ginning. Then  taking  the  first  port  they
found,  he  disembarked  his  horse,  armed  him-
self, and  advanced  alone  into  the  island,
which  seemed  to  him  pleasant  and  fertile:
He  had  not  gone  far  before  night  overtook
him,  in  a  place  where  he  knew  not  where  he
should  look  to  find  lodging;  and  being  wea-
ried with  crossing  a  mountain,  he  alighted,
and  took  the  bridle  off  his  horse  to  let  him
graze.     And  here  he  missed  Selviain,  who


236

alway  carried  provisions  against  such  occa-
sions, and  he  regretted  him.  For  they  had  been
bred  up  together,  and  alway  assorted  ;  two
things  which  occasion  more  perfect  love
than  all  others.  So  finding  himself  alone,
and  in  this  lonely  place,  he  was  fain  to  lie
down  upon  the  grass,  using  his  helmet  as  a
pillow  under  his  head  ;  and  there  lie  passed
the  night,  busied  wiih  careful  thoughts,  on
which  he  supt  and  sustained  himself  till  the
morning  came,  earlier  to  his  seeming  than
it  was  wont;  for  thev  who  pass  the  time  in
imaginations  after  their  own  liking,  alway
think  it  shorter  than  it  is.  But  then  calling
to  mind  for  what  he  was  come  into  that  land,
he  arose  and  Jaced  on  his  helmet,  and  hung
his  shield  about  his  neck,  and  mounting  on
horseback  pursued  his  way;  and  he  marvelled
that  so  rare  a  country  should  be  so  little
peopled.  About  the  evening,  he  came  *  here
was  a  little  town,  that  was  compassed  about
with  strong  walls:  into  this  town  he  entered,
and  took  up  his  lodging  in  the  house  of  an
ancient  knight,  who  was  accustomed  to  give
entertainment  to  such  knights  as  bestowed
their  time  in  seeking  adventures;  and  who


S37

seeing  him  without  a  squire  attending  on
him,  came  and  took  his  horse  himself,  and
afterward  helped  to  unarm  him,  using  him
with  bo  great  humanity  as  was  possible.

Here  he  rested  for  the  remainder  of  the  day,
and  lure  he  determined  to  pass  the  night,
that  he  might  inform  himself  from  his  host
concerning  the  things  of  that  country.  So
when  they  were  at  supper,  and  conversing
upon  such  matters  as  occurred,  he  requester!
bis  host  to  tell  him  to  whom  that  island  be-
ed,  and  what  there  was  therein,  that  he
might  report  it  in  other  places  where  he
«■ame  ;  to  which  demand,  the  ancient  knight
his  host  made  this  answer  :

A  on  came  in  good  time,  sir,  to  be  resolved
of  that  ;  if  it  had  been  your  fortune  to  come
hither  a  little  sooner,  your  youth  would  have
been  in  its  last  extremity  of  life.  For  you
shall  understand,  that  in  time  past  a  giant
named  Pravoraunte,  cruel,  ano  lull  of  malice
and  tivaeherv,  was  lord  and  possessor  of  this
island,  and  lie  was  wont  to  set  spies  ataJl  his
ports,  to   inform   him  when  any  knights  cr


damsels  did  arrive,  and  when  any  such  hap-
pened tp  come,  he  woi  -  cruelty;  the

1  ai  lus h<      i  '    >' ■  P  their  live»,  and

the  dams  aldaviilainously  force,  and

by  their  spoil  made  himself  rich.  And  all
the  sv,  ;•:  and  lui. our  of  lus  vassals  waa
expend*  d  for  hi:  piuat  only.  And  when
any  merchants,  by  fortii.ic,  came  to  cast
anchor  in  this  isle,  he  would  compel  them
to  pay  unreasonable  duties:  but  if  they
refused  to  pay  these  imposts,  which  they
knew  to  be  laid  on  them  without  all  right  or
reason,  then  would  he  make  them  ransom
their  lives  and  persons  at  a  price  imposed
by  his  will  and  pleasure.  In  fine,  he  was
cruel  and  tyrannous  above  all  men  that  ever
were  born.  At  length  it  was  his  lot  to  die  in
this  wickedness,  that  in  the  other  life  he
might  receive  the  reward  of  it.  He  thus  dying,
left  behind  him  four  sons  which  he  had  to
issue,  who  were  in  all  things  like  their  father;
the  two  eldest  were  named  Calfurnio  and
Camboklam,  who  being  not  content  to
live  in>  so  small  a  land,  went  to  inhabit  an-
other country,  where  the  gods  flot  sufteriir
their  tyranny,  they  were   stain  by  the  hand


239

of   one   only    knight,    who  was   called    the
knight  of  the   Savage  Man.     We  know  him
here   by  no    other    name,    and    be    i-»    tlfus
called,     for    he     beareth     figured     in     hi-
shield    «i    SaVagé    Man.     It    may    be    you
have  better  knowledge  of  him,  because  you
roam  about  lhe  world.     The   two  other  bre-
thren, who  were  younger,  were  nourished  in
this    island  under  their  mother's   wing;  and
against  her    will,    after  they  judged   them»
selves    able  to  endure  armour,    they  deter-
mined to  depart  hence,  to  revenge  the  deaths
of  their  brethren,  C'alfurnio  and  Camboldam.
With  this  purport   away    they    went,  doing
after  the  manner  of  their  predecessors.    It
so  fell  out  that  they    found  him  whom  they
sought,  tht:  knight  of  the  Savage  Man  him-
self, who   slew   them   both   in   equal   battle,
like  a  brave  and  doughty   knight.     It  seem:»
that   God   made   him  to   be  the  succour  of
many,  and  the  helper  of  these  people,  who  so
long  lived  under  such  tyranny.     The  mother
of  these,  called  Colambar,  could  not  endure
the  grief  she  sustained  for  the  death    oí  her
children,    and    therefore   she    practised   and
compassed  all  devices,  she  could,  thereby  to  get


240

the  knight  of  the  Savage  Man  íntd  her  cus-
tody  ;  and  that  she  might  speed  the  belter  in
lier  close  intent;  she  joined  with  a  m  i^ician,
a    friend    of  bfiffc,  one  that   she    loved    well,
named  Alfernao,  who  is  gone  to  the  emperor*»
court  of  Coiiumtiuojilc,  it  is  rjo.w  Booaue  lime
since;  with  good  hope  to  work  so  craftily,  as
well  he  can,  that  lhe  knight   of  the  Savage.
Man  may  be   brought  hiiher.     And  because
no   occasion    shall   lack    that    may    help  any
thing,  he  hath  taken  with  him  a  damsel  giant_
«sá  named  Arlanza,  that  is  daughter  to  this
Colambar,  and  is  of  young  years   and   good
customs,  accompanied  with  a.  certain  num-
ber of  knights  and  damsels  ;  and  according
to    the   practice    which  they   have  devised,
and  the  assurance    which  Colambar  repose!  h
in  this  Alfernao,  it  is  reported  thai  the  knight
of  the  Savage  Alan   shall  be   brought  here.
And  agaitut  the  day   of  the   saerdiee  which
they  hope  to  make  of  him,  she  hath  assem-
bled in  the  town  wherein  she  resides,  which
is  about  four  leagues  distant,  certain  of  her
friends,  and  also  her  brother,  a  giant,   who
is  young   and  marvellous  cruel  and  strong,
named  Pavoroso,  who  since  he  hath  been  in


241

this  island  hath  by  his  cruelty  renewed  the
days  ol'  his  brother-in-law  and  his  nephew  ;
an  evil  which  appcareth  the  more  unsupport-
ablc,  inasmuch  as  for  some  years  the  people
hud  begun  to  live  in  liberty.  God  therefore
keep  you  from  his  hands,  for  you  are  young,
and  any  mishap  would  be  ill  directed  upon
you  ;  and  God  preserve  him  of  the  Savage
from  craft  and  treason.

Believe  me,  friend,  replied  he  of  the  Tygcr,
I  he  things  which  God  hath  appointed  no  man
may  avoid.  God  hath  willed  that  this  bro-
th» t  of  Colanibar,  where  he  hath  Come
thinking  to  see  the  vengeance  which  he  de-
serves, is  come  to  seek  the  guerdon  of  his  mis-
deeds. The  knight  of  the  Savage  Man  1  know
well;  God,  who  hath  made  him  for  such
great  things,  will  keep  him  from  his  enemies.
I  am  glad  to  know  what  you  have  told  me,
and  to-morrow,  if  my  fortune  will  let  me
find  this  giant,  I  will  try  myself  With  him.
It  may  be  that  God,  wearied  out  with  his
wickedness,  v.  ill  let  him  receive  such  recom-
pilée as  is  meet.  You  say  this,  sir  knight,
replied  his  host,  because  you  know  not  what
vol.  m.  y


242

he  is.  This  giant  is  so  fierce  and  tetaible,
that  lie  would  not  think  much  of  doing  bat-
tle with  ten  knights.  To  adventure  your
youth  in  his  hands  would  not  be  courage —
we  might  call  it  by  another  name.

He  thanked  him  for  his  counsel,  but  not  as

one  who  accepted  it.  That  night  he  took  his
rest  more  contentedly,  seeing  that  he  of  the
Savage  was  not  yet  arrived,  and  he  had  come
with  his  succour  in  good  time.  Early  in  the
morning  he  took  leave  of  his  host,  and  de-
parted ;  and  coining  into  a  forest,  where-
through he  should  travel  to  the  city  where
Colambar  made  her  abode,  he  heard  upon
the  left  hand  the  roaring  of  the  sea.  and  it
came  into  his  mind  that  he  would  go  to  the
shore,  to  see  if  he  could  espy  any  vessel,
wherein  the  knight  of  the  Savage  Man  might
be  embarked  ;  butas  he  rode  that  way,  he
heard  a  great  noise  of  arms,  and  pushing  on
came  to  the  water's  edge.  There  he  espied
a  ship  lying  at  anchor,  and  hard  by  it  ten
knights  maintaining  a  fierce  combat  against
three,  whom  he  knew  to  be  Platir,  Beroldo,
and  Daliarte.  whereat  he  received  fresh  con-


343

tcn'uncnt,  remembering  that  they  were  come
to  succour  liis  brother.  About  twenty  i
from  tlicm  was  a  giant,,  of  bigness  out  of  all
measure,  covered  with  plates  of  black  steel,
which  were  of  great  strength.  He  carried
a  huge  and  heavy  shield,  which  was  bound
with  hoops  of  steel,  exceeding  strong;  and
bore  in  a  field  sable,  some  dark  and  gloomy
trees.  He  rode  a  mulberry-coloured  horse,
and  leant  upon  his  spear,  the  hilt  whereof
rested  on  the  ground  ;  being  withal  so  fierce
and  terrible,  that  the  bare  sight  dismayed  all
who  beheld  him.  He  of  the  Tyger  fixed  his
eyes  upon  him,  and  saw  how,  being  in  great
wrath,  he  called  to  the  ten  knights  to  lay  on
and  kill  the  others,  for  he  should  be  loth  to
[py  his  person  in  so  trifling  an  adventure.
But  the  three  good  knights,  seeing  what  worse
business  i!i-y  had  before  them  when  they
should  have  conquered  these,  did  wonders.
And  truly  the  others  were  a*  much  sustained  by
ihcp!' - nceof  the  giant, as  by  their  own  force.
Nevertheless,  as  their  strength  and  skill  w<  re
different  from  those  of  their  enemies,  they
began  to  wax  faint,  and  fall  for  loss  of  blood.,
or  lor  fear.

Y  1


C44

Thr  giant  seeing  this,  began  to  right  him-
self in  the  saddle,  meaning  togo  help  them,
and  satisfy  bis  ang<  r.     I  !<•  of  the  Tyger,  who

till  now  had  remained  beholding  the  prowess
of  his  friends,  which  was  well  worth v  to  he
seen,  when  he  saw  the  giant  pieparing  him-
self, went  before  him,  fearing  that  hiseoming
up  might  he  hurtful,  and  said,  Why  wouldst
thou,  Pavoroso,  put  out  thy  strength  against
men  who  are  so  wearied  that  they  cannot
resist  thee  ?  Let  them  alone,  and  address
thyself  to  me,  that  as  thy  mortal  enemy
come  to  seek  thee,  and  deliver  this  isle  out
of  thy  cruel  and  bloody  tyranny.  The  giant
stayed  awhile  to  behold  him  that  summoned
him  to  the  combat  in  such  brave  manner;  and
perceiving  that  he  bare  a  golden  Tyger  in
his  shield,  which  the  world  held  in  such
great  estimation,  he  thought  that  the  knight
had  not  thus  defied  him  without  great  confi-
dence in  his  own  deeds  :  and  seeing  that  his
people  were  now  utterly  overthrown,  and  they
who  had  escaped  were  flying  for  their  lives,
he  raised  his  voice  and  said,  I  see  well  that
you  are  far  different  in  valour  from  them  of
i his  country,  and  therefore  rejoice  to  find


something  worthy  to  employ  my  strength.
But  I.  beseech  thee  tell  me,  if  pcradventure
thou  art  of  the  house  of  the  emperor  Palme-
rm,  or  if  either  of  you  be  of  the  lineage  of
Don  Duardos,  or  of  his  sons;  that  would
full  well  content  me,  nor  can  1  believe  that
men  of  such  great  boldness  can  be  of  any
other  stock.  (Jive  me  aïbracias*}  quoth
he  of  the  Tyger,  for  if  you  greatly  desire
to  meet  with  these  men;  litre  you  have
them.  We  are  all  of  that  house.  I  am  the
son  of  Don  Duardos,  and  brother  to  the
knight  of  the  Savage  Man,  and  1  will  requite
thee  for  the  treason  ye  here  have  devised
against  him.

Art  thou  Palmerin,  cried  the  giant,  the  eldest
son  to  prince  J)on  Duardos,  that  vanquished
Dramuziando  and  slewest  Camboldam,  and
didst  win  the  Hidden  Island,  conquering  all
them  that  kept  the  same  ?

Why  dost  thou  ask,  said  he  ?  Marry,  for  that
1  greatly  desire,  said  the  giant,  to  enter  the
combat  with   thee,  in   the  presence   of  my

*  The  mvard  for  bringing  good  nc\ss.

y3


S46

sister  Colambar,  and  to  give  her  some  plea-
sure, in  recompence  for  all  the  evil  which
she  hath  received  from  thy  race.  I  am  he,
replied  he  of  the  Tyger,  and  I  am  right  glad
that  thou  wilt  have  this  battle  performed
there,  that  it  may  be  seen  in  public  how  Qéti
chastiseth  thy  sins.  Well  then,  said  the
giant,  since  it  pleasure  thrc,  wait  till  to-
morrow, for  it  is  now  late,  and  mean  while
will  I  cause  the  mid  to  be  provided  :  and  if
those  thy  companions  would  lie  Kkewise  set
to  work,  I  have  three  nephews,  that  shall
maintain  lhe  combat  against  them  ;  but  1
fear  they  will  excuse  themselves  with  the  la-
bour they  have  gone  through  to-day,  and
with  pleading  that  their  armour  is  broken  ;
as  for  that,  however,  I  will  furnish  them  out
of  the  armoury  of  my  brother-in-law  Bra-
vorante,  with  suits  enough,  from  which  they
may  chuse.  We  stand  in  need  of  them,  re-
plied Beroldo,  and  will  take  them,  that  we
may  not  reject  thy  courtesy  ;  but  though  we
should  have  had  them  not,  we  would  have
accepted  the  combat,  as  well  to  accom-
pany and  do  service  to  sir  Palmerin,  as  to
finish  the  rooting  out  of  all  your  breed.     In


247

truth,  said  he  of  the  Tyger,  I  would  fain  that
our  battle  should  be  ended  first  ;  there  will
be  time  enow  for  this,  if  you  think  good  ;  if
not,  let  it  be  as  you  will.  Sir  Palmerin,  cried
Platir  and  Daliarte,  do  not  do  us  this  wrong.
Remember,  if  you  vanquish  Pavoroso,  his
nephews  will  not  enter  the  field  next  day,  for
fear.  Consent  therefore  to  what  the  giant
proposes,  in  which  you  shall  do  us  a  great
pleasure,  and  all  the  praise  and  honour  will
be  yours  at  last.

Seeing  it  is  your  earnest  desire,  said  the
knight  of  the  Tyger,  let  it  be  so.  The
giant  went  away  as  joyful  as  might  be,  for
he  promised  himself  the  victory  before  the
knight  of  the  Savage  Man  arrived;  and  in
this  joy  he  came  to  his  sister,  who  was  full
sorrowful  because  her  knights  were  van-
quished, as  also  for  the  long  tarriance  of
her  daughter,  fearing  some  mischance,  as
hen  heart  foreboded.  Howbeit,  with  the
coming  of  her  brother  she  was  something
comforted,  and  he  began  to  make  ready  for
the  following  day.  He  of  the  Tyger  re-
mained with  his  friendtS,  and  asked  of  them


248

ia  what   manna  that  battle   haj    chanced
S;r,  said  Dali  arte,  as   this  giant   bath  •

all  over  the  island,  a  .ship  no  sooner  comes
to,  than  out  they  rush  to  a  e  who  may  le  in
it;  which  it  seems  did  not  happen  to  you,
because  they  could  not  be  in  all  places.  v>'  i
arrived  here  just  at  d:  y-bre.ik,  au  d  we  had
not  finished  landing  ear  horses,  when  we
•were  assaulted  by  the^e  knights  and  he
came  himself  to  encourage  and  animate
them  against  us.  We  might  have  been  in
danger  had  you  not  so  happily  arrived  ;
and  since  God  will  have  it  so,  in  like  man-
ner will  he  have  it  all  conic  to  happy  end  :
for  now  it  cannot  be  otherwise,  seeing  that
the  knight  of  the  Savage  hath  not  arrived
bei  o:

In  this  contentment  they  sent  for  food  from
the  ship,  and  dressed  a  little  wound  which
Beroldo  had  received  on  his  arm:  for  that
cause  Palmerin  besought  him  that  he  would
not  adventure  the  combat  the  next  day>
but  he  would  by  no  means  be  persuaded.

Daliarte's  squire   took  his  horse  from  him


249

of  the  Tyger,  and  they  passed  all  that  day
upon  the  shore,  looking  out  if  any  ship
should  appear,  that  they  might  be  as  quick
at  her  landing  as  the  enemy.  When  it  grew
dark  they  went  on  board,  for  they  did  not
hold  themselves  secure  ashore  ;  and  re-
membered that  it  was  folly  to  trust  in  the
faith  of  the  faithless.


'


CHAPTER     US.


The  morning  being  come,  which  was  the  day
of  the  battle,  the  four  knights  left  the  ship,
being  armed  at  all  points,  in  armour  which  was
somewhat  broken  :  so  leaving  the  ship  in  the
custody  of  the  mariners,  they  rode  on  accom-
panied with  their  squires,  who  bare  theirlanccs
and  their  shields,  slowly  towards  the  town,
which  was  about  a  half  league  distant.  Being
come  thither,  they  beheld  at  the  foot  of  some
great  and  noble  dwellings,  a  large  place,  which
was  spacious  and  level,  and  surrounded  on  all
sides  with  scaffolding,  whereon  was  assem-
bled an  innumerable  company  of  people  to
see  the  combat,  for  that  they  judged  it  would
be  the  most,  famous  that  ever  was  fought  in
that  country.  And  they  were  all  well  con-
tented, and  heartily  wished  that   it   mijht


£51

end  in  the  '.iant's  destruction,  though  none
durst  make  manifest  tins  wish  ;  for  thus  it  is,
that  they  who  rule  by  fear  are  flattered  openly
and  abhorred  in  secret.

The  four  companions  saw  that  tliis  was  the
place  of  battle,  an  in  the  midst  of  it.

now   a   I  -   spread  at  a

window  of  the  house,  and  the   giant   came
thither,  leading  hi-;  sister  Colambar   by
harrd.     He  had  on  the  ins  which  he

wore  yesterday  ;  his  head  was  unarmed,  and
albeit  he  were  young,  his  face  was  so  i
and  '■  rocióus  and  terrible,  as  was

sufficient  to  terrify  the  hearts  of  them  that
were  not  accustomed  to  see  such  a  hideous
proportion.  Aucrthough  beside  this  he  was  out
of  all  measure  huge,  yet  had  he  little  the  a  I-
vantage  of  Colam  bar,- who  in  the  bign<
her  liiii bs  and  size  of  her  body,  was  well
nigh  equal  to  him,  but  by  reason  of  her
had  more  wrinkles  in  her  ince,  which  was
ugly  and  black,  and  1.  hei;  eyes  al-

ways seemed  bloody,  and  her  lips  were  thick
and  rolled  back,  su  that  her  leeth  v.
The  giant  made  her  take  her  seat,  and  with


his  hand  pointed  out  to  her  the  knight  of  the
Tyger,  desiring  her  to  take  some  com  fort
for  the  death  of  hersons,  from  the  vengeance
which  he  would  now  give  her  upon  this
enemy, wherewith  she  might  content  herself
till  their  chief  destroyer  was  arrived.  In  the
mean  time,  there  came  an  esquire  of  his  and
ten  serving  men  with  him  laden  with  armour,
into  the  place  where  the  combat  should  be
fought  ;  and  coming  before  the  four  compa-
nions, the  squire  presented  the  armour  to
them,  saying,  The  giant  saith  he  cannot  be
content  to  conquer  knights  who  would  after-
wards excuse  themselves  that  their  misfor-
tune was  for  want  of  armour  f  and  there-
fore he  hath  sent  you  here  choice  of  ar-
mour, that  you  may  take  them  that,  you
shall  think  most  convenient  for  3rou.  He  bids
you  moreover  take  counsel,  and  consider
whether  you  think  it  better  to  yield  to  his
sister's  mercy,  or  to  abide  the  rigour  of  his
hands  and  his  nephews'.  In  my  mind,  said
Platir  to  his  companions,  it  would  not  be
well  to  accept  arms  from  him,  even  though
we  were  without  any  ;  for  it  would  be  better
to  die  for  lack  of  them,  than  to  conquer


253

through  any  assistance  which  he  vouchsafed
lia;  especially  as  ours  are  not  so  much  spoiled
but  we  may  very  well  endure  the  trial  of  this
combat:  my  opinion  therefore  :s,  that  we
should  fight  in  our  own  ;  for  in  this  quarrel
our  good  cause  is  sufficient  to  give  us  the
victory.  I  am  of  this  mind  also,  said  Be-
roldo.  Since  you  think  so,  quoth  Daliarte,  let
the  giant's  me-  :turn,  and  tell  him  this

resolution,  and  that  he  may  come,  for  he  is
wanted  in  the  lists.  A  wise  counsel  you  have
taken,  said  the  squire  ;  for  it  being  certain.
that  you  must  be  conquered,  it  will  be  with
the  less  dishonour.  That,  certainly,  r
Platir,  you  and  yours  who  wish  it,  may  have;
but  we  have  other  hope.

"W  ith  this  bidding  he  went  to  the  giant,  who
being  enraged  at  the  contempt  with  which
they  treated  him,  and  the  confidence
displayed,  his  limbs  shook  for  very  ant  -i ,
and  black  smoke  came  from  hi  nostrils,  and
his  voice  was  hoarse  and  te
leave  of  his  suier,  he  said,  '  ch      m  mo

not  go  from  the  window  vi  lebai  I

which  will  not  be  long,  for  I  shall  have  no

VOL.    111.  Z


Í254

pleasure  in  the  victory  il'  I  do  n  that

you  enjoy  it.  And  then  lacing  on
met,  he  went  to  his  nephews,  who  were
waiting  for  him  ;  they  were  armed  in  black
armour,  conformable  to  their  grief  and  sor-
row, and  in  their  shields,  in  remembrai]
Bracolan  and  Baleato,  their  cousins,  ih<\
bore  dead  bodies  in  a  field  sable,  b<  ing
minded  never  to  change  their  devices  mi-
ni they  had  seen  them  revenged.  With
them  he  went  into  the  field,  being  of  such
exceeding  stature  that  he  overtopt  them
by  head  and  shoulders.  When  the:  people
beheld  so  huge  and  immeasurable  a  monster,
and  his  nephews  also,  linger  than  all  other
men,  strong  and  courageous,  and  having
their  uncle  as  wcll^as  their  own  confidence  to
help  them,  they  lost  all  hope  that  the  knight
of  the  Tyger  and  his  comrades  could  win  the
victory  ;  and  in  truth,  that  which  is  greatly
desired  is  alwav  greatly  doubted.  NoWj
quoth  the  giant,  seeing  how  all  eyes  were
upon  him,  now  I  suppose  you  will  think
it  better  to  yield  than  to  endure  the
battle.  But  this  wisdom  is  too  late  :  pray
to  fortune  therefore  to  help  you  ;  though  I


'255

le  now  not  what  she  can  do  in  your   favour
against  me.

Thou  art  so  proud,  quoth  he  of  the  Tygera
of  the  wonder  which  thou  excitest  among
these  weak  people,  that  it  makes  thee  despise
those  who  have  no  tear,  and  who  will  pulJ
down  this  pride.  Let  us  do  our  battle  ;  the
end  will  be  according  to  the  deserts  of  each.
Since  thou  dost  not  acknowledge  the  favour
I  did  thee,  cried  Pavoroso,  in  giving  thee  a
little  longer  space  of  life,  look  to  thyself,
And  then  he  couched  his  lance,  and  he  and
his  nephews,  with  all  the  force  and  fury
which  their  horses  could  carry,  ran  their
career  with  such  a  thundering  sound,  as  if
the  earth  would  have  opened  beneath  them.
The  four  companions  met  them  in  their
might,  and  all  the  attaints  hit  on  both
Bides.  The  giant  broke  his  lance  on  tlw
knight  of  the  Tygcr's  shield,  and  pierced  it
through  and  through;  and  with  such  force,
that  it  made  him  lose  both  stirrups,  and
catch  hold  on  the  neck  oi'  his  horse;  but
mly  he  righted  himself,  and  the  en-
counter v. Inch  he  had  given  in  exchange

y     a


was  so  well  delivered,  that  piercing  thr
d  a  d  ara   mi ,  it  bn  ught  the

ti  h<  gro  ad,  with  the  saddle  between  his
■  ind  a  wound  upon  the  left  breast,  from
h  much  1  lood  issued.     l>ut  this  he  did

iiv-:  feel,  for    melancholy    at    seeing  himself

dismounted  by  a  single  knight.

The  other  six  were  all  dismounted,  except
Platir,  who  kept  his  saddle  still  ;  yel  was  the
je  so  rough,  that  he  had  almost  borne
his  fe  lows  company,  having  lost  both  his
.stirrups.  Nor  was  this  to  be  wondered  at,
for  the  doughtiness  of  the  giant's  nephews
•was  extreme,  and  they  held  their  fall  to  be
the  greatest  shame  they  had  ever  received*
being  so  little  accustomed  to  be  thrown.  He
of  the  Tyger  seeing  the  giant  on  the  ground,
slighted  lest  he  should  kill  his  horse,  saying,
Foul  thing,  come  away  from  thy  nephews,  and
look  to  thyself.  Thou  shalt  now  see  how
like  1  am  to  ask  mercy!  I  see  well,  said  the
giant,  that  thy  good  fortune  in  the  encounter
makes  thee  so  bold  to  speak  thus  bravely;  but
I  have  thee  here  in  this  place,  inhere,  at  mine
own  pleasure,  I  shall  take  satisfaction  of  thy


257

blood,  hewing  away  thy  flesh  with  the  edge
of  my  sword.     Then  drawing  forth  a  huge

and  keen  cutlass,  Behold,  he  cried,  the  true
vengeance  for  the  death   of  my   nephews  !

and  grasping  it  in  his  hand,  he  delivered
such  a  blow  with  his  whole  force,  that  had
not  the  knight  deliverly  avoided  it,  the
giant  might  have  satisfied  his  wrath  with
that  single  stroke.  It  fell  upon  his  shield,
just  by  the  upper  handle,  and  split  it  clean
through,  so  that  half  fell  to  the  ground,
and  the  other  half  remained  upon  his  arm;
whereat  he  of  the  Tyger  was  dismayed,
thinking  that  if  a  second  blow  reached  him
fairly,  he  should  never  feel  a  third.  From
thenceforth,  therefore,  putting  all  his  hope
in  wariness  and  activity,  he  began  his  bat-
tle, avoiding  the  giant's  strokes,  and  putting
in  his  own  at  good  occasion,  so  that  he
gave  him  many  wounds,  though  slight;  for
the  strength  ol"  his  arms  would  not  let  them
be  greater.  That  however  in  his  breast
Was  a  gieat  wound,  ami  bled,  a  stream  ;  and
with  the  melancholy  which  he  resented  at
finding  his  own  strength  frustrated,  and  the
vantage  of  his  enemy,  he  snorted  out  sue!*
z  3


a  mass  of  smoke  through  the  vizor  of  his
helmet,  that  it  well  nigh  •  ongealed  the
air.  H  I  the  Tyger  shifted  continually,
and  led  him  from  place  to  place,  to  weary

him  out.  And  now  the  nuint  sought  as  far
rued  him  to  draw  back,  and  the
k  liffht  ot  the  Tygér  was  not  sorry  tin  rent,
for  he  desired  to  see  how  his  companions
Sj)ed;  and  he  saw  that  the  giant's  nephews
were  brought  to  such  plight,  that  they  tried
more  to  save  themselves  than  to  hurt  their
enemies;  and  they  on  the  other  hand  were
as  fresh  and  active,  as  strong  and  as  nim-
ble, as  though  they  had  but  just  begun
their  battle.  Platir  had  handled  bis  man
toe  best,  for  it  was  he  who  this  day  most
especially  signalized  himself.  The  giant
beholding  them  in  such  danger,  and  him-
self to  have  lost  a  great  part  of  his  blood,
and  such  a  puissant  enemy  before  him,  his
heart  began  to  faint,  and  he  returned  to
the  battle  With  less  pride  than  before,  and
he  of  the  Tyger  perceiving  his  weakness,
now  prest  him  closer;  meantime,  the  knight
that  fought  against  Platir,  was  so  faint  and
feeble,   that    he    fell   down  to  the    ground


£59

before  him  ;  then  Platir  taking  his  helmet
from  him,  struck  oil'  his  head,  and  shewed
it  to  CoJambar.

When  she  saw  that  fortune  was  thus  fully
bent  against  her,  she  went  from  the  window,
and  laying  hands  upon  her  hair,  began  loudly
to  lament  the  death  of  her  brother,  as  well  as
of  her  sons;  whereat  the  giant  resented
great  pain,  thinking  that  his  sister  held  his
death  so  certain,  that  she  would  not  wait  to
see  the  issue  of  the  battle.  But  having  greal
courage,  he  determined  to  try  it'  he  could
not  take  life  in  exchange  for  that  which  he
should  lose.  With  this  determination  he
began  to  shew  more  strength  ;  but  all  was  of
little  avail,  for  he  of  the  Tyger,  who  knew  his
weakness,  and  from  whence  Ids  strength
came,  prest  on  with  such  hlows  as  made
many  wounds,  and  drew  lrum  him  much
blood  :  whereas  those  of  the  giant  were  of
no  effect,  so  deliverlv  were  they  avoided.  By
this  time  his  nephews  were  at  the  feet  of
their  enemies,  who  cut  off  their  heads  with-
out mercy,  and  then  looked  on  to  see  the
ççd.     lie  of  the  Tyger  was  somewhat   me-


260

lancholy  at  being  tbe  last  who  should  fi

his  day's  business,  as  if  the  giant  had  not  de-
served to  have  longer  tim  -  n  h:m.
Pavoroso,  like  one  desperate  and  who  had  no
other  hope  of  salvation  than  from  his  own
hands,  did  wonders  in  this  extremity.  Never-
theless, as  this  was  only  deriving  strength
from  weakness,  the  loss  and  exhaustion  of
strength  increased,  tdl  at  length  he  fell
upon  the  ground,  and  yielded  up  his  soul  to
the  devil.

Then  the  knight  of  the  Tygcr  took  off  his
helmet  to  see  whether  he  were  alive  or  dead;
but  when  he  saw  no  Hie  left  in  him,  he
wiped  his  sword  and  put  it  in  the  sheath,
and  kneeling  down  upon  the  ground,  he
thanked  God  for  the  victory,  believing  that
without  his  aid  no  human  strength  could
have  been  sufficient  to  overcome  so  great  a
monster.

But  now  so  great  an  uproar  arose  among  the
people,  that  it  seemed  as  if  there  were  some
new  danger  ;  it  was  this— they  were  so  re-
joiced at  their  delivery  from  the  great  ty-  (


âf5l

ranny  which  they  had  endured,  that  with
one  accord  they  cried  out  to  beset  the  house
of  Colam  bar,  that  none  of  that  bloody  line-
age  might  be  left  alive  ;  for  except  she  was
likewise  dispatched,  they  feared  their  former
servitude.  Presently  a  dame,  who  was  one
of  her  women,  came  to  the  knight  of  the
Tyger,  having  her  hair  dishevelled,  and  fell
down  before  him,  saying,  1  beseech  you,  sir
knight,  since  you  have  courage  more  than
enough  to  conquer  your  enemies,  you  will
not  be  found  wanting  in  pity  to  succour
dames  and  damsels.  The  people  are  going
to  kill  my  lady  Colambar,  and  there  are  only
three  knights  who  defend  her  ;  they  entreat
you  to  save  her,  and  let  her  receive  then  at
your  hands  what  punishment  you  may  think
meet.

He  of  the  Tyger,  fearing  that  if  they  delayed
their  help  would  be  of  no  avail,  said  to  his
comrades,  birs,  let  us  succour  Colambar
in  this  extremity;  the  rage  of  the  people  does
great  hurt  in  little  time  So  toning  their
way   through   the   pr<  reached    the

gate    which   the  knights    of  Colambar  do


d,  one  of  them  being  jlain,  and  the  other
two  ready  to  yield  themselves.  The  knight
of  the  Tyger  and  his  companions  stood  be»

lore  them,  and  turning  faces   to  tin-

people,  desired  them  with  the  best  words
they  could  to  depart  to  their  houses,  and
assured  them  they  would  not  fail  to  set  the  in
in  such  a  sure  state  of  liberty,  that  they
should  no  longer  be  molested  with  such  cruel
tyranny,  as  they  had  been  too  long  a  time.

The  people  conceived  such  contentment  by
these  words,  as  they  presently  departed
thence,  crying,  that  the  island  ought  to  be
given  to  the  knight  of  the  Tyger,  for  that  it
■was  his  own  by  right,  and  they  did  heartily
desire  that  he  would  accept  them  as  his  vas-
sals and  subjects,  and  protect  them,  and  not
Jet  the  tears  of  Colam  bar  persuade  him
to  leave  her  again  in  possession  of  it,  for  she
was  worse  to  be  endured  than  all  before  her-
He  promised  to  look  to  all  things  which  re-
garded their  liberty  :  so  giving  them  a  courte-
ous farewell,  he  went  into  the  first  hall,  which
was  large  and  well  wrought,  and  there  he
stopt,  for  the  other  rooms  were  full   of  the


263

cries  and  lamentations  of  Colambar's  women,
and  she  among  them,  well  worthy  then  of  com-
passion, little  as  her  actions  deserved  it,  her
hair  all  dispersed  about  her  shoulders,  hanging
her  head  down  to  the  ground,  and  making
such  pitiful  lamentation,  as  her  damsels  eould
not  chuse  but  bedew  their  cheeks  with  tears,
beholding  the  extreme  grief  of  their  lady  and
mistress;  who  at  this  instant  remembered  the
death  of  her  husband,  the  loss  of  her  sons,
and  destruction  of  her  house,  and  the  death
of  her  brother,  who  came  only  loi'  her  sake
thither,  as  well  to  defend  her  as  also  to  see
the  death  of  the  knight  of  the  Savage  Man  ;
but  now  being  past  all  hope  to  have  him,
and  fearing  lest  by  him,  she  had  likewise  lost
her  daughter  Allanza,  of  whom  she  made
most  high  and  especial  account  :  all  these
occasions  considered  together,  compelled  her
to  immoderate  mourning.

The    knight    of    the    Tyger  being  by   na-
ture compassionate,  was  divers  times   offer-
ing to  comfort  her  ;  but  he   judging  hi
senee  would   rather  enrage   than   pacify    her,
thought  it  best  to  let  her  alone,     lier   crie-


264

and  groans  were  not  like  those  of  other  wo-
men :  for  as  her  speech   \v;ts  naturally  i
and  coarse,  and  now  hoarse  with  lament
its  sound    rung  over  all   the  arches   of  the
house,    so    that  it    might   well    have    been
doubted  from    whence    it   came.      Sir    PaU
merin,  said  Platir,  if  we  are  guided  by  your
disposition,  we  shall   never  have  done — Let
us  dispose  of  her  at  once,  and   secure    our-
selves from-her  wiles,  for  there  is  nothing  else
to  fear.     Sir  Platir,  replied  he  of  the  Tyger,
do  what  you  think  best,  but  do  not  let  me  in-
terfere, for  it  is  not  in  my  nature  to  hear  to
see  the  face  of  one  so  wretched.     So   they
three  took  counsel  together  without  him,  and
agreed  to  send  her  on  board  their  ship,  and
carry  her  to  Constantinople,  that  the  empe-
ror might  dispose  of  her  as  he  thought  meet.
Incontinently  they  ordered  her  to  be  taken,
and  being  in  a  manner  senseless,  she  was  put
in  a  cart,  and  carried  to  the  port,  where  they
embarked   her,    and    Daliarte   remained    to
guard  her,  while  the  others  determined  what
should  be  done  with  the  island.


265


CHAPTER  116.


The  history  reporteth,  that  Colambar,  ovci-
come  with  exceeding  grief  and  anguish  of
mind,  and  worn  out  with  rage,  and  the  violence
of  her  lamentations,  fell  on  the  ground  in  a
trance,  like  one  dead.  Platir,  who  desired  to
see  the  end  of  that  house,  gave  orders  to  take
her  up  in  that  state;  but  she  was  so  heavy,
that  with  great  labour,  and  the  help  of  other
men,  they  could  scantly  bear  her  down  into
the  court.  There  they  placed  her  in  a  cart,
which  was  covered  over  with  an  awning,
and  so  she  was  carried  away  to  the  ship,
being  followed  by  some  of  her  women  on
foot,  and  with  their  hair  loose,  who  made
such   woful  and   bitter   lamentations,   as   it

VOL.  Ill  S  A


I

moved  even  them  to  pity  who  hud   suffered

under  her  cruelty.

When  they  were  come  to  the  ship  they
conveyed  her  thereinto,  being  still  senseless,
and  two  of  her  dames  would  by  no  means
depart  from  her,  but  determined  to  bear  her
company  till  the  last  ;  fornoteven  thewi
in  this  world  are  without  some  who  love
them.  When  she  returned  to  herself,  see-
ing herself  in  the  ship,  and  in  the  custody  of
her  enemies,  her  power  gone,  and  no  hope
of  recovering  it,  she  would  have  cast  herself
into  the  sea,  judging  that  to  be  the  only
way  to  end  her  sorrows.  Beroldo,  Platir,
and  Daliarte,  who  were  in  the  ship  with
lier,  for  the  knight  of  the  ^^-ger  was  on
shore,  laid  hands  on  her,  and  endeavoured
to  comfort  her  with  hopes  which  appear-
ed trilling  to  her,  since  her  best  hopes
were  lost;  but  as  among  them  there  was
that  of  seeing  her  daughter,  the  desire  she
had  of  this  something  pacified  her.  Never-
theless, as  they  knew  well  that  nothing  was
such  a  sovereign  remedy  to  the  desperate  as
death  itself,  they  would  not  leave  her   with-     ,


out  good  guard.  Daliarte  therefore  remained
in  the  ship,  and  Platir  and  Beroldo  wont  on
shore,  where  they  found  him  of  the  Tygcr
surrounded  by  the  people,  who  came  to  see
him  and  serve  him,  as  the  preserver  of  their
fifes  and  liberties  ;  rejoicing  at  last, after  so
many  troubles,  and  so  cruel  a  tyranny,  to  ob-
tain linn  for  their  lord,  and  thinking  this  ;<,
sufficient  repayment  for  all  which  they  had
endured;    and   scarcely  could  they  believe  it

'■■\r  that  so  great  happiness  should  be  in
store  for  them.  He  of  the  Tyger  recc
ihein  with  that  natural  grace  and  benig-
nity with  the  which  Heaven  had  gifted  him  ;
but  in  no  cafe  would  Ire  accept  the  govern-
ment of  the  isle,  for  that  he  said  it  appertained
to  his  broil:  r  Dorian,  he  having  with  greater
cost  of    his   blood    destroyed   ils  tyrannous

r  ;  as  for  himself  and  ins  friends,  they
only  to  find  him.

But  if  he  should  refuse  this,  then  peradven-
ture  he  might  accept  \\.<"  Btate  which  thej
would  bestow  upon  him,  and  meantime  would
m  his  name  receive  their  homage,  and  pro-
vide a  governor  according  to  their  choice;

,  ■     .,     .  >


S68

and  he  besought  them  to  be  contented  to
become  vassals  of  him,  who  with  his  own
blood,  and  at  the  expence  of  so  many  wounds,
had  purchased  them,  and  would  love  them  as
persons  who  had  cost  him  so  dearly.

The  principal  persons  of  the  island  that  were
there  present,  made  answer,  that  they  were
willing  to  receive  him  for  their  lord,  and  in
what  manner  he  pleased  would  do  homage  to
him,  and  deliver  up  the  fortresses.  Forthwith
they  assembled  together  all  the  commanders
thereof,  and  on  the  morrow  delivered  up  the
keys  into  his  hands.  The  knight  of  theTygcr
having  set  all  things  in  due  ancVnecessary  or-
der, returned  them  into  their  hands  that  had
the  custody  before,  until  such  time  as  his
brother  should  arrive  and  dispose  of  them  at
his  pleasure.  In  this  business  he  employed
that  and  the  following  day,  being  entertained
with  many  devices  which  the  people  invented
for  his  contentment,  all  far  different  from
what  his  heart  desired.  And  as  he  was  giv-
ing orders  to  guard  the  treasures  of  Colarri-
har,  which  were  full  great,  being  the  spoils
pf  many,  till  the  knight  of  the  Savage  should


269

dispose  of  thein,  lie  saw  Solviam  come  in,  ac
corapanied  with  the  ancient  knight  who  had
been  his  host,  at  his  first  arrival  in  the  isle;
and  who  being  informed  of  the  victory,  lost
his  former  fears.  This  was  a  new  joy  to  him
of  lhe  Tyger,  who  felt  no  joy  complete
while  Selviam  v. as  absent  :  for  such  is  the
love  of  those  who  have  been  fostered  together.

Tin1  host  humbled  himself  at  his  feet,  saving»
Sir,  if  yon  did  not  receive  in  my  house  that
courtesy  and  respect  which  to  sq  great  a.  per-
son are  dee,  let  the  sorrow  which  I  feel  be
my  punishment;  for  to  whomsoever  your
presence  comes,  it  is  easy  to  perceive  its
worth.  He  of  the  Tyger  raised  him  tip  and
embraced  him,  saying,  The  honour  and
Courtesy  which  Í  received  from  you  in  aland
where  they  were  forbidden,  T  well  remember,
and  by  how  much  the  more  rigorously  they
Were  forbidden,  so  much  the  more  am  I
bound  unto  you.  And  for  that  at  this  present
1  have  not  wherewith  to  guerdon  you,  1  praj
you  to  accept  the  government  of  this  island,
the  lord  thereof  i  know  will  be  well  content  -
'.!  therewithal;  and  if  fortune  vouchsafe  to
2  a  S


270

cull  nie  into  any  dignity,  I  will  not  fail  to  rc-.
ineinberyou.

How,  sir,  said  Argentao,  which  was  the  name
of  this  ancient  knight,  hath  this  people  In  re
any  other  governor  than  yourself  ?  Yea,  he
replied,  my  brother,  the  knight  of  the  Sa-
vage, to  whom  it  doth  by  greatest  ri^ht  ap-
pertain. I  feared,  said  Argentao,  that  there
still  reinainer!  some  of  the  stock  of  Bravo-
raiite  ;  but  he  who  desires  to  serve  you,  wil'
also  be  well  .pleased  to  serve  your  biother.
The  honour  which  you  bestow  upon  me  I  ac-
cept: for  though  I  am  unworthy  of  >o  great
a  thing,  you  are  not  he  who  should  bestow-
little  ones.  liowbeit,  I  would  have  the
people  of  this  country  satisfied  therewith,  for
if  that  be  not  the  case,  I  will  not  govern
those  who  may  despise  my  government.

Now  as  this  Argentao  was  a  knight  of  noble
hneage,  and  a  right  good  christian,  and  one
of  good  customs,  and  whom  the  giants  had
Jong  hated,  because  the  good  are  always  hate-
ful to  the  wicked,  the  people  did  well  allow
{o  accept  him  for  their  governor,  and  gladly


271

yielded  obedience  to  him,  thinking  it  a  fit
thing  that  he  should  be  their  governor.  Far
virtue  hath  this  privilege,  that  even  they
who  arc  not  virtuous  acknowledge  its  pre-
eminence ;  so  he  remained  governor,  to  the
contentment  of  all.

He  of  the  Tyger  and  his  companions  then
sent  for  Daliarte,  and  Selviam  the  while  re-
mained in  the  ship,  who  being  dismayed  at
the  sight  of  Colambar,  and  by  what  he  heard
of  the  might  of  her  brother,  concluded  that
eveiy  thing  was  possible  to  his  lord.  M  hen
Dali  arte  came,  they  determined  that  the  ship
should  sail  for  Constantinople,  and  one  of
Beroldo's  squires  in  it  ;  for  he,  who  was  not
only  a  good  knight,  but  also  prided  himseli
in  being  gaily  adorned,  had  always  two  or
three  squires  with  him,  that  he  might  be  the
better  served.  This  one  was  to  present  the
emperor  of  Greece  with  the  news  of  the  victory
in  that  island,  and  also  to  deliver  Colambar
into  his  hands.  It  was  also  appointed,  that
v\hcn  Arlanza  and  the  ship  of  Alfernao  should
arrive  with  the  knight  of  the  Savage,  every
thing  should  be  surrendered  into  his  hands*


272

and  he  should  determine  of  them  according
to  his  pleasure.  ï\o  other  security  for  this
was  needed  than  Unit  Argentao  was  governor,

and  the  desire  which  the  people  had  to  perse-
cute Alfernao  as  soon  as  be  should  appear,
lest  any  evil  might  come  from  him;  such  is
the  effect  of  the  works  of  the  wicked,  that
the  good  cannothe  at  rest  lill  they  are  utterly
destroyed.  From  Arlanza  nothing  was  fear-
ed ;  contrariwise,  they  desired  her  honour  and
comfort:  for  albeit  she  tvas  bred  up  amid  the
tyrannies  of  her  father  and  the  cruelties  ol
her  brethren,  and  notwithstanding  the
damnable  condition  of  her  mother,  she  was
always  compassionate,  benevolent,  full  of
pity,  and  virtuous  inclinations  ;  insomuch,
that  sometimes  by  her  tears  and  intreaties
she  had  prevailed  upon  her  parents  to  do
things  contraiy  to  their  dispositions.

All  things  being  thus  determined,  Beroldo's
squire,  whose  name  was  Albaner,  embarked
with  Colambar,  when  the  pilot  hoisted  sail,
and  the  «rind  serving  gallantly,  they  rode  on
ai  pleasure,  and  cut  the  seas  witli  marvellous
expedition.     The  comrades  stood  gazing  at


the  vessel  till  she  was  out  of  sight,  remaining
then  with  their  bodies  upon  shore,  and  their
thoughts  on  the  sea,  for  that  way  their
hearts  would  have  led  them,  though  none
of  them  could  so  greatly  resent  that  longing
as  the  knight  of  theTyger;  the  others  had
sent  letter;  and  messages,  thereby  something
relieving  their  wishes  ;  but  how  could  he
who  trusted  his  secret  10  none,  find  any
such  consolation  ?

When  they  had  lost  sight  of  the  ship,  as  the
tlay  was  yet  young  ;  pnd  he  of  the  Tyger  little
woilt  to  spend  idle  hours,  he  asked  the  others
if  they  would  visit  his  Perilous  Isle,  which
v,  ;•  -  hard  by,  saying  it  would  not  be  well  were
he  to  pass  so  near  and  not  call  there.  Well
pleased  were  they,  for  the  things  of  that  island
were  such  that  men  might  well  have  conic
from  tar  to  see  them.  Argentao  ordered  a
foyst  to  be  made  ready,  whereof  there  were
many  there,  being  vessels  which  Bravo-
rante  used  more  than  any  others  ;  and  the
four  companions  embarked  in  it,  and  Ar-
gentao with  some  of  the  chiefs  in  another,
carrying    refreshments   with  them,  because


they  knew  not  how  the    place   whither  they
were  going  might  he  stored.     So  they   de-
parted    from    the   Profound    [aland,   rowing
along  its  shore,   that  they  might  behold  it  at
their  pleasure,  for  there  were   many    goodly
towns  and  large  villages  therein  ; — any  mince
might  have   been   well  content  with  such   a
dominion.      Argentao  from    his   foyst   told
them  the  names  of  the  places  as  they  went
along,  and  that  the  population  was  small  ac-
cording to  the  nature  of  the  land,  by  reay/n
of  the  cruelties  of  Bravorante.     Thus  they
past  that  day,  and  during   the  night  cr<
over  to  the  other  island.   When  the  morning
opened,  they  found  themselves  near  it,  and
cast  anchor  in  the  port  where  Pahnerin  had
arrived  when  first  he  came  there,  there  being
no  other  there.     Then    having  landed    their
horses,  they  would  fain  have  mounted  ;  but
the  way  was  so  narrow,  and  the  rock  so  steep,
that  there  was  no  advancing  except  on  foot;
so  giving  their  horses  to  their  squires  to  lead*
they  began  to  ascend  one  after  another.

Long  time  it  was  hefore  they  were  come  to
the  place  where  Palme rin  found  the  inoiiu-


ment,  with  these  letters  engraven  thereon:
Pass  no  further.    There   they  mounted;  foi
the  way  then  permitted  it,  and    rode  under
those    fair    overbowering   boughs,   till  they
gained  the  top  of  the  rock.     The   manner  of
that   land   seemed   marvellous  to  the  three
Companions,  and  to  Argentao  and  his  eom-
panv,   as    also    the  goodlincss  of  the    trees
and  the  strength  of  the  situation.     But  when
they   were   come    to  the  fountain,  they  had
then  a  greater  cause    of  astonishment,   for
ih.  re  they  saw  huge  beasts    like    unto  them
which  Palmerin  slew,  when  they  would  not
suffer  him  to  drink  of  the  water  :  these  beasts
were   so   cunningly  and    artificially   framed,
that  though  they  v.  ere  things  of  art,  without
life  or  spirit,  yet  were  they  so   made    to   the
]ikeness  and  exact  proportion  of  the  others,
that  their  lifeless  fierceness  struck  the  same
Fear  to   the  beholders.      They  were  chained
by  the  necks  with   the  self  same   chains  as
the  living  ones  hail  been,  being  themselves
made  of  metal,  by  the  hand  of  even  so  rare
an  artistas  I  rganda  herself;  who  foreseeing
it,  and  that  the  memory  of  a  feat  so  notable
might  not  be  effaced   by   time,  had    placed


276

them  hero,  upon  the  spot  where  it  had  been
atchieved.

Now  as  this  was  as  new  a  thing  to  him  of
the  Tyger  as  to  his  companions,  lie  suspected
that  it  was  one  of  Daliarte's  works,  and  be-
sought him  to  resolve  that  doubt.  Sir,  re-
plied Daliarte,  she  which  invented  the  ad-
venture of  this  fountain,  did  well,  that  as  they
who  failed  therein  should  be  forgotten,  so  he
which  should  acehievc  the  honour  thereof,
should  leave  to  all  posteriiies  a  perpetual  re-
membrance of  him  ;  and  therefore  she  or-
dained these  cruel  beasts,  framed  in  the  na-
tural shapes  of  thcin  which  you  slew,  ap-
pointing that  as  soon  as  the  natural  ones  de-
cayed, these  should  he  placed  in  their  stead;
to  the  end  that  they  which  come  into  this
island  may  render  continual  laud  and  com-
mendation to  your  prowess.  Moreover,  in
this  place  where  von  slew  the  knights  of  Eu-
tropa,  you  will  find  their  images,  being  lively
carved  in  marble,  of  the  same  height  and
proportion  as  they  were,  defending  their
shields,  which  you  will  yet  see  hanging  on
their  several  pillars,  even  in  the  same  rnann^j


277

as  they  were  on  the  day  of  your  victory  and
their  overthrow.  Here  you  behold  the  fore-
sight of  [Jrgandaj  whose  the  island  once  was,
and  unto  whom  you  arc  no  little  beholden,
seeing  that  by  her  means  your  noble  deeds
are  thus  registered  for  perpetual  memory.

Certainly,  answered  Beroldo,  much  is  due  to
her,  but  more  to  him  who  had  the  power  to
end  such  a  perilous  adventure  :  as  for  myself,
I  may  say,  that  though  these  beasts  are  life-
less, 1  stand  in  fear,  and  should  not  dare  at-
tack them  ;  much  less  were  they  alive.  Do
you  not  see,  said  Platir,  the  letters  engraven
on  this  fountain  ?  some  invite  us  to  think,
Others  warn  us  to  refrain  ;  but  since  the  dan-
ger is  warranted,  we  may  taste.  They  then
all  went  up  to  the  fountain,  and  washed  the
dust  and  sweat  from  their  faces,  and  having
drunk  of  the  water,  commended  the  sweet-
ness thereof  above  all  other  waters.

Argcntao,  and  they  of  the  Profound  Isle,
knew  not  what  to  say,  for  they  had  not  hearts
ever  to  conceive  of  such  things;  and  even
Platir  and  Beroldo,  albeit   they    were  good

VOL.  III.  2li


278

.'•.mi  hardy  knights,  and  su rpas  ung  among  the

best,  nevertheless  they  held   this  leal  to    be
an  admirable  thing.

After  they  had  well  noted  the  singularity  of
this  fountain,  they  touk  their  way  to  the
castle,  where  hard  by  the  moat  side  stood
four  fair  jasper  pillars,  whereon  hanged  foui
shields,  like  unto  them  which  Palmerin  won
from  the  four  knights,  and  there  stood  the
images  of  the  knights  in  marble,  having  the
like  armour  and  shields  as  the  defenders  of  the
shields  had  home  ;  and  being  large  limbed,
and  of  fearful  strength,  they  well  bespake
the  worth  of  him  who  had  conquered  their..
The  name  of  each  was  written  upon  the  rim
of  his  shield.  These  things  excited  admira-
tion in  them  all,  nor  was  lie  of  the  'i
without  it,  seeing  the  dangers  through  which
he  had  past,  even  as  if  they  were  present.
And  now  the  bridge  over  the  moat  was
lowered  by  command  of  Satiafor,  a  squire
came  over  it  to  know  who  those  kni
were,  and  then  it  was  drawn  up  again,  ac-
cording to  custom.  But  when  he  saw  the
nue  lord    of  the  castle,  the  bridge  was  let


279

down  again,  ami   Satiafor  came  out  to  wel*
cume  them  and  conduct  them  in.

Me  thinks,  said  Platir,  when  they  had  en-
tered the  court,  the  things  of  this  coun-
try are  unlike  those  of  all  others  ;  for  if  the
adventures  were  perilous,  the  fortress  and
the  manner  thereof  are  not  less  admirable.
Certes,  the  more  I  see,  the  more  doth  it  ap-
pear that  the  skill  and  knowledge  of  Urgandâ
ought  to  be  esteemed  above  all  other.  Platir
did  not  err  in  this;  for  as  these  palaces  were
made  for  her  own  dwelling  and  place  of
repose,  where  for  the  most  part  she  made  her
abode,  having  with  her  her  friend  whom  she
loved  so  well,  as  is  related  in  the  history  of
Aniadis,  she  displayed  the  utmost  of  her
skill  and  ingenuity  in  the  invention  and
fashion  thereof:  and  when  that  skill  m
ex'cellcnt  in  all  things,  let  any  one  judge
what  it  would  be  when  it  was  employed  upon
things  so  greatly  to  her  own  liking.

Having  seen   this  apartment,  they  came  to
the  place  where  the  giant  stood,  putas  that
tic  one  had  been,  with  the  iron  p

2  i5  2


280

in  his  bauds  ;  but  this  they  held  for  so  little
à  feat,  io  comparison  with  the  fore  past,  that
they  ditl  not  stop  to  look  at  it.  From  thence
they  went  to  the  place  where  he  had  Crost
the  river  ;  and  seeing  the  manner  of  the
bridge,  and  the  narrowness  and  rottenness
thereof,  and  the  depth  of  the  water,  the
sight,  of  this  perilous  adventure  made  them
forget  all  the  bravery  they  had  seen  before.
Selviam,  who  till  now  had  gone  on  rejoicing
in  his  heart  over  the  achievements  of  his
lord,  now  lost  that  joy,  and  the  tears  came
into  his  eyes,  having  before  him  the  perils
which  had  been  gone  through  in  that  fortress;
but  the  knight  of  the  Tyger  perceiving
this  while  his  other  friends  were  busied  in
beholding  the  occasions  there  present,  went
to  him  and  said,  Selviam,  my  friend,  do  not
think  that  any  feat  can  be  difficult  for  him
to  atchieve,  who  hath  the  remembrance  of
the  lady  Polinarda  on  his  side.  This  was
enterprized  and  atchieved  in  her  name;
think  it  not  therefore  much.  Then  turning
to  the  others  he  said,  Sirs,  let  us  waste  no
more  time  on  things  of  so  small  importance,
but  go  eat,  for  Satiafor  is  calling  us.     You


may  think  little  of  them,  sir  Palmcrin,  said'
Beroldo,  for  nothing  can  be  much  to  you  ;
but  they  arc  not  to  be  thought  little  of.

Satiafor  then  led  them  into  a  spacious  hall,
or  singular  workmanship,  and  with  a  goodly

cet.  A  tank  of  water  sounded  by  the
door  thereof,  and  supplied  a  garden  well
stocked  with  many  trees,  some  for  fruit,
others  for  shade,  and  all  plants  in  due  place
and  order.  Here  they  were  set  at  supper,
being  served  with  such  pomp  and  state,  as
there  wanted  nothing  that  could  be  devised  :
for  Satiafor,  being  desirous  to  witness  their
great  welcome  into  the  Perilous  Isle,  shewed
himself  surpassing  bountiful;  as  in  truth  he
was  by  nature,  and  now  also  desirous  to
please  the  knight  of  the  Tyger.  There  they
past  the  day,  and    when   night    came    beds

provided  for  all  from  among  the  spoils
ol  Eu  tropa,  who,  as  she  was  a  great  lady,  wa  i
always  well  provided  with  things  nec<
for  her  guests,  as  was  needful  for  her  friend  i  ;
as  for  her  enemies,  she  had  prepared  o
welcome  for  them.

2  b  a


CHAPTER  117.


On  the  following  morning  the  four  compa-
nions went  into  the  garden,  which  among  the
notahle  things  of  that  place  was  not  least  to
be  esteemed;  for  as  Lrganda  was  there  wont
to  pass  the  sesta  in  summer  with  her  friend,
she  laid  it  out  after  her  pleasure.  It  was
laid  out  in  divisions  which  were  separated
b\r  broad  walks,  all  in  such  ride  and  com-
pass, that  in  no  part  was  there  any  irregu-
larity, and  planted  on  each  side  with  high
and  wide  branching  elms,  all  of  equal  grovs  tii ,
and  placed  at  equal  distances,  which  made  it
the  more  beautiful.  From  one  tree  to  an-
other, the  whole  length  of  the  walks,  was
trellis-work  of  so  many  gallant  fashions,  that
it  seemed  impossible  for  human  wit  to  have


283

devised  them  all  ;  and  all  were  as  new  as  if
they  had  that  day  been  finished.  The  walks
were  paved  with  white  and  green  stones  laid
in  lozenges,  which  gave  them  the  greater
grandeur  and  gallantry.  As  many  as  there
were  plats  in  the  garden,  so  many  were  the
dilfercnecs  of  trees,  plants,  and  ilowers,  con-
formable to  the  place.  In  some  there  were
trees  of  huge  trunks,  so  high  that  they
seemed  to  touch  the  clouds,  and  so  thickly
set  that  you  couid  scarcely  find  way  between
them,  and  so  bravely  branched,  as  the  sun
could  not  offend  any  with  heat;  there  was
such  a  delicate  shadow,  and  of  such  quality
and  nature,  that  in  the  hottest  cal©  of  sum-
mer they  always  moved  with  the  wind.  In
others  there  were  trees  reared  lor  the  uses  of
life,  of  the  rarest  fruits  that  nature  could
produce  ;  in,  others,  flowers  that  blossomed
all  the  year  round,  and  of  as  many  colours  as
Spring  brings  with  her  in  her  bravest  array.
Here  were  green  pjats  without  the  in  ten  )i\-
ture  of  any  other  plants,  of  a  short  In  rl -,
smooth  shaven,  whereon  to  enjoy  the  ^un
when  it  should  be  delightful.  Here  rough
;uid  craggy  rocks  in  another  division,   ce.-


▼ered  with  ivy  and  other  plants,  according  to
their  nature,  and  from  the  top  there  opened

pipes  of  water,  wliioli  fell  from  stone  to
stone,  and  were  so  curiously  devised,  that  the
sound  of  the  water  upon  the  stones  presented

whatever  harmony  the  nightingales  and  all
other  sweet  biids  make  in  the  season  when
it  is  sweetest  to  listen  to  them.  At  the  foot
of  the  rock  all  these  waters  were  collected  in
tanks,  fronted  with  a  crystal  stone  wrought
in  masonry  of  Roman  work,  of  such  rare
gallantry,  that  the  eyes  were  not  more  de-
lighted with  beholding  it,  than  the  under-
standing was  confounded  in  devising  how  it
had  been  wrought.  And  what  was  most
notable  was,  that  none  of  all  these  thing!
had  suffered  decay  ;  but  all  retained  their
prime  beauty  and  perfect  nature;  the  trees
had  their  full  leafmess,  the  flowers  their
fresh  blossoms,  the  fields  their  delightful
verdure.  And  moreover,  there  were  clear
fountains  in  convenient  places,  the  waters  of
which  were  received  in  secret  pipes,  and
from  thence  spotted  up  with  great  force,
when  it  fell  a^ain  into  great  basons  of  the
same  stone  as  the  tanks,  and  wrought  after


285

the  same  fashion»  From  thence  the  water
spread  all  ways,  through  metal  channels,
and  watered  the  whole  garden  and  every
thing  therein  ;  and  this  not  hy  the  labour  of
any  one,  but  the  pipes  were  so  devised  as
to  direct  it  every  where.  This  was  not  done
without  mystery  ;  for  that  water  was  oi'  such
excellent  virtue,  cither  of  itself,  or  that  the
quality  of  the  earth  imparted  it,  that  by  the
virtue  thereof  all  the  things  in  that  garden.
were  preserved  free  from  decay.

The  knights  had  so  much  to  do  in  beholding
these  things,  that  the  hour  of  dinner  over-
took them,  and  they  would  not  tarry  long  at
table,  for  they  wished  to  return  again,  and
survey  them  at  leisure;  and  in  this  manner
they  passed  the  day,  and  when  night  came
on,  they  past  the  greater  part  thereof  in  dis-
coursing of  the  great  wisdom  and  discretion
of  I  rganda,  so  that  it  was  well  nigh  morn-
ing  before  they  retired  to  sleep.  When  they
were  risen,  Satiafor  came  to  them  with  new-
tidings.  Methinks,  Sir,  said  heto  the  knight
of  the  Tjgcr,  that  when  the  things  of  this.
island  arc  old,  novelties  are  still  to  be  found


iti  it.  in  ilio  mid  i  of  that  garden  wherein
vnu  were  walking  yesterday,  and  which  1
vibit  every  day,  and  in  the  mosl  op<  n  part
thereof.  1  have  now  found  a  great  square
chamber,  of  the  rarest  work  and  fashion  that
I  ever  saw  ;  for  though  all  the  other  things  of
this  house  may  well  be  esteemed  marvellous
this,  in  inv  mind,  is  far  above  them  all.  I
could  not  enter  therein,  for  the  door  was  oc-
cupied by  two  huge  and  terrible  giants  who
guard  it.  Now,  Sir,  it  is  good  that  you  try
their  courtesy,  for  I  am  persuaded  the  re-
ward that  is  due  to  your  knightly  travels,
bestowed  in  conquering  this  isle,  undoubtedly
is  within  that  place.

This  news  did  so  amaze  the  knights,  that
they  started  up  presently,  and  armed  them-
selves ;  and  coining  into  the  garden,  they
found  in  the  midst  thereof,  which  yesterday
had  been  vacant,  that  stately  chamber,  which
they  stood  to  behold,  as  indeed  it  was  well
"worthy  to  be  seen  :  for  the  outer  walls
thereof  were  wrought  with  such  subtle  gallan-
tries in  white  and  hard  marble,  that  it  would
have  seemed  full  diilicult  to  execute  the  like


887

in  yielding  wax.  It  had  a  lofty  spire  covered
with  tiles  of  many  colours,  so  bright  that  the
sight  could  not  tarry  long  enough  upon  them
to  determine  what  they  were;  when  they
were  eyed  at  distance,  and  so  became  more
endurable,  all  that  could  be  distinguished
was,  that  one  colour  gave  beauty  to  another,
and  that  all  were  perpetually  shifting  their
hues.  From  the  top  of  the  spire  there  rose
a  long  flag-staff  of  silver,  whereon  was  a
square  vane,  alter  the  fashion  of  a  banner,
made  of  incorruptible  materials.  On  one
side  thereof  the  starry  heavens  were  figured,
with  all  the  planets  in  their  circle,  and  in  the
midst  of  them  Mercury,  attired  in  that  an-
cient habit  that  they  of  old  time  did  r
him  to  wear;  on  the  other  was  pictured  Her-
cales,  team;;  in  pieces  the  chief  Cacus.

At  the  four  corners  of  this  house  were  four
goodl)  trees  that  were  just  of  the  height  of
i  spire,  and  their  branches  spreading
bravely  all  abroad  ;  but  such  tha  could

■  neither  their  name  nor  quality,  and
they  seemed  things  supernatural:  and  round
nboutthe  house  were  glass  win  I  mar-


us  costliness,  that  gave  light  plentifully
into  all  places  of  the  same,  the  glass  having
ancient  histories  figured  on  it  which  were
well  worthy  to  be  noted.  Methinks,  said
Platir,  having  well  observed  the  whole,  that
since  Urganda  delighted  to  deck  this  so
bravely  without,  no  doubt  she  hath  made  it
far  more  sumptuous  within  ;  let  u>  therefore
try  the  cruelty  of  the  giants  ;  and  it'  they
will  permit  us,  sec  what  there  is.  Sir  Pal
merin,  1  should  greatly  esteem  the  favour
if  in  this  adventure  you  would  allow  me  to
make  the  first  essay  ;  for  here  and  every
■where  else,  we  are  at  your  commands.

"Who,  think  you,  would  hinder  you,  replied
Palmerin,  in  a  thing  which  you  desire  so
much  r  Do  your  pleasure,  and  free  the  en-
trance for  us;  for  if  you  fail  wc  must  lose
the  hope  of  it.  The  brave  Platir,  that  he
might  not  hear  himself  praised  by  one  before
•whose  feats  all  others  were  of  little  account,
advanced  before  he  had  finished  these  words,
covering  himself  witli  his  shield,  and  sword
in  hand,  towards  the  giants,  who  taking  their
maees  in  their  hands,  prepared  themselves  to


1Î39

receive  him,  and  when  he  had  «et  his  foot
on  the  first  step,  which  was  not  past  the
height  of  one  cubit,  one  of  the  giants
coming  two  paces  forward,  às  if  he  had  been
a  living  body,  took  him  in  his  arms,  and
having  thrown  him  down  tue  two  steps  lo
the  ground,  returned  again  to  his  post.

riatir  bring  greatly  offended  to  see  himself
so  used,  came  and  made  a  s<  ■        '   and  third
assault  ;  but  he  was  served  as  h
Beroldo  then  went    and   tried  his  fortune;
but  he  sped  as  Plàtir  did  before  him.

The  knight  of  the  Tygér,  whose  heart  could
not  endure  to  behold  (he  fail  re  of  his  friends^
went  on  without  waiting  to  U  i  Daliarte  try
his  fortune,  and  advanced  himself  to  the  ad-
venture; butas  the  treasure  of  that  cham-
b  i  did  not  appertain  unto  him,  his  I  t  was
like  that  of  the  other  twain  :  not  indeed,  that
one  giant  threw  him  from  the  def<  nded  door,
but  both  together  advanced  toward  him,  for
an  image  of  gold  which  stood  over  the  I
■way,  and  was  made  after  the  likeness  i
old  woman,  clad  in  the  manner  of  old  times
■vol.  in.  2  c


290

ftaîled  out  to  tlicm  both  to  do  their  duty,  and
Dot  suffer  her  treasure  to  1
who  was  not  worthy  thereof.  Each  then
taking  him  by  one  arm,  in  spite  of  all
his  strength  and  courage,  they  threw  him
clown  the  steps.  Now,  though  these  were
things  of  enchantment,  and  therefore  little
to  be  felt  or  grieved  for,  yet  he  of  the  Tyger,
revolving  in  his  memory  all  his  good  fortunes
past,  thought  that  now  that  fortune  had
reached  its  summit  and  was  beginning  to
decline,  soeing  that  after  having  atebicved
things  so  great,  he  now  prevailed  so  little  in
one  of  less  consideration.

In  the  meantime,  while  his  thoughts  were
occupied  in  this  eoneeit,  Daliartc  adva-wed
to  the  door,  more  to  be  partaker  with  bis
friends  in  the'rr  foil,  than  for  any  opinion
he  had  himself  to  end  the  adventure;  for  he
well  believed,  that  where  the  flower  of  all
prowess  had  failed,  his  would  remain  far
behind.  Howbeit,  leaping  up  the  steps,  he
offered  to  charge  the  giants  ;  but  without
•making  any  shew  of  resistance,  they  hum-
nled  themselves,  at  his  feet,  granting  him  fres
liberty  to  enter*


Contented  with  this  obedience,  lie  stood
awhile  beholding  the  workmanship  of  the
door,  which  was  of  like  excellency  with  the
rest  of  the  building;  when  the  image  that  stood
above,  in  the  presence  of  them  all,  opened  a
little  coller  which  she  held  in  her  lap,  so  rich,
and  of  such  surpassing  value,  as  to  be  above
iiil  price  ;  and  taking  from  thence  a  little  key
of  gold,  let  it  fall  by  a  string  of  black  silk,
which  the  sage  Daliarte  took,  and  without
any  further  delay  opened  the  door.  Then
Paiuierin,  Platir,  and  Beroldo,  joined  him
without  let,  and  did  all  enter  with  him,  and

tttly  they  understood  that  the  con
of  that  chamber  belonged  to  no  other  than
him  who   had   atchieved   it;  and   they   held
in   still    higher  esteem    the  wisdom  of  t  i-
ganda,  this  being  her  library,  wherein   she

I-'.  >vs  wont  to  study  ;  and  certes,  though
all  the  thi  igs  which  they  had  before  seen  were
admirable,  and  such  as  did  gr<  atly  amaze  them,
yet  the  sight  hereof  did  very  much  delight
their  eyes,  nunc  than  any  thing  else  they
had  seen  in  the  whole  island,

This  library  was  round  about  garnished  with
S  c  2


infinite  book?,  wherein  was  i Deluded  all  the
exi    !•  'all  the  sciences  that   could  be

devised,  the  books  lyii  g  on  sumptuous
es  ind  desk  sof  -old,  and  the  desks  b<  ing
supjo  I  with  birds  and  beasts  óf  antiqua
work,  all  of  the  same  metal.  The  coverings
of  these  hooks  were  cloth  or  gold,  having  at
every  corner  placed  precious  stones  of  in-
credible value,  and  the  clasps  also  were  of
jewelry.  The  -walls,  higher  than  where  the
books  reached,  wèrë  round  about  decked
with  images  of  ladies  made  to  the  likeness  of
those  who  v  ere  most  famous  for  their  rare
and  singular  beauty,  they  being  all  in  such
frdbes  and  devices  of  apparel  as  they  were
faorit  to  wear,  each  in  her  day;  and  with
such  a  semi  lance  of  the  life,  that  Whoso  be-
held them  could  scant  believe  they  were  life-
less bodies,  for  in  nothing  did  they  resemble
things  inanimate,  save  that  the  limbs  had  no
power  of  motion,  and  the  tongue  no  liberty
of  speech.  Now,  as  they  who  affect  such
things  forget  all  other  when  they  have  them
present,  even  so  were  these  companions
so  bi;sied  with  what  the}'  saw  before  them,
that  all  the  past  was  put  clean  out  of  remem-


293

branco,  especially  when  among  those  imagGs
they  saw  those  which  they  bore  in  then;
hearts.

.All  along  vue  part  of  this  chamber  were  the

ima  jes  of  such   a>  lived  in  the  time  of  Ur-

,  her  own  being  in  the  midst  of  them.

such  as    '.•   was  in   the  davs  of  her  youth,

she  sitting  in  a  chair  of  gold,  having  a  book

in  her  hand.     On  lier  right  hand  was  placed

Oriana,  the  daughter  of    king   Lisuarte  of

G  eat  Britain,  and   on   the   other  side  was

Briolania    the   queen   of    Sobradisa:    then,

Leo  narina,  the   princess  of  Constantinople,

and  the  two  princesses  Melicia  and  Orlinda,

each  of  them   having  their  names   imposed

;■  them  in  leti  irs   of  gold.    There  were

other  but    w.l-^c,  wherefore    it  is  to  be

ved,    that    the    others   of     their    time,

who  had  also  the  commendation  of  beauty,

as  is  written   i:i  the   book    of  king   Atnadi-,

w»ie  not  worthv  *  of  this  immortality."  On.


*  This  seems  to  allude  to  the  inferiority   of  ail  the  c:u-
r.nuators  of  Vasco  I-obeira.

2  c3


another  side  was  to  be  ?cen  Isco*  la  Blonde,
Giencver,  Wife" of  kitig  Arthur  and  mi
to  Lancelot  du  Lake,' the  second  Ueo  óf  t lie
white  hands,    with   others,   which  in  those
days  had  flourished  in  Great  Britam  ;  ítb
I       inda's  intention  to  leave  some  memorial
of  the    wonders   of  that   land,  because  sh<
was  a  native  thereof.     On  a  third  side  were
those  of  later  days  :  the  empress   Polinarda*
Agrioia  the  empiess  of  Allemain,   Gridofjia,
Fieri  da,  and  Franceliha,  figured  so  near  their
just   proportions,  as    there   wanted    nothing
but  life  itself:  all  of  them  worthy  high  praise
for  their  surpassing  beauty  ;  but  Fk  rida  was
judged  to  exceed  them  all.     On  the  fourth
side  were  tho>e  who   were  still   flourishing  :
Polinarda  the  daughter  of  Prirnaleon,    IVÍi-
raguarda,  Lionarda  the  piincess  of  Thrace^
Aitea,    Sidela,    daughter    to    king    Tarnaes


*  As  the  orthography  of  this  heroine's  name  is  doubtful,
J  haw  followed  the  Portuguese.  It  supplies  another  ana-
lcey  aga..ist  the  reading  which  M  .  A'altcr  Scot?  has  followed
Jn  in.  édition  of  òir  'njtram  The  stories  of  tht  Round
Table  we  popul  •  in  Portugal  in  the  fourteenth  century—
of  this  I  have  some  carioui  instances  to  adduce  hereafter.


295

!    Lacedemonia,   and   Arnalta,  princess  ot^
Navarre,  who,  though  her  actions  were  un
worthy  of  that  chamber,  yet  merited  a  place
(here  for  her  beauty.     Polinarda  was   seated
in  the  midst  of'  these,  as  she  who  seemed  to
excel  the  other  ;  yet,  it'  Florendos  had  been
there,  she  would  nut  have  appeared  so  to  him,
and  he  would  have  had  reason  for  not  think-
ing so  ;  for  Miraguarda  had  such  a  look,  that
il  seemed  as  if  her  place  had  been  usurped.
On  the  first  side,  Oriana  and  Briolania'were
of  such   equality  together  as  it  would  have
tried  a  sharp  wit  to  say  which  of  them  was
fairest  :  but   yet  Oriana  had  in  her  counte-
nance   a  quiet   loveliness,  which   made    the
beholders  willing  to  allow  the  victory  to  lier.
But    whoso  had  surveyed  all  in  the  chambi  i
with  a  free  and  unoccupied  judgment,  would
have  judged  thai    neither  Orianà,  Briolania,
Polinarda,     1'Ieiida,    nor    Miraguarda,    who
were  the  fairest,  was  so  fair  as  Iseo  la  Blonde.

The  four  companions  were  so  amazed  at
what  they  saw  before  them,  and  each  so
occupied  with  his  own  thoughts,  as  not  to
notice  the  extremes  of  the  others.  Beyond
them  all,  he  of  the  Tyger,  seeing  the  coun-


256

tcrfeit  of  her  that  did  so  much  torment  him,
with  the  same  native  grace,  an-i  attired   in
the  same  manner  as  she   was  when  lie   took
Ins  farewel  of  her,  could  not  believe  that  it
was  a  thing   of  art,  but  fell  into  such  a  i
ceir  of  imaginations  ih  though   it  were  his
lady  Polinarca  indeed,  and  looked  at  her   as
though  it  were  her  very  self,  with  the  same
fear;  and  silently  addressed  himself  to  ber,
saying,  Lady,  1  know  well   that  this  is  you  ;
and  since   it  is,  it  would   not  be   ill  done,
if  you  were  sometimes  to  change  your  will
towards  me,  in  recompcnoe  of  my  love  and
deserving:.     But  to  whom    am    i    spei
or'what  profit  do    I  receive  in    using  such
speeches  to  her,  who  maketh   hersell
and   will  not  hear  me,  and   dumb  when  she
should   speak  to  me;  in   every  thing  wl
with  you    should    give   life    to   me  yvi    are
dead  ;  but  in  all  that  can  give  me  pain,  I  find
you  living,  to  my  cost.  If,  how  ever,  it  plea  »eth
you  to  treat  me  thus,  what  have  I  to  complain
of?   For  in  fine,  what  you  wish  that  do  J  wish
also,  and    am  content  with  the  cruelty   you
shew  me,  thinking  that  you  arc   so  ;   and  in
this  confidence  I  support  myself,  and  it  may
he  that  in  this  I  err.     In  this  manner,  each


ïicltl  silent  discourses  to  her  whom  he  afïected,
and  they  who  had  none  present  to  discourse
unto,  let  their  phantasies  rove  at  will,  -not
knowing  where  to  fix  them.  There  Platir
had  the  princess  .Sidela*,  daughter  to  king
Tarnaes  of  Lacedemonia,  whom  he  after-
wards espoused,  and  became  king  of  that
country.  Beroido  the  prince  of  Spain,  find-
ing not  I] is  lady  and  mistress  in  this  place,
felt  not  the  same  contentment  as  these,  and
yet  would  not  confess  to  himself  that  she  was
less  worthy  of  a  seat  there  than  these  others  ;
for  it  is  the  nature  of  true  lovers  to  be  so
well  satisfied  with  those  whom  they  do  affect,
that  they  will  allow  none  other  to  have  the
vantage  over  them.  And  in  truth,  Onistalda,
whom  Beroido  served,  deserved  to  have  been.
among    their  number;  and  if  she  was    not


*  This  probably  refers  to  the  Romance  of  Platir.  His  mar-
riage with  Sidela  is  indicated  in  the  latter  chapters  of  Pri-
maleon,  where  Platir  is  appointed  as  his  father's  lineal  suc-
essor in  chivalry,  and  Pompides  as  Don  Duardos's.  The
Chionicle  of  Platir  was  probably  obscured  by  the  merit  oi
the  present  story.


•


found  th^rr1,  it  w,v  q  i'v  heoa  mda had

appointed  'hat   place  lor  such  as  were  par»*
of  nature.

When  they  had  long  looked  on,  Daliarle  at
!,  Sus,  metbinks  it'  you  be  not  in-
taeiiupted,  you  will  take  i  p  your  perpetual
abode  here,  and  i-  ■  lifeless  images  <
you  to  forg  t  them  whom  your  duty  com-
manded you  to  remember;  !  pray  you  vu  Id
not  so  absolutely  ;<-  these  which  are  no
other  but  shapes  without  substance,  for  HI
the  beholding  these  you  do  hut  mis-spu  od
your  time,  looking  for  that  rccom pence
which  they  have  not  the  power  to  give  you.
It  is  more  necessary  to  go  to  them  whom
the  pictures  represent,  who  in  time  will  more
sufficiently  content  your  hearts,  than  your
eyes  receive  pleasure  in  looking  on  these
toys,  whose  fantastic  appearances  you  may
at  any  time  enjoy.

At  this  the  knight  of  the  Tygcr  turned  to
him,  saying,  What  would  you,  sir  Dali  arte,
that  he  who  beholds  the  wonders  of  this
chamber  should  tlo,  but  gaze  upon  them  till


ï9l)

he  loses  all  recollection  of  other  things?  For
elf  1  am,  i  confess,  so  amazed  at  what
is  before  me,  as  scarcely  to  know  where  I
am  !  What  then  would  he  be  whose  heart
was  given  to  one  of  these  fair  personages  ?  lie
spake  in  this  manner,  because  he  would  not
have  his  friends  suspect  his  amorous  thoughts:
so  departing  thence,  they  Ment  again  to  toe
castle,  where,  provision  being  made,  they
sale  down  to  dinner,  which  being  em
they  concluded  to  depart  from  the  island,  as
there  was  now  nothing  more  to  see.  Pal-
merin  being  then  about  to  take  his  leave  of
Sâtiafor,  in  the  presence  of  him  and  of  most
of  the  other  habitants,  called  for  his  brother
Daiiarte,  and  said  to  him,  as  he  had  long  re-
solved to  do  :

If  1  did  not  hope,  my  noble  friend  and  bro-
ther, that  fortune  might  one  day  advance
me  to  such  estate,  as  1  might  be  able  in  some
manner  to  reeompeuce  the  manifold  courte-
sies !  have  received  at  your  hands,  yon
might  repute  me  of  a  base  and  thankless
rature.  And  as  at  i  his  time  1  possess  nothing
wherewith  to  manifest  this  my  great  desire,


soo

í  beseech  you,  as  a  pledge  of  it,  accept  thii
island,  the  thing  of  all  others  which  i  bave
conquered  with  the  greatest  risk  of  my  person,
and  cost  of  my  own  blood  ;  which  I  shall  thus
think  well  employed.  And  as  this  place  is  more
worthy  to  be  yours  than  any  other  person's,
and  you  more  worthy  than  any  other  person
of  it,  I  beseech  you  do  not  wrong  me  by  i  «  -
fusing  it.  At  least,  remember,  that  thai
which  was  of  most  value  I  rganda  reserved  for
you;  accept  therefore  the  lordship  thereof,
With  the  same  will  wherewith  1  offer  it.
And  from  this  time  forth  I  enjoin  Satiafor  to
obey  you  as  he  hath  done  me,  and  beseech
you  to  honour  him  as  I  expect,  so  that  hi:
may  receive  from  your  hands  the  guerdon  of
the  much  wherein  I  stand  indebted,  to  him.

Sir,  answered  Daliarte,  they  of  this  island
have  good  occasion  to  be  offended,  seeing
you  will  deprive  them  of  yourself,  to  give  it
unto  one  whom  it  hath  cost  so  little.  I  accept
it  because  I  know  that  herein  i  shall  hereaf-
ter do  you  great  service  in  things  which  are
yet  to  come,  and  which  time  will  discover;
and  I  accept  Satiafor,,  not  as  my  subject,


301

"hut  as  my  loving  friend  and  companion,  as  well
for  the  valour  of  his  person,  as  likewise  to
let  you  perfectly  understand,  that  I  am  he
who  vows  himself  always  at  your  command-
ment, lie  then  offered  to  take  Palmerin's
hand  to  kiss  it;  but  he  took  him  in  his  arms,
and  embracing  him,  said,  God  grant,  sir  bro-
ther, that  time  may  give  me  wherewith  to
show  you  how  fully  Í  acknowledge  all  that  I
owe  to  you.

Beroldo  and  Platif  thought  well  of  this  gift  to
Daliarte,  saying  that  nothing  was  ever  better
bestowed;  for  the  island  appeared  destined
for  his  habitation,  and  for  none  other's.  Sa-
tiafor,  though  he  was  sorry  for  the  transfer,
yet  concealed  his  mind  lest  he  should  pur-
chase the  displeasure  of  his  new  lord,  to
whom  he  advanced  himself  to  give  obedience,
praying  however  the  knight  of  the  Tyger,
that  he  would  not  regard  him  as  another's
vassal,  nor  forget  him.  He  of  the  Tyger
replied  in  words  with  the  which  Satiafoï
remained  contented,  and  which  afterward
were  well  accomplished  with  deeds.  Forth-
with they  resolved  to  depart,  leaving  Daliartô
vol.  in,  £  i>


I

there.     The  kniçhi  oi
foyst   with    \
meaning  to  land   upon  die  coniinent  at  tbe
,   and    ll"  him    buck   to

his  government  ;  and  sed  himself  la

'•lo  and  Platir,  giving  them  to  under-
stand, that  be  umst  oi'  necessity  go  alone,
for  I  hat   he  had    ;:

iv here  he   had  promised  tu   be  on  a  da
pointed,  and  must  appear  with
uion.      They   admitted    the   excuse,    '
believing  it,  or  judging  that  it  vas  his
sure  to  travel  alone.  ter*«l   tbte

same  fbyst  wherein  they   were   brou  -b.i  thi-

■
sailed  towards  Constantinople,  :    •      im
weath

y  attain-.!

;  ger  in  like  .  nináeã  ia

another  -country,  una''  ri  Argeu-

xao,  who  with   many  tears,  taking  leave  oi
him,  returned  to  the  Prof  .     ]   .0  as-

sume   .  .  when  the  peopk

corned  aim  -with  that  ■  ûf.   me  oi'  h

is  WeA  worth  v.


CHAPTER  IIS.


Some  time  after  the  departure  of  the  knight
of  the  Savage  from  the  court  of  the  emperor
his  grandfather,  he  and  all  his  household
being  m  great  fear  and  sorrow,  because  there
vas  no  news  of  his  preservation,  and  his  des-
truction was  held  certain  by  reason  of  what
his  squire  had  reported  ;  it.  fell  out,  that  as
the  emperor  was  one  day  at  table,  talking
with  certain  prince?  and  knights  concerning
this  misadventure  and  his  own  imprudence
therein,  Alfernao  entered  the  hall,  a]
ing  now  m>  much  older  than  he  had  done
upon    his    former   visit,   that    l  rcely

knew    him;    1er    the    fear  which    accompa-

.  and  the  accidents  of  these  latter
had  wrinkled    his    countenance   much,  and
2  '


304

weakened  all  his  limbs.  He,  coming  before
the  emperor,  fell  on  the  ground  before  him,
and  perforce  kissed  his  feet,  saying,  Most
powerful  Sir,  I  beseech  you,  since  your  be-
nevolence, humanity,  and  virtue  arc  generally
.dispensed  unto  all,  do  not  itc  me  find  them
failing.  Well  do  I  know,  that  if  you  judge
me  according  to  my  deeds,  there  is  no  rea-
son why  I  should  be  excused  from  grievous
punishment;  but  this  your  royal  nature  can.
supply,  which  is  accustomed  to  forgive  all
offences.  I,  sir,  for  my  misfortune,  am  that
old  man,  who  having  attained  to  an  age  when
it  was  time  to  have  put  from  me  all  wicked
thoughts,  came  to  your  court  to  practice  evil
devices,  as  I  had  ever  been  wont  to  do  ;  and.
feigning  need  of  aid,  which  I  had  not,  you
gave  me  your  grandson  Florian,  to  succour
jne.

Then  began  he  to  discourse  the  whole  suc-
cess, even  as  it  had  chanced,  and  how  Florian
had  sent  him  there  to  relate  all  that  happened  ;
that  the  truth  being  known,  all  fear  which.
Mould  needs  be  entertained  for  his  safety,
might  be  removed.


305

Certes,  .Alieinao,   replied  ihe   emperor,
brought  me  into  one  of  the  greatest  trouble  .-
that  1  ever  endured.     1  know  not  what   pa-
tience could  have  been  so  great,  as  to  forego
the   hatred  which   I   bear  you,  had  you  ool
brought  me  news  of  my  grandson's  preserva
tion.     1  give  thanks  to  God  who  bath  d<  !i-
vered  him  bom  your  devices,  and  bom   the
revenge   of  Colambar.     Henceforth  I   shall
be  more  wary  ;  your  dealing  shall  remain  to
me  for  a  sufficient  example   how  i  give  cre-
dit hereafter  to  tears  and  fair  speeches,  grey
hairs,  and  feeble  old   age.     I  thank  Arlanza
for   what  she  hath   done,  and  if  it   fortune
that  she    come  into   my  court,  will  witness
my  good-will,  to  requite  her  virtuous  d<
that   whoretinto    I  am  most   indebted  is   the
storm  of  the  sea,  which  was  the  cause  of  his
preservation.     You  may  go  rest  yourself,  and
either  stay  their  coming  or  d<  part,   at   your
pleasure  ;  for  from  this  time  you  arc  at  liberty.
1  will  go  to  the  empress  and  give   ber  this
news,  of  which  she  and  ber  daughters  have
little  hope.     But  as  by  this  time  the  news  had
spread  through   the   palace,    before   the  em-
peror could   rise  up,  she  came  in   with  Gri-
2n3


306

donia  in  her  hand,  ;md  behind  her  PolinanU
and  the  princess  Lionarda,  who  was  not  the
one  who  least  rest  ntedthe  loss  of  her  knight.
The  emperor  received  them  saying,  I  see
lady,  1  have  been  late  in  seeking  you  ;  but  the
desire  which  Í  had  to  hear  all  that  hath  be-
fallen your  grandson,  and  the  perils  which
he  hath  gone  through,  delayed  me.  Then,
making  them  be  seated,  he  commanded  Al-
fernao  to  repeat  his  former  discourse.  Al-
fernao,  to  whom  it  was  full  grievous  to  avow
his  own  wickedness  so  often,  did  so,  sorely
against  his  will,  whereat  those  ladies  con-
ceived a  mortal  hatred  against  him  ;  for  in
women  anger  and  the  desire  of  vengeance
are  alway  at  hand,  and  the  will  of  forgiveness
is  slow.  And  not  being  able  to  bear  the
sight  of  him,  they  made  the  emperor  dismiss
him,  whereat  Primaleon  was  well  pleased  to
see  their  little  patience.

At  this  time,  that  their  pleasure  might  be
complete,  they  heard  a  great  uproar  in  the
place  before  the  palace — the  cause  whereof
was,  that  Albaner,  prince  Beroldo's  squire,
who  brought  Colambar,  by  the  knight  of  the


307

Tiger's  command,  was  arrive»-!,  and  was
bringing  her  to  the  court.  All  the  people
Tnn  fo  see  her,  as  one  of  the  most  monstrous
things  which  had  ever  been  seen  in  that
country,  and  the  boys  and  children  made  an
uproar  which  rung  through  the  palace  and
the  whole  city.  Being  surprized  at  this,  their
snrprize  was  yet  greater  when  Albaner  en-
tered the  hall,  leading  Colambar  by  the
hand,  for  they  knew  not  what  thus  could  be.
As  soon  as  Alfernao  saw  her,  he  knew  her,
and  understood  that  all  was  utterly  lost;  and
drawing  near  lier,  he  said,  It  seems,  lady,
the  same  misfortune  that  brought  me  hither,
hath  had  the  like  authority  over  you  ;  I  be-
seech you  take  all  patiently,  since  it  is  the
will  of  fate,  and  hath  long  been  reserved  for
you.  When  Colambar,  who  had  all  this
while  eyed  the  emperor  and  those  ladi
turned  round  and  knew  Alfernfio,  she  began
to  cry  aloud,  suspecting  that  she  was  be-
trayed, as  though  with  her  voice  she  would
have  shaken  the  hall  in  pieces  :  and  then
such  sobs  came  from  the  very  bottom  of
her  breast,  so  loud  and  mournful,  that  the
empress  and  those  princesses,  with  their  wo-


308

men,  could  not  bear  to  hear  them,  and  had
pity  and  tear  pf  her  at  the  same  time;  for
she  was  not  only  huge  and  ugly  out  of  all
proportion,  but  her  lamentation  made  her
appear  more  hideous  and  frightful  When
at  length  her  tears  allowed  her  power  to
speak,  she  said  with  a  hoarse  voice,  O  Al-
fernao,  is  this  the  end  of  the  trust  which  I
reposed  in  thee,  and  of  the  love  which  my
husband  Bravorante,  in  his  life-time,  did  bear
thee?  Where  is  Arlanzamy  daughter?  Where
hast  thou  left  her?  Into  whose  hands  hast
thou  betrayed  her,  depriving  me  of  my  child
whom  I  have  trusted  to  thee  ?

Lady,  replied  Alfernao,  it  is  plain  you  treat
me  as  one  not  knowing  what  has  chanced,
nor  is  it  much  that  you  should  suspect  my
truth,  it  being  your  nature  never  to  have
perfect  confidence  in  any  thing.  I  have  just
related  my  miseries  twice,  and  must  now  yet
once  again  repeat  them  for  the  third  time,
that  you  may  understand  what  you  owe  me,
and  how  little  we  both  owe  to  fortune.  Then
having  once  more  unfolded  the  whole  circum-
íltauce    of  that  which  had  happened   since       ,


$09

his"    departure     from]  her,     at    the  end
his  discourse  added,  your  daughter  Arlanza
temaius  well  pleased  with  herself,     rid      ith,

if  yon  would  have  her  regard  you  as  her
ftïotl  er,  it  is  necessary  that  you  must  become:
the  friend  of  him  whom  you  have  ever  re-
garded as  your  enemy,  and  forget  the  death  or
your  sons,  and  lay  aside  }  --ir  hatred  against
him  who  sic  w  them;  else  you  must  needs  lose
6er  as  well  as  her  brethren.  Belie  ;  me,
Alfernao,  said  Colambar,  in  all  my  misfor-
tunes theie  is  nothing  which  afflicieth  me  so
an        as  these    words,    from  her   whom  I

ght  forth,     Would  to  God  that  the  same

end  which  I  have  seen  m}r  sons  come  to  had

1  :•■■! -ilico  hei  also,   rather  than  I  had  lived  to

her  affecting  the  destroyer   of  her  race.

Now  then  let  all  miseries  fall  upon  me  which

orTd  can  bestow.  I  neither  feel  nor
fear  them,  nor  will  I  have  any  consolation
for  this  wretchedness!  And  with   that  new

"n,  unable  to  keep  «>n  foot,  she  seated
herself  on  the  ground,  her  spirits  failing  like.
on.    dead,  so  that  it  was  some  time  before
she    could    speak.      Tn  that   while    All
made  known  to  the  emperor  the  whole  cir-


3  10

çumstance  of  what  happened  in  the  Profound
fsle  ;  both  how  Palmerin  had  slain  the  giant
Pavoroso,  and  how  his  three  nephews  were
deprived  of  their  lives  by  the  prowess  of  Be-
roldo,  Platir,  and  Daliarte  ;  news,  which  did
greatly  satisfy  Prinudeon  and  Gridonia,  hear-
ing thus  of  the  great  chivalry  of  their  son.
He  related,  moreover,  how  the  people  of  the
Profound  Isle  had  chosen  the  knight  of  the
Savage  Man  for  their  lord,  and  because  he
was  absent,  Palmerin  had  placed  Argentao
to  rule  the  Isle;  and  that  they  had  -'charted
to  the  Perilous  Island,  where  they  would  re-
main a  few  days,  and  then  take  their  way  to
Constantinople.  I  know,  said  the  emperor*
that  all  good  fortune  is  reserved  for  Palme-
rin ;  if  1  had  known  he  had  taken  with  him
so  good  a  guide  as  Daliarte,  I  should  have
had  little  fear  of  Floriau's  safety.  And  now,
would  that  I  could  see  them  here,  for  my
condition  tells  ine  that  I  l*ive  but  short  time
to  enjoy  them.

Then  calling  again  for  Alfernao,  he  asked  him
if  it  was  the  intention  of  the  knight  of  the  Sa-
vage .Man  to  travel  long  in  the  realm  of  Spain.


m

Sir,  answered  Alfernao,  he  is  not  minded  tb
retuni  unto  your  court,  before  he  have  first
shown  the   castle  of  Almourol    to   Arlanza;
The  princess  Lionarda  heard    this  well,  and
as  she  was  already  yielded  up  to  love,  it  wag
nothing  agreeable   to  her,  thinking  thuf  thé
gight  of  Miraguarda  would   occasion   some
change  in  him  ;  on  the  other  hand,   she  re-
mem!,  ered,   that  being   there   he    would    do
battle  with  the  keeper  of  the  shield,  and  that
when  he  had   conquered  him  in   her  name,
her  praise  would  be  the  greater.     Polinaida,
who  perceived  these  thoughts,  being  herself
acquainted  with  such  fears,  s;' id   to   her,  let
your   knight,    lady,    go   wherever  his  incli-
nation leads  him  ;  lor  1  dare  assure  y  oil  there
is  nothing  in   the  world  which   can  change
that  with  the  which  lie   went   IVom   hi
Time  will  shew  whether  I  know  him  well  or
ill  ; — have  you  no  tear  of  Miraguarda's  beau-
ty, lor  you  are   one  who   need  have  no  such
fear  of  any  !  From  you,  lady,  replied  Lionarda,
I  cannot  conceal  tin's  fear, — from   any  other
it  should  have  been  dissembled:   but  this  fear
1  feci,  and  am  glad  that  you  have  relieved  ù
with  these  words,  which,  as  being  your*,  do
something  assure  me.


The  emperor  then  bade  Alfemao  tell  Colanv
bar  to    take  comfort,  since  lier  grief  CO
not  be  remedied  by  this  extreme  pa-
to be  sure  that  the  :-i.iould  in  that  house  re-
ceive a  full  favourable  h

of  Arlauza;  and  if  she  would  become  a  Chris-
tian, such  honours  and  bounties  would  b?e
conferred  upon  her,,  that  she  might  there-
with forget  a  part  of  her  sorrow.  But  3$
Alfemao  began  to  persuade  lier  to  this  effect^
Colam  bar,  not  able  to  bear  it,  nor  to
such      i  leteruoined  up

heard  .of  action  ;  ■  og  full  of  des

and  the  fa  F  the  devil,  she  rose  up  anti

said,,  How  dost  thou,  Alfernaot,  recomp
the  faith  and  confidence  which  I  reposed  in
thee,  to  render  thys  on  mine

enemy'     ide;  .and  by  the  persuasion  of
thou    eomeet    te  will  me  fors
wherein  1  li;.;.  nourished  and  brought

up,  and  avherc'm  I  will  vlie.     Now  then  Í  ivjU
•life  and  thy  ire  a  ■■  rlie.r,  .thaj

it  way  be  an  example  to  then)  whp  do  what
they  onjgbx  not.

on   hjm.,


313

and  seizing  him  with  all  her  might,  lifted
him  from  the  ground,  and  bore  him  to  one  of
the  great  open  windows  of  the  hall  ;  and  be-
fore any  one  could  get  to  her  to  succour
him,  she  threw  him  headlong  down,  and
herself  after  him  ;  where,  as  the  height  was
great,  and  the  place  below  paved,  she  died
presently  ;  but  Alfernao,  not  being  so  heavy.
lived  until  the  next  morning.

The  emperor  and  Primaieon  were  grieved  at
this,  but  the  empress  and  the  other  princesses
rejoiced  that  they  were  so  well  delivered  of
the  cruel  Colambar,  for  they  were  still  in  fear
of  her.  And  it  being  now  late,  they  withdrew
themselves  into  their  chambers.


VOL.111.  T    F


.


7  A  PT ER     US


On  the  next.  day.  after  the  bodies  of  Colaiil-
bar  and  Alfernao  were  buried,  as  tin'  enipe-
ror  was  sitting  aí  table,  and  conferring  with
Albaner,  prince  Beroldos  squire,  about
inany  matters  of  the  Profound  Isle,  an  an-
cient  knight  whom  he  had  eivén  char,
guard  the  port  of  Constantinople,  enti
the  great  hall,  and  being  come  into  the  em-
peror's presence,  he  kneeled  clown,  and  spake
as  followcth  :

Sir,  if  the  news  which  were  yesterday  rehear-
sed or*  your  grandsons  did  move  content
amid  your  sorrow,  the  tidings  which  I  bring
you  at  this  present,  will  be  no  less  welcome  :
within  vour  haven  is  entered  four  galleys


315

from  the  Great  Turk,  wherein  are  Polemic-,
|3elçar,  and  all  the  princes  and  knights  of
your  court,  which  have  been  kept  thug  long
in  prison  ;  Í  came  to  let  you  understand  here-
of before  they  were  landed,  that  no  one
might  have  the  pleasure  of  bringing  you  the
news  before  me.

The  emperor  was  so  surprised  with  this  sud-
den joy,  whereof  his  hope  had  been  full,
doubtful,  that  without  making  any  answer
he  departed  forth  of  the  hall,  and  went  down
into  the  court,  almost  without  remembering
where  he  went,  or  how  he  was  going  ;  but
having  gone  down,  and  then  finding  himself
unattended,  hestopt,  and  seated  himself  upon,
a  stone  bench,  waiting  till  a  horse  should  be
brought  him.  And  though  many  persons
who  now  came  spake  unto  him,  and  gave  him
joy  of  this  good  fortune,  he  did  not  make
tiiein  any  answer,  for  that  his  mind  was.
»  d  in  remembering  how  many  happy
fortunes  had  come  to  him  one  on  another's
neck  :  whereupon  lu-  humbly  desired  om
Lord  to  temper  them  with  some  little  visita-
tion of  sorrow  ;  for  it  is  the  nature  of  men  of

—    i


r>i6

good  judgment,  to  doubt  of  evil  after  they
have  received  good  success,  and  when  their
fort'in*  r  in  its  highest  state  of  prosperity,
tlRn  to  have  most  distrust  thereof.  In  this
manner  he  discoursed  secretly  with  himself,
and  comparing  every  cause  jointly  together,
the  tears  did  plentifully  run  down  his  white
beard,  thinking  how  fortune  favoured  him
in  his  extreme  age,  and  how  short  a  space  of
life  remained  to  him  to  enjoy  this  happiness.
While  he  was  wrapt  in  these  and  other  such
imaginations,  Primaleon  his  son,  who  had
by  this  time  heard  how  the  galleys  were  ar-
rived, came  to  him,  v.  hereupon  he  mount-
ed his  horse,  and  with  a  small  retinue
took  his  way  to  the  port,  where,  when  he
came,  he  four  d  the  greater  part  of  the  people»
as  well  the  prince  of  the  court  as  the  in-
habitants cf  the  city,  all  greatly  desiring  to
see  the  piisoners.  By  this  time  Polendos,
Belcar,  Onistaldo,  with  divers  others,  had
landed,  a:;d  that  he  might  the  better  wel-
come them,  he  alighted  from  his  horse,  and
embraced  them  one  by  one.  But  though
this  meeting  vas  for  him  one  of  the  things
in  his  life  which  he  had   most  desired,   and


317

most  rejoiced  at,  nevertheless  lie  was  troubled
to  see  that  Polendos  and  the  rest  of  his
knights  bore  with  them  evident  marks  of
their  misfortune;  for  the  greater  part  of
them  came  with  beards  grown  out  of  all
measure^  pole  and  sallow  complexions,  and
dispositions  of  body  ;  and  some  who
who;  they  departed  from  Constantinople  in
the  company  of  the  prineess  Targiaua,  were.
young  gallants,  returned  no  a-  with  grey
hairs,  and  limbs  weak  like  old  age,  every
•  hearing  testimony  of  the  life  which
(hey  had  endured  :  when  they  were  all  come
on  shore,  the  emperor  received  them  with
imc  true  love  that  he  had  ever  borne
them  ;  and  he  held  Belcar  in  his  arms  a
long  time,  remembering  how  from  a  child,
and  even  like  his  own  son  Primaleon,  he  had
been  brought  up  in  his  court,  being  the  sou
of  his  own  sister,  and  of  Frisol,  king  of  Hun-
gary, his  brother  and  especial  friend  ;  and
thinking  how  to  serve  him,  he  had  accom-
panied Targiana,  on  this  unhappy  journey,
on  which  he  had  set  out  a  comely  young
man,  and  was  returned  so  different;  so  that
the  remembrance  of  these  things  abated  the
2  e  3


318

joy  of  this  happy  day.  It  may  be,  that  at
this  hour  also,  si  eing  men  before  him  waxed
so  old,  who  might  easily  have  been  his  grand-
children, that  he  thought  of  his  own  great
age,  which  according  to  the  course  of  nature
could  not  now  last  long.  After  he  had  thus
embraced  Belcar,  and  welcomed  all,  especi-
ally Onislaldoj  the  son  of  king  Recindos,
he  turned  to  his  son  Polendos,  and  laying
aside  all  sorrowful  thoughts,  took  his  arm,
and  walked  with  them  towards  the  palace*
enquiring  as  he  went  concerning  their
voyage,  and  of  his  friend  Targiana.  Pri-
maleon  went  in  the  midst  between  Belcar
and  Onistaldo  ;  and  the  other  princes  and
knights  in  like  wise,  communing  with  their
friends,  followed  the  emperor.  Having
come  to  the  palace,  they  there  found  the
empress  accompanied  with  all  her  house,  at-
tending their  coming,  and  were  received  by
her  each  according  to  the  quality  of  his  per-
son. Forthwith  the  emperor  commanded
they  should  be  brought  to  their  chambers^
for  that  they  required  rest.

The  princes  were  lodged  in    the   emperor's


3\9

house,  according  as  it  was  the  custom  for
those  whom  he  esteemed  at  their  arrival.
But  when  they  had  taken  their  leave,  there
entered  into  the  hall  a  Turkish  squire,  who
Coming  before  the  emperor,  began  to  salute»
him  with  these  words  :  Sir,  Almanzar,  am-
bassador  from  the  Great  Turk,  saith  that  he
will  not  land,  lest  he  might  interrupt  the  joy
which  you  receive  in  the  return  of  your
knights,  and  hath  therefore  ordered  them  to
be  disembarked.  If  in  this  there  be  any
discourtesy,  forgive  it;,  since  the  intention
excuseth  it.  On  the  morrow  he  will  make
you  acquainted  with  the  sum  of  his  embas-
sage, which  he  thinks  will  abate  somewhat
of  your  present  contentment.

In  truth,  squire,  said  the  emperor,  I  find  I
ba\r  been  forgetful  in  not  speaking  to  him.,
nor  enquiring  fur  him  ;  but  if  this  be  art
error;  the  pleasure  of  this  meeting  must  be
mj  excuse,  and  if  it  ran  be  amended,  wil-
lingly shall  I  make  the  amends.  To-morrow^
.'h  ,  be  chuses  to  pass  the  night  in  his  galleys,
we  shall  meet,  and  then  I  willaione  for  thjfi
foigetfulaess    of   to-day.      The    squire  de


320

parted  with  this  courteous  answer,  and   the
emperor  and  empress  withdrew  t!.
each  to  their  chamber.

On  the  morrow  the  emperor  beard  mass  in
thehonse  of  the  empress,  where  he  also  dined,
at  her  request,  that  she  might  entertain  Po-
lendos,  Belcar,  and  Ónistaldo.   When  dinner

was  ended,  the  emperor  commanded  the
principal  knights  of  his  court  to  go  welcome
on  land  the  Turk's  ambassador, to  whom  he
would  shew  himself  honourable,  as  well  for
that  he  had  brought  back  his  knight.-,  as
because  the  Moor  deserved  to  he  ho-
nourably welcomed,  being  a  great  p<  r-
sonage.

Polendos,  Belcar,  and  the  rest  of  them  that
had  been  prisoners,  went  foremost,  to  receive
him  on  shore,  because  they  would  not  have
him  think  that  they  had  forgotten  the  kind-
ness he  shewed  them  on  the  seas  :  whereat
lY.uKueon  was  somewhat  displeased,  because
his,  nature  could  not  suffer  him  to  use  such
courtesv  towards  them  he  knew  to  be  his
professed  enemies  ;  but  the  emperor  thought


S2Î

it  well,  for  in  this  his  disposition  dirtied  from,
that  of  his  son.

Polenclos  with  his  company  being  come  to
the  quay,    lie    with    Belcar    and    Onistaldo

took,  a  barge,  and  went  aboard  the  gaLley  to
the  ambassador,  and  brought  him  on  shore.
The  Moor  seeing  such  principal  persons,  and
so  great  nobility,  for  Polenclos  told  him  who
they  all  were,  knew  well  that  this  exceed-
ing humanity  came  from  the  greatness  of
mind  of  him  that  was  their  lord  and  go-
vernor ;  whereupon  he  judged  that  a  man
well  beloved  of  all,  should  find  more  friends
to  aid  him  in  his  necessity,  than  enemici
to  molest  him.

This  while  the  emperor  attended  the  am-
bassador's coming  in  the  empress's  cham-
ber, accompanied  with  Primaleon,  and  many
piinces  and  knights  of  his  <  ...  The  am-
bassador being  the  sain  lal  came  before
to  propose  the  exchange  of  Albayzar,  as  he
now  knew  all  those  princesses,  did  his  de-
voir to  them  and  to  the  emperor  with  greater
courtesy  and  le^s  pride  than  he  had  displayed


3<20

parted  with  this  courteous  answer,  and   the
emperor  and  empress  withdrew  t!.
each  to  their  chamber.

On  the  morrow  the  emperor  beard
the  house  of  the  empress,  where  he  also  din< .!,
at  her  request,  that  she  might  entertain  Po-
lendos,  Belcar  and  Onistaldo.   When  dinner

was  ended,  the  emperor  commanded  the
principal  knights  of  his  court  to  go  welcome
on  land  the  Turk's  ambassador,  to  whom  he
would  shew  himself  honourable,  as  well  for
that  he  had  brought  back  his  knights
because  the  Moor  deserved  to  be  ho-
nourably welcomed,  being  a  great
sonage.

Polemics,  Belcar,  and  the  rest  of  them  that
had  been  prisoners,  went  foremost,  to  receive
him  on  shore,  because  they  would  not  have
him  think  that  they  had  forgotten  the  kind-
gess  he  shewed  them  on  the  seas  :  whereat
aleon  was  somewhat  displeased,  because
his  naitire  could  not  suffer  him  to  use  such
courtesy  towards  them  he  knew  to  be  his
professed  enemies  ;  but  the  emperor  thought


321

a  well,  for  in  this  his  disposition  differed  from,
that  of  his  son.

Polendos  with  his  company  being  come  to
the  quay,  lie  with  Belcar  and  Onistaldo
took  a  barge,  and  went  aboard  the  galley  to
the  ambassador,  and  brought  him  on  shore,
The  Moor  seeing  such  principal  persons,  and
so  great  nobility,  for  Polendos  told  him  who
they  all  were,  knew  well  that  this  exceed-
ing humanity  came  from  the  greatness  of
mind  of  him  that  was  their  lord  and  go-
vernor ;  whereupon  he  judged  that  aman  so-
well  beloved  of  all,  should  find  more  friends
to  aid  him  in  his  necessity,  than  cnemici
to  molest  him.

This  while  the  emperor  attended  the  am-
bassador's coming  in  the  empress's  cham-
ber, accompanied  with  Primaleon,  and  many
piinces  and  knights  .>i'  his  *  .l.  The  am-
bassador being  the  sam<  lal  came  before
to  propose  the  exchange  of  Albayzar,  as  he
mm  knew  all  those  princesses,  did  his  de-
voir to  them  and  lo  the  emperor  with  greater
courtesy  and  le>s  pride  than  he  had  displayed.


324

Tbcfore  lie  come  hither  :  wherefore  I  proy
you  abide  here  a  few  days  till  he  come,  then
shall  you  be  dispatched  to  your  content,
the  Turk  your  lord  be  rid  of  his  doubt,
and  the  princess  Targiana  satisfied.

I  believe,  said  the  ambassador,  he  will  be
nere  sooner  than  you  expect;  for  the  dam-
sel who  formerly  cume  here  with  the  prin-
cess Targiana's  bidding,  Was  dispatched  in
a  galley,  twenty  days  before  my  setting
forth,  that  she  should  let  king  Recindos
and  Albayzar  understand  of  my  coming,  and
certify  them  of  the  liberty  of  your  knights,
that  there  might  be  the  less  delay.  Of
this,  therefore,  there  is  nothing  more  to  be
said  till  he  shall  come.  Give  order  now
that  this  letter  of  credence  be  read,  and
then  I  will  declare  what  farther  I  have  in
charge.

i  There  pausing,  he  took  forth  of  his  bosom
a  letter  written  in  parchment  and  sealed
-with  the  arms  of  the  Great  Turk,  which
lie  presented  to  the  emperor,  who  caused
it  to  be   opened  ;   and  perceiving  thereby


325

that  the  Turk  willed  him  to  give  faithful
credit  to  what  the  ambassador  said,  he  de-
sired him  to  say  on  :  whereto  the  ambas-
sador thus  replied  :

Sir,  I  know  you  cannot  have  forgotten  the
coming  of  the  princess  Targiana  to  your
court,  neither  the  manner  of  her  coming  ;
your  grandson  beguili  igher  from  her  father's
house.  Now  inasmuch  as  she  being  here*
was  entertained  by  your  excellency,  the  em-
piVvs,  and  the  princess  Polinarda,  in  such
gracious  manner  as  she  esteemeth  he
during  life  bound  to  you  for  your  manifold
courtesies,  my  lord  the  Turk  saith,  that
though  for  old  enmity  he  hath  all  his  life
desired  to  make  war  upon  you,  and  con-
quer this  empire,  whereto  he  hath  I-  i
required  by  his  vassals,  and  importuned  by
his  friends;  yet  having  present  the  entrea-
ties of  his  daughter,  and  the  obligation
wherein  for  her  sake  he  stands  bound  unto
you,  he  would  fain  be  your  friend,  and
nut  all  past  enmities  in  forget  fulness,  with
this  condition,  that  you  do  him  justice  in
one  thing  ;  for  according  to  what  is  said
vol.  in.  '2  ?


$26

bf  yon,  he  holds  you  for  such  a  lover  of  jus-
tice, that  even  in  those  things  which  touch
you  the  most  nearly,  you  would  display  your
virtue.  Should  you  refuse  this,  he  will  be
constrained  to  take  that  just  vengeance  by
force  of  arm.-,,  which  you  deny  him.  It  is,
that  you  deliver,  or  cause  to  be  delivered
unto  hini,  the  knight  of  the  Savage  Man,  that
he  may  deal  with  him  according  to  his  hei-
nous offence  ;  and  as  you  are  perfect  in  all
things,  that  you  do  not  fail  in  this  of  your
wonted  virtue.  If  nevertheless  it  be  other-
wise, he  here  revoketh  all  the  desire  which
he  hath  shown  for  your  friendship,  and  all
good  will  toward  you,  deadlily  defying  you
and  your  court,  and  resolving  to  rake  the
most  cruel  vengeance  that  was  ever  seen.

I  could  have  wished,  replied  the  emperor,
that  when  justice  was  required  at  my  hand,
it  had  not  been  required  with  threats,  lest,  if
I  had  the  will  to  render  it,  they  should  have
deterred  me  i  but  there  is  no  justice  in  this
which  he  demandeth.  If  he  saith  that  Florian
brought  away  his  daughter,  I  answer,  that
he  did  it  at  the  earnest  entreaty  and  desire


3í27

of  her.-elf.  Tu  fine,  I  hold  it  time  lost  to  al-
ledge  any  ckfe  ice  in  this  matter;  suffice  it,
that  notliing  shall  mai<e  me  deliver  up  the
knight  of  die  Savage  Man,  unless  it  were  to
one  who  would  esteem  him  as  I  do  myself.
And  though  I  were  willing  to  consent  to  this»
he  himself  would  not  consent,  for  he  is  his
own  lord;  nor  his  father,  who  is  a  mighty
prince.  If  nevertheless  these  reasons  be  not
sufficient  to  avoid  the  defiance,  it  is  welcome  !
1  am  sorry  it  comes  not  in  a  season  when  I
could  shew  him  in  arms  what  I  once  was
myself;  as  it  is,  I  choose  rather  to  have  the
knight  for  my  companion,  than  to  expect
such  courtesy  as  the  Turk  would  show  him.
Oilier  answer  you  are  not  to  look  for  at  my
hands  ;  you  may  go  now  rest  yourself,  and
when  Albayzar  cometh,  if  you  find  the  wea-
ther convenient,  you  may  depart,  and  if  not,
as  long  as  you  tarry  here,  such  honour  and
welcome  shall  be  shewn  yon,  as  you  deserve
and  I  desire.  I  well  knew,  said  the  ambas-
sador, this  would  be  the  answer  which  my
embassy  would  needs  have;  and  having  thus
fulfilled  my  charge,  shall  say  nothing  mofe
thereon.

2  F2


328

Polendos  then  rose,  and  besought  the  empe-
ror that  he  would  suffer  him  to  entertain  the
ambassador  while  he  staid  there  ;  and  bring-
ing him  into  his  lodging,  failed  not  to  let  him
see,  that  enemies  were  better  welcomed  in
the  emperor's  court,  than  friends  were  by
the  lurk.

Primaleon  was  well  contented  with  the  an-
swer of  the  emperor  his  father;  for  he  had
neither  patience  nor  moderation  at  hearing
the  pride  with  which  the  biddings  of  the
lurk  were  accompanied.  Who  will  think,
that  the  princess  Lionarda  was  not  troubled
at  hearing  the  knight  of  the  Savage  Man
demanded,  that  he  might  be  sacrificed  among
his  enemies  !  in  truth,  till  the  emperor  had
fully  declared  himself,  her  heart  was  full  of
fear,  caused  by  the  love  with  which  from  the
first  moment  she  had  regarded  him.  This
fear  was  not  so  well  dissembled  but  that  the
lady  Polinaida  perceived  it,  with  whom,  after
the  empress  had  retired,  she  held  talk  con-
cerning the  matter.  And  as  Lionarda  knew
nothing  of  the  coming  of  Targiana  to  that
court.,    or   how   else   the  matter  stood,  she


329

besought  her  to  declare  how  the-;c  occasion*
had  happened.

"When  Pulinarda  h;id  herein  satisfied  her
mind,  she  remained  in  great  sorrow  :  tor
bearing  of  the  worth  and  beauty  of  Targiana,
and  of  the  ingratitude  wherewith  the  knight
of  the  Savage  Man  had  requited  her,  she
reputed  him  as  a  man  without  faith,  love,  or
regard  of  loyalty,  and  she  would  gladly  have
devised  the  mean  whereby  to  banish  the
remembrance  of  him  fori  h  of  her  heart  j
which  Polinarda  perceiving,  and  grieving
to  behold  so  great  and  sudden  a  change,  be-
gan to  seek  how  she  might  do  away  this  in-
tention which  she  had  unwittingly  excited.
Lady,  said  she,  think  you  that  Florian  will
be  the  same  man  to  _\ou  as  hew  a-  to  th<5
princess  Targiana  ?  ^  ou  must  remember,  thud
love  From  him  toward  lier  was  neither  lawii.j
nor  honest,  beyond  what  was  necessary  for
him  that  he  might  get  out  of  the  hands  of
the  Great  Turk  lier  father;  and  from  that
court  he  could  never  have  espaped  by  any
other  means  than  this  which  she  presented.
But  after  this,  would  you  have  had  him  nut
■ir  3


330

remember  that  he  was  a  Christian,  and  she  a
Moor;  and  todo  her  pleasure,  would  you
that  he  should  have  offended  God?  Certes,
far  more  would  he  have  been  condemned  if
he  had  done  otherwise.  But  such  dealings
are  not  to  be  expected  toward  you,  who  are
fairer  than  Targiana,  as  great  in  rank  as  she,
worthy  that  all  the  world  should  serve  you,
worthy  to  have  this  confidence,  and  far  more
worthy  of  blame  if  you  should  at  any  time
lose  it.  The  knight  of  the  Savage  is  yours;
in  your  name  he  trusts  to  overcome  all
dangers,  nor  doth  he  desire  any  good  to
himself  that  is  not  thus  attained.  1  pray  you
therefore  do  not  by  any  means  deprive  him
of  this  certain  trust.

You  have  such  power  over  me,  lady,  replied
Lionarda,  that  what  you  say  changes  my
thoughts  and  resolutions,  though  I  see  things
which  make  me  doubtful.  Is  he  not  travel-
ling through  Spain  with  a  bevy  of  women
after  him,  showing  love  to  them  all?  I
know  not  how  he  who  scatters  it  among  so
",  can  have  any  fixed  affection  for
any  one.


3:31

Sweet  lady,  said  Polinarda,  I  pray  you  let  not
your  spirits  be  troubled  with  these  trifles,
things  which  you  should  not  remember,  and
which  cannot  make  him  forget  you.  He  is
used  to  such  things  ;  he  remembers  them
when  he  sees  them,  forgets  them  when  they
are  out  o\'  sight  ;  and  still  more  when  he  sees
you.  All  his  remembrances  are  for  you  ;
trust  this,  and  trust  me,  who  have  long  known
him.  These  speeches  did  persuade  her,  and
with  that  they  went  to  rest,  both  desirous  to
see  the  end  of  these  uncertain  affections,
which,  till  they  find  their  end,  are  never  en-
dured without  care  and  trouble.


13  2


CHAPTER   120-


The  ambassador  of  the  Turk  staid  certain
days  in  the  court  of  the  emperor,  in  the  com-
pany of  Polendos,  waiting  for  the  coming
of  Albayzar,  and  receiving  far  other  treat-
ment from  him  than  Polendos  had  found
in  Turkey;  the  emperor  and  Priinuleon
could  not  sufficiently  commend  the  gouti-
ness of  Targiana,  marvelling  that  such  per-
fect goodness  should  be  found  in  one  born
of  so  curst  a  father  ;  for  the  prisoners  could
speak  of  nothing  Dut  the  bounty  and  honour
which  they  had  received  from  her,  in  despite
of  his  will  ;  holding  it  certain,  that  her  tears
ransomed  thern  from  their  prison.

But  leaving  them,  let  us  return  again  to  the


333

knight  of  the  Savage  Man,  who  journeyed
on  alter  he  had  vanquished  the  four  knights
in  the  valley,  and  gotten  the  damsels,  till  he
arrived  in  the  city  of'Brusia,  which  is  at  this
time  called  Toledo,  where  king  Recindos  then
made  his  abode,  who  was  at  that  time  not  a
little  glad  ;  for  tidings  had  come  to  him  of
the  liberty  of  his  son,  and  the  other  knights
which  were  held  in  captivity  by  the  Great
lurk.

Having  arrived  in  the  place  before  the  pa-
lace, j.being  armed  in  other  arms,  that  he
might  not  be  known  by  his  device  of  the
Savage,  (for  he  was  wont  in  this  manner  to
dissemble  himself,  when  he  would  fain  re-
main concealed,)  there  he  stopt  with  his  hel-
met on,  and  sent  a  squire  to  let  the  queen
and  her  ladies  understand,  that  Arlanza  and
the  other  damsels  in  his  company  had  be-
sought him  to  display  some  proof  of  his
person  in  that  court.  The  squire  went  into
the  palace,  where  he  was  brought  to  the
queen's  apartment,  the  king  himself  being
there;  for  he  had  dined  there  in  the  company
of  the  queen  and  her  ladies  ;  and  casting  big


334

eyes  round,  though  he  saw  many  dames,  and
some  who  were  right  fair,  yet  he  judged
that  all  that  he  saw  was  as  nothing  in  compa-
rison of  what  ho  hud  seen  in  the  court  of
the  emperor.  Then  having  first  humbled
himself  to  king  Recindos,  he  came  to  the
queen,  and  kneeled  down  and  spake  as  fol-
lowed :

Lady,  a  strange  knight,  in  whose  company  I
come  here,  being  on   his  way    thorow  your
realm,     had    resolved    not   to    try    himself
in  arms  against  the  knights  of  y  our  court,  for
the  great  desire  he  hath  to  do  service  to  the
king,  even  though    time  or  chance   should
have  given  him  occasion.     But  now,  being
forced  by   the  request    of  certain   damsels
whom  he  hath  brought  in  his  company,  whose
will  he  cannot  disobey,  he   must  forego   his
own, and  therefore  beseecheth  your  highness,
that  if  there  be  any  among   the   knights  of
your  court  who  will  maintain  the  beauty  of
their   ladies  against  him,    and  will  combat
with  him  upon  this  quarrel,  they  may  be  per-
mitted so   to  do.     He  doth  not  ask  this  per-
mission of  the  king,  because  it  is  a  thing  of


this  nature,  and  because  he  would  not  seem
to  have  come  to  his  court  with  any  intention
to  disserve  him.  W  ell  were  the  king  and
queen  pleased  to  see  an  adventure  of  this
kind  in  their  court,  being  so  little  wont  to
sec  them  ;  f'or  the  emperor's  court  of  Greeee
carried  such  a  brave  report,  that  all  the  noble
knights  in  the  world  went  thither  to  try  their
valour,  and  tor  that  all  the  adventures  were
reserved  ;  and  it'  any  adventure  were  approved
in  the  realm  of  Spain,  they  were  altogether
done  at  the  castle  of  Almourol,  and  lor  that
reason  they  Tailed  at  the  eourt.  The  king  of
Spain  seeing  the  queen  was  embarrassed  how
to  reply,  and  that  she  looked  to  him  to  see
what  he  might  command,  said  to  her,  Me-
thinks,  lady,  you  ought  not  to  refuse  the
gentle  offer  of  the  knight,  as  well  to  satisij
him,  as  that  you  may  not  wrung  your  ladies  ;
for  all  would  gladly  see  the  courage  of  their
favoured  knights.  Then,  said  the  queen,
since  it  liketh  you  so  well,  my  gracious  lurd,
that  the  request  is  to  be  allowed,  thou  mayst,
squire,  say  unto  the  knight,  that  the  king  and
I  do  think  well  of  his  coming  to  our  court,
and  that  we  do  permit  him  the  liberty  QÏ  the


336

joust  against  any  that  will  enter  the  field
with  him,  whether  it  be  for  the  joust  or  com-
bat, that  is  as  the  occasion  shall  happen  ;
but  howsoever  it  be,  the  king  alloweth  him

the  freedom  of  the  field  ;  and  if  the  knight
desire  to  rest  himself,  let  him  do  so,  and  to-
morrow he  may  put  his  intent  in  execution.

The  greatest  rest  or  quiet,  said  the  squire,
the  knight  my  master  desireth  to  have,  is,
that  he  may  find  such  knights  on  whom  he
may  bestow  the  breaking  of  some  lances  j
and  since  your  highness  hath  granted  him
thejoust,  let  your  knights  see  now  what  tin  j
will  do,  while  1  return  with  my  answer.  .So
making  his  obeisance,  he  departed.

Then  the  king  went  and  looked  forth  at  one
of  the  windows,  and  seeing  the  knight  in  the
field  surrounded  by  so  many  damsels,  he
called  to  the  queen,  saying,  Come  hither,
lady,  and  see  the  strangest  adventure  that
ever  you  did  in  your  life;  I  never  vet  knew
a  knight  whom  the  company  of  one  woman
did  not  soon  weary,  but  this  knight  seems  to
delight  in  what  tires  all  others.     Cei  tes,  re-


337

plied  the  qneen,  after  she  had  seen  rhem,  it
cannot  be  denied  but  that  they  are  greatly
indebted  to  him,  since  for  the  sake  of  some
he  does  not  regret  others.  I  should  think
by  his  suffering  so  many,  that  they  were  near
akin  to  him,  if  there  were  not  one  among
them  who  seemeth  to  be  a  giantess.  I  was
looking  at  her,  said  the  king;  the  man  must
either  be  crazy,  or  some  great  adventure
makes  him  tjaveJ  about  with  such  a  burthen  !

While  they  were  thus  talking.  Albayzar  came
out  to  see  this  adventure  ;  for  the  news  there-
of had  been  reported  to  him  in  his  chamber.
He  came  upon  a  large  iron-grey  horse,  un-
armed, and  clad  after  the  Spanish  manner,  a
man  of  goodly  and  spirited  semblance.  And
coming  to  the  window  where  the  king  and
queen  looked  forth,  after  making  to  them  due
courtesy,  he  entered  into  talk  about  the
knight  and  the  bevy  of  damsels.  The  knight
heard  them,  and  how  they  judged  of  him,
and  he  eyed  Albayzar  well,  and  thought  him
well  made,  and  fit  for  great  things,  and  he
longed  to  do  battle  with  him,  for  he  remem
bered  what  had  passed  betwrcn  them  in  the

vol.  III.  0,  G


338

eastle  of  Dramorante  the  Cruel.  But  from
these  thoughts  a  knight  interrupted  him,  who
came  into  the  field,  armed  at  ail  points,  and
desirous  to  be  the  first  in  winning  the  victor?
over  this  stranger.  He  rode  a  horse  which
was  of  the  colour  of  a  bustard;  his  arms
were  checquered  in  gold  and  silver,  and  he
bore  in  his  shield  a  white  hart  in  afield  sable  ;
and  being  confident  of  victory,  alter  making
obeisance  to  die  king,  he  would  inconti-
nently have  jousted.  Uut  the  squire  who
had  been  before  sent  with  the  message  to  the
queen,  went  unto  him  and  said,  Sir  knight,
he  of  the  Damsels  saith,  that  he  is  not  ac-
customed to  let  his  actions  be  so  cheap,  but
that  he  must  have  his  recoin  pence  if  he  re-
main victor.  Wherefore  1  pray  you  let  him
understand  what  shall  be  his  prize  if  he  chance
to  conquer  you  :  for  if  the  victory  fall  on  your
side,  he  will  yield  the  damsel  untoyou  which
you  shall  think  best  in  all  his  company.  The
knight  replied,  It  well  appears  that  my  love
and  his  are  full  different,  and  that  he  does
not  feel  the  incumbrance  of  carrying  them
about,  because  he  esteems  them  so  lightly.
Tell  him  that  the  lady  whom  1  serve  hath  not


330

given  me  such  power  over  her  that  T  can
adventure  her  against  any  one  ;  that  I  come
hither  to  make  him  know  her  worth  and
beauty  are  greater  than  any  of  those  in  his
company  can  boast,  or  any  whom  he  knows.
Iff  can  approve  this  upon  him,  I  desire  no
other  prize  than  the  satisfaction  of  victory,
with  the  which  he  also  ought  to  be  contented,
should  it  be  his  fortune  to  win  it  from  me.  I
beseech  him  therefore  let  him  show  me  for
which  of  his  damsels  he  will  do  battle,  and
tell  me  her  name,  that  I  may  know  what.  I
gain.

The  squire  returned  with  this  reply  to  the
knight  of  the  Damsels,  who  thought  it  good  ;
and  in  answer  to  the  question,  for  which  of
his  damsels  he  would  do  battle,  bade  the
squire  say  it  should  be  for  the  ugliest  of
them,  for  he  thought  she  would  suffice  for
lhe  occasion  ;  as  for  her  name,  he  did  not
know  the  name  of  any  one  of  them,  Inn
if  the  knight  should  conquer,  he  might
then  learn  it  from  herself.  I  perceive,
said  the  other,  the  pride  with  which  thy
U2


340

master  cometh  hither,  tcacheth  him  to  hold
so  little    ceremony   with  one  who  has  held
more  towards  him;  I  will  see  whether  lean
abate  it  in  this  encounter.     The  king  and  Al-
bayzar  heard  all  this,    and    wished    to    see
whether   the    deeds    of   the    knight  of  the
Damsels  would  answer  his  words.     By  this
time   they  had   placed  their  spears  in  rest,
and  ran  at  each  other.     The  knight  was  one
of  the  best  in  that  court,  a  person  of  great
rank,  and  who  served   Polisia,  the  daughter
of  duke  Ladislao,  in  whose  name  he  thought
he  could  have  overthrown  all  the  world  ;  he
delivered    his  encounter  with  all  his  force,
full  upon  the  shield  of  his  rival,  and  pierced
it,  and  reached  the  armour,  though  without
doing    farther    hurt  ;    and  there  the  lance
brake  :  but   he    of   the    Damsels  bore  him
lightly    out   of  the  saddle,  scarcely  feeling
that  he  touched  him.     He  recovered  him-
self quickly,  like  a  good  knight,  and  drawing
his  sword,  came  to  revenge  the   foil  he  had
sustained  in  the  joust;  but  he  of  the  Damsels
said,  Sir  knight,  1  craved  license  for  nothing
bevond  this  ;  let  me  joust  with  these  other


341

sirs  who  arc  ready,  (for  by  this  time  t;i<-rr
were  five  knights  in  the  place,)  and  if  I
shall  come  from  their  hands  in  a  state  to
do  battle,  I  will  then  do  your  pleasure.
But  though  this  reply  ought  to  have  been  ad-
mitted, the  knight  would  not  receive  it,  sa}'-
ing,  that  perforce  he  would  have  the  combat,
till  the  king  interfered,  and  bade  him  give
place  to  the  others,  according  to  the  condi-
tions with  which  he  of  the  Damsels  was  come.
Upon  this  he  retired,  full  discontented  that
he  had  not  tried  his  fortune  to  the  uttermost.

Forthwith  one  of  the  five  came  forward,
armed  in  red  arms,  and  bearing  in  his  shield
a  forest  with  all  flowers  that  nature  bringeth
forth.  But  though  his  valour  had  taught
him  to  be  confident,  he  had  the  same  fate
as  the  first;  and  so  fared  the  third  and  the
fourth.  Methinks,  said  Albayzar,  the  knight
of  the  Damsels  does  not  defend  them  so
badly,  that  they  can  be  won  from  him  with-
out trouble.  And  as  in  these  encounters  he
had  broken  the  three  lances  which  he
brought,  the  fifth  knight  stopt,  waiting  till
another   should    be    given    him.       Albayzar

'1   G  J


342

sent  him  one  of  his  own,  for  he  jousted  some-
times ;  it  was  black,  and  the  iron  thereof  gilt.
He  of  the  Damsels  would  not  take  ir,  saying,
Tell  Albayzar,  he  must  excuse  me  from  ac-
cepting his  lance;  the  little  love  I  bear
him  maketh  me  reject  any  thing  from  him.
Then  taking  a  lance  that  was  sent  him  by
the  king,  he  charged  another  knight  in  such
sort,  that  he  burst  his  girths,  and  sent  him
saddle  and  all  to  the  ground,  where  he  lay
for  awhile  stunned  ;  his  own  horse  ran  on
in  the  career,  till  he  came  to  the  window  of
the  king,  close  by  Albayzar.  Now  as  Albay-
zar was  of  his  condition  proud  and  haughty,
and  was  incensed  that  his  courtesy  had  been
rejected  ;  seeing  him  so  near,  he  took  him.
by  the  arm,  and  said,  Don  Cavalier,  it  was
because  you  did  not  know  me,  that  you  de-
spised my  gift,  and  therefore  I  pardon  you.
Do  not  think  of  pardoning  me  for  that,  re-
plied he  of  the  Damsels,  for  I  know  you
well — you  are  Albayzar,  soldan  of  Babylon,
to  purchase  a  bout  with  whom,  I  would  give
more  than  I  have  here.  You  shall  not  go
"without  it,  quoth  he,  seeing  you  know  me»
stay  till  my  armour  be  brought  hither,  and  I


343

will  chastise  you  with  this  very  lance  which
you  have  refused.  If  fortune  favour  you  so
much  as  to  leave  you  then  in  a  plight  for  any
thing  farther,  we  will  do  battle,  and  1  will
then  teach  you  with  what  courtes}'  any  thing
from  me  is  to  be  accepted.

I  would  thou  wert  armed,  quoth  he  of  the
Damsels,  for  Í  will  demolish  the  arms  upon
thy  body  as  fast  as  thou  canst  put  them  on.
Incontinently  Albayzar  sent  for  his  armour,
and  the  king  for  a  horse  for  himself,  on  which
he  came  into  the  place,  being  troubled  at
this  dispute  ;  for  he  would  not  that  Albayzar
should  fall  into  any  mishap  before  he  had
been  delivered  to  the  emperor,  in  whose
hand  the  prisoners  were  for  whom  he  was
to  be  exchanged.  He  therefore  resolved
not  to  permit  them  to  do  battle,  because
he  feared  the  prowess  of  the  knight  of  the
Damsels.

The  queen  was  well  pleased  to  see  this  ad-
venture in  her  court,  and  the  dames  also,  it
being  a  new  thing  there;  and  especially  they

who    found    their   pastime   at  the    cost    of


344

others,  whose  servants  had  been  overthrown  ;
and  they  thought  the  damsels  were  well
guarded,  and  would  not  be  lightly  won,  as
long  as  their  champion  thought  proper  to  de-,
fetid  them.  One  thing  they  could  not  com-
prehend, why  so  good  a  knight  should  have
been  won  by  women  of  no  great  beauty  »
and  some  said,  that  since  he  had  manifested
such  prowess  for  the  ugliest  of  them,  what
would  he  do  when  he  fought  for  the  fairest'
iSo  they  past  the  time,  some  laughing,  others
resenting  the  mishap  of  their  servants  :  lor
thus  the  world  goes,  and  the  joy  of  some  ii
the  sorrow  of  others.


34;


CHAPTER     121.


Not  long  it  was  before  two  of  Albayzar'a
squires  returned  with  their  master's  armour,
which  was  black  and  gold,  the  gold  being  less
than  the  black,  so  that  they  seemed  to  be
worn  for  mourning,  which  made  them  the
more  gallant.  Having  armed,  and  taken  the
same  lance  which  the  other  had  refused,  he
came  to  the  king  and  said,  I  beseech  you,
sir,  do  not  prevent  me  from  taking  vengeance
for  the  contempt  with  which  this  knight  hath
treated  me,  whom  1  am  sure  you  would  not
have  receive  any  shame  in  your  court.  Sir
Albayzar,  the  king  replied,  1  would  Iain  that
you  should  receive  every  honour  that  can
be  done  you  in  my  house,  and  nothing  which
you   should  think   contempt  ;  but  to  grant


346

you  the  combat  against  this  knight,  I  neither
can  nor  must  consent  to  it,  for  I  know  not
what  might  chance,  and  the  emperor  might
have  cause  to  complain  of  me.  I  ween,  quoth
Albayzar,  this  lance  shall  tlo  as  much  as  I
would  have  it  ;  but  if  it  do  not,  I  may  well
complain  on  your  highness,  in  that  you  will
not  suffer  me  to  satisfy  my  desire.  What
need  of  so  many  words,  cried  he  of  the
Damsels  ;  let  us  joust  if  you  please,  and  at\ex
that  do  as  fortune  shall  favour  you.

I  pray  you,  quoth  Albayzar,  do  me  so  much
favour  as  to  tell  me  who  you  are  ;  I  would
gladly  know,  for  two  causes:  the  first,  that
I  might  not  be  ignorant  of  the  knight  whom
I  shall  vanquish  :  the  second,  if  so  be  I
speed  not  according  to  my  desire,  that  I
inty  know  whom  to  seek  for  in  all  parts.  I
•will  not  satisfy  thee  in  this,  replied  the  other  ;
know  this,  however,  that  I  am  the  greatest
enemy  thou  hast  in  this  world,  and  1  grieve
that  I  may  not  have  liberty  of  the  combat
against  thee,  because  I  long  have  wished  to
have  my  fill  on  thee  :  but  since  it  is  the  plea-
sure of  tiie  king  it  shall  not  be  so,  I  must


347

wait  the  time,  when  I  may  deal  with  thee
according  to  my  desire.

If  I  be  not  deceived,  said  Albayzar,  now   I

know  thee,  and  remember  that  I  saw  thee
in  the  castle  of  Dramorante  the  Cru*!.  Í
have  in  memory  also  the  words  which  then
passed  between  us,  and  I  promise  thee,  that
if  I  live,  they  shall  be  remembered  with
these  which  are  now  passing,  and  many  shall
suffer  for  thy  offences;  for  there  shall  he  none
to  come  between  us  then,  and  debar  me  from
the  vengeance  which  I  would  otherwise  now
take.  But  leaving  this  melancholy  for  its
due  time,  Í  pray  you  break  a  lance  with  me
in  the  name  of  some  woman  whom  you
greatly  esteem,  that  as  mine  is  to  be  adven-
tured in  the  name  of  Targiana,  it  may  be
with  more  pleasure.  Whichever  you  think
the  ugliest  in  my  company,  replied  he  of  the
Damsels,  her  i  will  take  for  in  y  patroness,
and  in  her  service  I  will  joust,  to  show  you
that  any  favour  is  sufficient  for  me.  I  be-
seech you,  said  Albayzar,  change  this  inten-
tion, for  what  is  due  to  the  worth  and  dignity
of  her  who  makes  me  ask  it.    You  make  tne


S48

ilo  what  I  thought  not  to  have  done,  replied
the  other.  1  have  one  in  my  mind,  to  whom
1  would  tain  not  have  commended  myself,
except  in  matters  of  greater  moment  :  since
you  urge  me  thus,  1  will  joust  with  you  in
her  name  ;  and  that  you  may  be  altogether
contented,  1  assure  you  that  she  is  fairer
than  Targiana,  of  equal  worth,  and  little
differing  in  estate.  Ask  me  not  who  she  is,
lor  that  secret  is  reserved  to  myself.  Now
then,  quoth  Albayzar,  let  us  have  no  more
delay  ;  my  ^oul  cannot  brook  to  hear  an,
other  praised  against  one  who  cannot  be  dis-
paraged.

Then  these  two  knights  departed  to  fetch  their
career,  and  ran  together  with  a  greater  eager-
ness  peradventure  than  either  one  had  ever
felt  before,  Albayzar  having  before  his  eves
the  love  of  his  lady  Targiana,  and  the  hatred
and  abhorrence  of  his  enemy,  and  he  of  the
Damsels  the  remembrance  of  Lionarda,  and
that  this  was  the  first  atchievement  which  he
had  attempted  in  her  name.  They  encoun-
tered together  with  sueh  force,  as  their
fences  flew  up  into  the  aii  in  pieces  ;  and  io


349

they  passed  on,  not  being  shaken  any  thing
at  all.  When  they  were  come  to  the  end  of
the  race,  they  took  new  staves,  which  were
broken  again  like  as  the  first  were,  and  yet
no  further  advantage  on  either  side.

The  king  made  great  estimation  of  the  va-
lour lie  perceived  in  the  Damsels  knight,  and
wished  to  know  who  he  was;  Aibayzar  was
already  known,  and  held  in  great  account  for
his  prowess.  JSow  they  tried  the  third  lance  ;
this  career  was  either  ran  with  greater  force,
or  they  were  less  able  to  endure  it  than  at
first;  for  he  of  the  Damsels  lost  one  of  his
stirrups,  and  was  well  nigh  cast  back  upon
the  crupper,  and  Aibayzar  lost  both,  and
was  constrained  to  catch  hold  about  the  neck
of  his  horse.  Greatly  offended  they  were
both  at  these  reverses,  and  taking  other  lances^
Aibayzar  said,  I  pray  you,  sir  knight,  let
there  be  some  terms  between  us,  and  let  it
be  thus: — before  he  could  proceed  he  of  the
Damsels  answered,  I  will  have  none  but  ilj
terms  with  you — no  more  words  therefore;
for  1  will  either  overthrow  you,  or  never
trust  more  in  thinking  of  another.,  but  live
vol.  hi.  '1  H


S50

iree  from   such  thoughts,    as   I  have   alway
done.

Certes,  quoth  Albayzar,  a  little  thing  would
make  you  forsake   them  ;    that   appears   by
what  we  see.     Nevertheless,  I   beseech  you,
let   the  matter  stand  thus  :  If  I    overthrow
you,  that  you  go  present  yourself  before  the
giant  Almourol,  and  say  to  him,  that  by  your
means   1  have  acquitted   the  bond,    wherein
Miraguarda   so   straightly    tied  me,  though
indeed,  from  that  1  was  already  loosed  ;  but
I  do  it  that  she  may  see  ivhat  the  force  of  an
encounter  is  when  given  in  the  name  of  Tar-
giana.     You,  if  you   should  overthrow  me,
send  me  where  you  please,  and  I  will  do  your
bidding,  provided  that  it  delay  not  my  jour-
ney.    You  have  so  wearied  me  with  proffer-
ing conditions,  replied   he   of  the  Damsels,
that  I  will  accept  this,  lest  you  should  pro-
pound   more.     And  if    this    career    do  not
suffice  to  end   this  contest,  I  never  will  deli-
ver another   in  trust  of  any   one,  but  com-
mend myself  to  myself,  which  I  have  always
found  the  surest  way.    Then  they  separated
to  fetch  their  course,  and  encountering  with


wO  1

All  the  force  which  their  horses  could  carry,
their  lances  were  splintered,  and  they  hurtled
together,  shields  and  bodies,  with  such  a  shock
that  the  knight  of  the  Damsels  lost  both  his
stirrups,  and  remained  almost  astound,  and  Al-
bayzar  being  stunned,  fell,  and  lay  for  some
whi  e  before  he  came  to  himself.  He  of  the
Damsels,  when  he  had  righted  himself  in  the
saddle,  seeing  him  thus,  sa  I,  Mv  thinks  you
ate  not  he  who  has  lost  the  most  by  being  for-
bidden from  doing  battle.  And  then  order-
ing his  helmet  to  be  taken  off,  he  began  to
recover,  and  perceiving  his  discomfiture,  the
king,  to  do  him  honour,  alighted  and  heiped
to  raise  him  up.  Albayzar,  said  he  of  the
Damsels,  what  1  will  have  you  do  is  this  :
that  when  you  arrive  in  the  emperor's
court,  you  present  yourself  before  the
princess  of  Thrace,  whom  yon  will  find  there,
and  whom,  if  love  hath  not  blinded  you,
you  will  deem  fairer  than  Targiana,  and  say
to  her,  that  a  strange  knight,  who  ealletb.
himself  the  kniiilir.  of  the  Damsels,  hath
commanded  you  to  present  yourself  before
her,  as  one  who  has  been  conquered  in  her
name;  but  that  it  grieves  me,  seeing  this  iá

2    H  1


352

the  first  service  which  I  have  rendered  her,
that  it  should  be  of  less  consequence  than  I
could  wish.

I  will  do  your  bidding,  replied  Albayzar,  for
it  was  a  covenant  between  us,  and  one  day,
if  Í  live,  I  will  present  thy  head  to  my  lady
Targiana,  in  revenge  of  the   shame  I  have
this    da}'   through    my    weakness     received.
That,   quoth  he   of   the    Damsels,   shall    be
seen  to  when  we  meet  hereafter.     Your  high-
ness, (turning  to  the  king,)  will  now  suiter  me
to  depart,  for  I  have  much  to  do  elsewhere;
and  pardon  me  for  not  declaring  who  1  am,
■which  at  present  I  cannot  do  ;  suffice  it  that
here  and  in  all  places   I   am  at  your  service.
1  am  not  so  easily    contented,    replied   the
king,  as  to  be  satisfied  with  this  little  compli-
ment; hut  since  it  is  your  pleasure  to  remain
concealed,  I   beseech    you    come    this   u;u
again  in  your  own    person;  for  all   honour
should  be  done  you  because  of  what  we  have
seen,  though  we  know  nothing  more  of  yoii.
I  kiss  your  highness's  hands,   said  lie  of  the
Damsels:  this  is  according  to  your    wonted
goodness,  and  nothing   else    was  to  be  ex-


353

pccted  from  you.  Then  taking  one  of  the
lances  that  were  left,  he  gave  a  reverent
shew  of  obeisance  to  the  -:ing,  the  queen,  and
all  the  ladies,  [each  of  whom  were  dying  for
him,  and  he  for  all)  and  so  he  departed  with
his  company.

The  king  returned  into  his  castle,  accompa-
nied with  Albayzar,  whose  heart  was  so  mar-
vellously overcome  with  grief,  as  he  would
not  speak  to  any,  nor  suffer  any  to  speak
to  him.  The  queen  would  fain  that  the
king  had  not  permitted  the  knight  of  the
Damsels  to  depart,  and  her  ladies  were  still
more  sorry  for  his  departure;  all  women
affecting  novelties.  Yet  did  they  resent
Albayzar's  toil,  having  wished  the  victory  to
him,  because  of  his  conversation  in  that
court,  and  the  worth  of  his  person.

He  of  the  damsels  was  not  very  far  from
the  city,  but  the  dark  night  drew  on,  and
they  being  in  a  forest,  concluded  there  to
rest  themselves  for  that  night:  for  it  was  in
the  summer  season,  when  they  might  sleep
any  where.  So  they  stopt  under  some  goodly
2hj


354,

cork-trees,  near  to  a  fountain  of  clear  water.
Here  they  alighted,  and  having  taken  their
supper  of  what  they  carried  with  them,  the
knight  retired  farther  into  the  wood,  thai  he
might  leave  them  to  themselves  ;  and  throw-
ing himself  at  the  foot  of  a  tree,  with  his
helmet  for  a  pillow,  began  to  think  upon
Lionarda,  and  this  new  passion  deprived
him  of  sleep  :  yet  had  it  struck  such  little
root,  that  any  thing  made  him  forget  it.

At  this  time  Arlanza,  who  was  tormented
more  by  her  love,  seeing  her  companions
"were  all  fast  asleep,  while  her  passion  was
awake,  and  being  desperate  to  see  it  forgot-
ten by  him,  and  not  able  to  dissemble  her
pain,  after  a  thousand  struggles,  putting
aside  what  became  her  honour,  she  deter-
mined to  seek  him;  and  going  to  him  where
he  was  laid,  she  found  him  waking,  and  sate
herself  upon  the  green  leaves  beside  him,
and  began  to  say,  O  knight  of  the  Savage,
the  wrong  you  have  done  me  ought  have
sufficed  for  your  revenge,  though  I  had  not
been  forced  to  undergo  this  shame  ;  for  my
wishes  are  not  so  much  concealed    but  that


355

you  know  them, — but  even  in  this  it  seems
that  fortune  persecutes  me.  I  beseech  you,
since  I  thus  plainly  express  my  fault,  pity
Hie,  lest  it  shouid  lead  covet  a  greater.  And
when  she  had  said  thus,  she  fell  with  her
head  upon  his  breast,  as  une  almost  senseless.
He  took  her  in  his  arms,  and  with  gentle
words,  not  according  to  his  wonted  condi-
tion, consoled  hei,  saving,  Lady  Arlanza,  I
tio  not  so  little  esteem  of  you,  that  I  would
show  it  in  any  thing  injurious.  1  beseech
you  hold  this  to  be  my  true  meaning;  and  it'
you  would  have  me  speak  plainer,  i  will  tell
you,  that  before  I  was  so  much  bound  to  you
as  now  I  am,  I  intended  to  solicit  your  lov<.  ;
but  since  you  have  made  me  so  greatly  yout
debtor,  Í  am  not  so  ungrateful  as  to  requite
you  with  a  short  contentment  which  would
leave  behind  it  perpetual  regret.  1  have  in
my  own  mind  provided  a  husband  tor  vou,
such  as  your  bounty  doth  wen  deserve,  and
for  this  1  reserve  the  state  which  your  father
left,  which  1  will  take  care  snail  be  given
you,  and  more  thereunto,  for  your  serv.ee  :  I
would  not  that  there  should  be  spot  or  staiu
Uj)on  you  to  lose   this,  oi  make  me  deal  uu«


J0<


worthily  towards  one  who  may  deserve  you.
Hold  me,  I  pray  you,  to  be  your  ti  ue  t  friend  ;

and  put  a\\  ay  from  you  this  other  thought,  as  it
behoveth  you  to  do.  Then  he  took  her  hand
and  led  her  again  to  the  place  where  the
others  slept.  But  Arlanza,  though  she  made
him  no  reply,  for  sorrow  and  shame  at  what
had  past  left  her  silent,  was  yet  determined
not  to  be  thus  rejected.  And  waking  one  of
her  damsels,  the  very  same  that  gave  the  fatal
ring  to  him  in  the  Castle  of  All'ernao,  and  who
was  the  one  whom  sue  loved  best  and  trusted
most,  she  told  her  all  that  had  past,  and  be-
sought her  with  many  tears  to  give  her  some
help.  In  truth  Lady,  replied  the  damsel,
I  do  not  see  that  you  ought  to  hold  yourself
aggrieved,  for  if  the  knight  of  the  Savage
denieth  what  you  desire,  it  is  for  your  ho-
nour; nor  do  I  believe  that  one  so  brave  and
of  such  royal  blood  would  speak  to  deceive
any  one,  but  that  he  will  do  for  you  what  he
proiniseth.  Quiet  yourself,  therefore,  and
be  better  satisfied  as  it  is,  than  if  you  had
found  in  him  the  welcome  you  wished.  How-
beit,  if  you  will  permit  me,  1  will  ask  him  to
tell  me  with  whom  he  designs  to  marry  you>


r


557

and  will  speak  to  him  concerning  you,  to  see
if  I  can  incline  him.  Arlanza,  threw  her
arms  around  her,  saying,  1  knew,  my  friend,
that  in  you  my  remedy  was  certain  ;  go  ta
him,  and  it'  you  cannot  prevail  upon  him,  at
least  excuse  me,  that  I  may  not  seem  so  bad
a  one.

Then  the  damsel  went  to  the  place  where  the
knight  was  lying  be  tore,  but  he  had  moved,
.  that  Arlanza  might  not  again  come  to  him  ;
she  however  found  him  lying  on  his  lace
under  a  great  oak,  and  laying  her  hand  upon
his  side,  she  said,  Methinks  that  lie  which
enforceth  ladies  to  live  in  sorrow,  because  lie
will  nse  no  more  regard  unto  them,  ought
not  so  easily  to  take  his  rest.  The  knight
hearing  the  voice  of  a  woman,  opened  his
eyes,  and  seeing  it  was  not  Arlanza,  but  the
damsel  whom  he  liked  best  amongst  them  all,
welcomed  her  with  far  other  words  than  he
ha-d  used  to  her  Lady,  full  of  his  wonted
deceitful  ways.  But  before  he  had  expended
many  she  siopt  him,  saying,  Sir  knight,  I
cometo  argue  wilhyou;  tell  me  why  you
do  not  remember  that  for  your  ^ake  Arlanza


35  S

bath  forsaken  lier  mother,  forgotten  the
death  of  her  brothers,  lost  her  patrimony
and  put  her  person  into  your  hands,  and  yet
you  scorn  her.  Lady,  replied  he  of  the  Sa-
vage, the  nights  are  so  short,  and  this  is  so
much  to  reply  to,  that  there  would  not  be
time  to  do  it  before  morning.  But  I  ask
you,  for  what  occasion  you  have  forgotten
me,  seeing  that  I  deserve  to  be  remembered
"by  you,  and  that  do  what  you  will,  I  cannot
"but  love  you.  So  in  his  wonted  way  he  dealt
with  her,  who  was  nothing  loth,  and  who,
when  she  returned,  reported  a  thousand  fables
to  her  mistress  of  things  which  had  never
been  spoken  of.


3.59


CHAPTER  122


In  the  morning  the  knight  and  his  damsels
resumed  their  journey  ;  and  as  he  perceived
that  Arlanza  was  troubled,  and  did  not  dare
look  at  him  as  she  was  wont  to  do,  he  drew
near  her,  and  talking  of  things  which  were
to  her  honour  and  advantage,  soothed  her
and  relieved  her  of  those  painful  thoughts.
And  then  he  turned  to  talk  and  jest  with  all
his  company,  so  that  the  journey  seemed
nothing  wearying  unto  then  :  but  this  pleased
not  Polifema,  who  was  the  damsel  that  Ar-
lanza sent  to  move  her  suit  to  him  the  pre-
ceding night,  for  she  thought  that  she  de*
seised  better  countenance  at  his  hands  than
all  the  other,  and  shewed  her  jealousy  in  her
countenance  w  hen  she  saw  him  speaking  to


360

another  ;  for  in  these  things  they  have  neither
dissimulation,  moderation,  nor  patience.
The  knight,  over  whom  she  would  tain  have
had  that  power  which  he  allowed  none  to
have,  perceived  it  and  heeded  it  not,  talking
with  one  and  sporting  with  another,  she
having  the  least  share  in  his  attentions  or'
all — so  that  she  was  fain  to  show  other  sem-
blance towards  him,  Ic^t  that  should  be  sus-
pected which  she  would  not  have  known  ;
and  in  this  way  the  knight  went  on,  he  being
disagreeable  unto  them,  or  they  so  little
discreet,  that  before  they  reached  the  castle
ofAlmourol,  all  of  them  had  reason  to  re-
pent the  journey,  yet  none  knew  thai  the  rest
were  partners  with  her  in  her  misfortune  :
and  then,  according  to  his  condition,  he  began
to  wish  to  get  rid  of  them.

Jt  chanced  five  days  after  their  departure
from  the  Spanish  court,  that  they  came  one
evening  into  a  fair  green  field,  which  was
necked  with  flowers,  and  there  they  took
cjeiighjt  to  stay  awhile,  because  they  would
make  them  garlands  for  their  heads  ;  when
tney   had   made  their  chaplets  and  placed


361

them  round  their  brows,  they  mounted  again
and  went  their  way,  jesting  one  with  the
other.  But  to  change  their  jocund  humour,
they  beheld  to  come  from  a  rank  of  trees,  a
knight  in  manner  of  a  giant,  mounted  on  ;i
horse  meet  to  carry  such  a  mighty  person  :
his  armour  was  grey  with  silver  edges,  and  in
his  shield  be  carried  for  his  device,  Hydra,
the  Serpent  with  seven  heads,  in  a  fiel
lie  had  two  squires  attending  on  hirn  ;  one
of  them  carried  his  lance,  and  the  other  a
battie-axe,  the  blade  thereof  being  gilt  :
when  he  was  come  nigh,  he  said  in  a  loud
voice  unto  him  of  the  Damsel.-:,  knight,  I
was  some  few  days  ago  at  the  castle  of  Al-
mourol,  where,  ha  zing  been  conquered  by
the-  picture  of  M ii aguarda,  I  would  fain
have  conquered  him  that  keeps  it,  that  I
might  afterward  take  his  office.  But  it  hap-
pened to  me  far  contrary  to  my  desire,  and
I  am  persuaded,  that  her  favour  makes  him
more  victorious  than  his  own  force  is  able  '
the  consideration  hereof  doth  not  a  little
offend  me,  so  that  I  am  determined  to  re-
venge myself  by  other  means.  Wherefore,
advise  thee  well  of  these  two  conditions   1

vol.  in.  2i


362

shall  put  to  thee,  which  of  them  thou  shalt
best  like  of:  either  to  surrender  these  dam-
sels which  bear  thee  company,  or  to  do  bat-
tle with  me  and  so  lose  both  them  and  thy-
self; make  your  choice  at  once,  for  J  am
cholerick,  and  brook  not  to  be  kept  waiting.

Friend,  quoth  the  other,  if  you  think  to  find
less  resistance  in  me  than  in  him  whom  you
have  left  with  so  little  satisfaction,  you  arc
mistaken.  I  give  thee  to  understand,  that  Í
am  not  accustomed  to  fear  such  as  speak
with  such  a  glorious  pride  in  themselves,
neither  can  the  huge  stature  of  a  giant  dis-
may me  ;  if  thou  didst  presume  to  take  the
worst  garland  from  any  of  these  ladies'  heads,
I  would  die  to  defend  it  ;  how  much  more
then  to  defend  them  themselves.

The  affection,  said  the  knight,  which  thou
Nearest  to  some  one  of  these,  maketh  thee
not  to  esteem  the  danger  wherein  thou  mayest
fall:  but  seeing  thou  wilt  be  so  lusty,  I  am
content,  for  courtesy  sake,  to  offer  thee  this
condition.  These  ladies  are  nine  ;  let  us  di-
vide them;  and  he  who  takes  the  four  shall


363

have  the  large  one,  meaning  Arlanza,  to
make  the  share  more  equal;  and  to  shew
thee  how  reasonable  I  am,  I  will  take  the
smallest  share.     The  other  replied,

I  wish  thou  hadst  as  many  damsels  in  thy
power,  as  thou  seest  here  in  mine,  that  I
might  take  them  all  !  I  will  not  give  thee  one
or' them  on  any  terms  whatever,  and  however
much  thou  mayest  intreat  me.  So  either
take  them  by  force,  or  get  thee  going  about
thy  business.  I  see,  said  the  knight,  that
thou  wilt  have  me  hurt  thee  against  mv  in-
cli nation,  so  look  to  thyself'.  Then  he  called
his  squire,  who  brought  him  his  lance,  which
when  he  had  couched,  he  ran  courageously
against  the  knight  of  the  Damsels,  who  met
him  bravely  in  the  midway  ;  they  encoun-
tered without  hurt,  save  that  the  knight  of
the  Valley  lost  his  stirrups,  and  would  have
fallen  it'  he  had  not  canght  hold  of  his  horse's
neck.  And  as  they  passed  their  horses  ran
against  each  other;  now  that  of  the  knight
of  the  Valley  was  a  stronger  one,  and  the
other  being  weak,  and  weary  with  long  travel,
fell,  and  might  have  hurt  his  rider  if  he  had


364:

deliverly  leapt  off;  whereat  Arlanza  and
her  friends  were  little  pleased,  fearing  the
strength  of  his  enemy.  For  though  by
what  they  had  seen  they  knew  the  excellent
prowess  of  their  knight,  yet  the  bigness  and
fierceness  of  the  other  made  them  doubt  the
battle.  He  of  the  Valley,  who  was  some-
what shaken  with  the  rough  encounter,  seeing
him  uu  the  ground  so  ready  for  the  combat,
began  more  to  fear  him  than  he  did  before;
but  as  he  would  let  no  weakness  be  seen,  he
alighted,  and  with  sword  and  shield  in  hand
said  :  If  thou  art  so  much  a  friend  to  thine
own  life,  as  to  agree  to  the  condition  I  made
thee  before  we  jousted,  1  will  still  consent  to
it,  for  I  would  rather  have  them  by  fair  means
than  by  force.  Care  you  nothing  for  that,
replied  he  of  the  Damsels,  for  you  shall  pay
for  the  loss  of  my  horse  by  going  on  foot
yourself:  and  so  without  wasting  any  more
time  in  words,  he  began  to  charge  the  knight
ficrcel}',  which  when  the  knight  both  saw
and  felt,  he  likewise  laid  on  with  huge  and
weighty  strokes;  and  as  the  other  found  more
resistance  in  him  than  he  looked  for,  he  was
fain  to  put  out  his  whole  might,  and  even


365

then  he  tlouhtcd  the  issue,  his  enemy  was  so
doughty.  But  as  the  battle  lasted  long  time,
and  he  of  the  Damsels  did  his  endeavour  to
show  his  companions  what  a  servant  they
had,  he  prest  his  enemy,  never  giving  him
an  instant  of  repose,  till  in  the  end,  not  so
:  v  ith  the  loss  of  blood  as  with  the  faint-
ness  of  his  body,  he  was  constrained  to  fall
down  to  the  ground  :  the  knight  set  his  foot
on  him,  and  taking  oft*  his  helmet,  made
show  as  though  he  would  have  smitten  off
his  head;  but  the  other  yielded  himself  to
his  mercy,  desiring  that  it  might  please  him
to  save  his  life.

He  of  the  Damsels  answered,  I  am  content
to  give  it  thee,  on  condition  thou  wilt  fulfil
what  Í  command  thee.  1  know  nothing,  said
the  knight,  which  [  would  make  any  account
of  to  save  it.  Thou  shaft  first,  then,  quoth  he,
tell  me  what  and  who  thou  art,  andafterward,
thou  shalt  take  one  of  the  horses  from  thy
squires,  (for  I  must  have  thine  in  place  of  the
one  thou  hast  killed  for  me)  and  go  thy  way
presently  to  the  court  of  king  tXecindos,
and  there  before  the  queen,  thou  droit  -■•■•
l2    i  3


on  my  behalf,  that  the  knight  of  the  Dam-
sels who  jousted  id  their  presence  against
Albayzar,  salutëth  them,  and  desireth  Buch
favour  at  the  king'.-,  hands,  that  lie  will  think
no  ill  because  he  made  not  himself  known  10
him;  but  thou  mayest  assure  his  highness,
that  I  will  not  fail  to  make  myself  known,
at  my  return  from  the  castle  of  Almourol;
and  tell  him  of  our  battle,  and  upon  what
quarrel  it  was.

Sir  Knight,   replied  he  of  the  Valley,  since
fortune  hath  brought  me  into  tins  extremity»
I  shall  not  fail  to  obey   you.     I  am  called
Trofolante  the  Fearful,  jf  you  have  heard  of
me.     Oftentimes,  quoth  he  of  the  Damsels,
so  you  need  say  no  more,  but  go  your  way,
if   you   would   discharge   yourself    of    that
in  you  are  bound.     Then  he  mounted
on  Trcfolante's  horse,  which  seemed  to  him
one  of  the  goodliest   that   he  had  ever    be-
strode; and  leaving  him  and  his  squires  in
the  field,   set   forward   on  his  journey  with'
the  damsels,  in  the  same  manner  as  before,
talking  of  leve  and  things  of  that  nature,  and
as  forgetful  of  the   battle  as  if  it  had  been


367

fought  with  one  of  less  account.     Thus  he
went  on  sporting  through  the  vest  of  the  day,
till  having  left   that  valley   they  came  into
another,    through  which    theie  ran   a  little
brook,  shaded  with  many  trees.      And  riding
alon"',  he  saw  three  knights  on  the  other  side,
in  gay  and  gallant  arms  ;  who,  v  h<  n  they  came
opposite  to  him,  stopt,   that  the}  might  eye
him  at  leisure.     One  of  ihem  pricked  for-
ward and  called  out   to    turn   to    halt,  upon
which  he  cheeked   his   horse  and  turned  to-
wards him,    to   hear  what   he   had  to    say.
Sir   Knight,  said    the   other,  I  want  one  of
these  ladies,  and  as  I  cannot  tell  which  of
them  would  please  a  num  best,  Í  will  beg  you
who  know  them   to  tell  me,  and  whichever
best  satisfies  you  I  will  be  content  with.     Í
like  them  all  so  well,  he  replied,  that  he  who
•would  take  any  one  of  them  from  me  must
pay  her  full  price.     But  I,  cried  one  of  the
other  two,  will  not  let  mine  be  of  your  chas-
ing; for  having  looked  at  them  all,  my  fancy
doth  affect  her   that  exceedeth   the'  rest  in
stature:  for  tho'  she  is  not  over  handsome,
I  like  the  condition   of  her.     I  was  inclined
that  way  also,  said  the  third  ;  but  since  you  are


3G8

before  me,  I  will  content  myself  with  her  that
ridetb  next  the  tall  one,  meaning  Pol  iff  m  a,
because  me  thinks  her  beauty  exceeded]  ;  H
the  other  :  wherefore  sir  knight,  as  we  have
saved  you  the  trouble  of  chusing  for  us,
you  may  chuse  one  for  our  comrade,  and
then  go  your  way  with  the  rest;  you  need
not  be  uneasy  about  those  you  leave,  lor
they  will  be  taken  good  care  of.  Let  him
who  would  have  one,  replied  he  of  the  Dam-
sels, cross  the  water,  and  take  her  at  what  she
wiil  cost.  With  a  good  will  answered  the
first  knight  ;  and  seeing  your  stomach  serves
you  so  well,  I  will  shew  you  what  you  get
by  this  resistance.

Upon  these  words  he  passed  the  river,  with
his  lance  in  rest,  and  ran  valiantly  against
the  knight  of  the  Damsels,  who  was  ready
with  another,  the  squire  of  his  party  having
"Brought  store  from  the  court  of  king  Recin-
dos,  and  entertained  him  with  such  a  puis-
sant stroke  as  pierced  shield  and  armour,
and  sent  him  over  the  crupper  in  such  plight,
that  where  he  fell  there  he  lay,  not  having
for  a  while  power  to  rise.     AY  hen  the  other


369

two  knights  saw  their  fellow  foiled,  they
came  over  the  river  together;  for  being
abashed  at  his  valour,  they  durst  not  ven-
ture to  try  it  one  after  another,  but  ran
both  together  against  him,  and  encountered
him  upon  his  shield,  where  they  brake  their
spears  without  moving  him  ;  but  he,  whose
lance  remained  whole  from  the  first,  brake  it
upon  the  second  so  much  to  his  liking,  that
he  sent  him  to  keep  the  former  company,
having  his  arm  broken  by  the  force  of  his
fall.  Then  drew  he  forth  his  sword,  and
welcomed  the  third,  who,  sword  in  hand,
bravely  received  him  ;  but  the  battle  did  not
endure  long,  for  he  of  the  Damsels  so  pu-
nished him  as  in  a  little  while  he  tumbled
down  before  him.

Then  he  commanded  one  of  his  squires  to
alight  and  take  oil"  the  knight's  helmet;  and
when  they  were  recovered,  he  told  them  all
three  that  each  must  do  the  bidding  of  the
damse]  whom  be  had  chosen,  or  he  would
put  them  to  death  ;  and  they  in  their  fear,
thinking  this  a  light  penance,  consented
fidl  willingly  :  whereupon  one  of  them  came


370

to  Arlanza,  with  these  words  :  You,  lad J,
are  she  whom  I  a  flee  ted  ;  command  me  what
you  pleas*»,  since  my  ill  luck  is  such,  that  Í
am  in  her  power  who  I  thought  should  have
been  in  mine.

I  have  so  little  need,  said  she,  of  your  ser-
vice, that  I  know  not  what  to  command.
Howbeit,  as  I  rejoice  to  have  his  deeds
"bruited  every  where,  who  every  day  saves
me  and  these  ladies  from  the  hands  of  evil-
minded  men,  I  command  you  to  go  to  the
king  of  Spain's  court,  and  there,  on  my  be-
half, let  all  the  ladies  understand  what  de-
sert is  come  to  you  for  your  wretched  deal-
ing: and  say,  that  I  advise  them,  if  fortune-
should  lead  them  into  the  roads  and  woods,
that  they  go  with  a  good  defender,  since
there  are  others  in  the  world  like  you  and
your  comrades,  of  whom  they  should  stand  in
fear.

And  you,  lady,  said  the  second  knight  to
Pòlifema,  what  shall  it  like  you  to  command
me  ?  Marry,  quoth  she,  that  you  take  the
fame  course  that  your  companion  doth,  not


371

forgetting  to  tell  the  ladies,  that  though  the
advice  of  the  lady  .Arlanza,  my  mistress,  is
good,  belter  is  it  that  they  trust  to  none;  let
them  seek  for  a  quiet  life,  and  not  go  travel-
ling in  the  woods  ;  for  tho'they  may  take  a  de-
fender who  will  protect  them  against  others,
they  may  need  one  to  secure  them  from  him.
Her  knight  well  enough  understood  her
covert  meaning,  but  yet  he  dissembled  it
alter  his  wonted  manner.  And  now,  Sir,
said  the  remaining  one,  what  do  you  enjoin
me,  since  1  had  not  time  to  make  a  choice,
but  left  il  to  you.  I  am  not  so  unreasonable,
replied  he,  as  to  separate  you  from  your
comrades.  Go  with  them,  and  since  these
ladies  have  sent  them  to  the  dames,  do  you
also  present  yourself  before  them  on  my
part,  and  say,  that  [  beseech  them,  when
they  have  any  danger  to  pass  through,  that
they  would  commend  themselves  to  me,  who
will  :-ave  them,  and  that  they  are  not  to  fear
any  danger  from  me,  nor  to  be  deceived  by
the  advice  of  those  who  say  otherwise.  But
tell  me  your  names  before  you  depart,  that
I  may  demand  another  day,  v.  hcthcr  you
have   fulfilled  your  promises   or  uo.      Sir,


S72

quoth  the  one,  we  are  all  three  of  the  same
court  whereto  you  send  us,  and  this  is  the
greatest  shame  and  the  worst  fortune  that
could  befall  us;  nevertheless,  your  excellent
prowess  must  be  our  excuse.  They  call  me
Gravanel:  this  is  my  brother,  who  is  named
Barbosantc,  we  twain  being  the  sons  of  count
Loban  ;  and  the  third  knight,  who  is  our
cousin,  he  is  called  Clarisalte,  a  greatly
reputed  man  in  the  court  of  Spain.

Certes,  sirs,  quoth  he  of  the  Damsels,  such
persons  as  ye  should  act  suitably  to  your
rank.  But  as  damsels  tempt  all  the  world,
and  I  myself  am  sometimes  tempted  by  such
chances,  I  hold  your  fault  the  less.  So  end-
ing, he  rode  on  with  his  company.


O/v»


CHAPTER  123-


The  English  Chronicles,  from  whence  this
history  hath  been  translated,  do  relate  how
it  was  long  before  the  knight  of  the  Dam-
sels could  reach  to  the  castle  of  Almourol,
because  he  was  hindered  in  his  way  by  many
knights  who  ventured  themselves  to  take  the
damsels  from  him,  which  he  had  taken
charge  of.  Leaving  him  they  proceed  to  say,
that  one  day  after  the  departure  of  Albayzar,
as  king  Recindos  stood  pleasantly  talking
with  the  queen,  and  many  knights  in  the
chamber  with  him  beside,  he  beheld  to  enter
a  goodly  tall  knight,  his  countenance  (for
his  head  was  unarmed)  stein  and  somewhat
wrinkled,  his  armour  broken  in  many  places,
atid  so  besprent  with  his  blood,  as  the  co-
vol.  m.  2  s


lours  and  devices  thereon  could  hardly  be
discerned.  His  shield,  which  was  curried
after  him  by  his  squire,  was  splintered  in
such  sort  that  little  beside  the  handles  re-
mained. .And  as  none  present  knew  him,
and  they  saw  him  iu  that  manner,  there  was
a  stir  among  them  all  at  beholding  him.  Lut
he,  who  was  of  haughty  eondhion  and  prided
himself  in  that  haughtiness,  forced  his  way
through  them  till  lie  came  to  the  qi
estrado,  and  having  made  some  little  obei-
sance to  the  king,  he  turned  to  .;er,  saying,
Lady,  Í  have  combated  with  a  knight,  »vho
not  long  since  was  in  this  court,  and  jousted
against  ALbayzar  ;  he  hath  in  his  company
nine  damsels,  and  I  desired  him  to  b<
the  one  half  of  them  on  me,  whereto  be
would  by  no  means  consent,  but  made  me
answer,  that  he  could  wish  I  had  n->  many
in  conduct  as  he  had,  for  then  would  in
mine  from  me,  to  bear  his  ladies  company
in  travel.  Lpon  this,  I  intended  to
them  from  him  perforce,  which  lie  would  not
suffer,  but  made  such  resistance  against  me,
as  in  the  end  I  was  not  only  conquered,  but
was  at  his  mercy,    which  he  granted    loqj


Of  i>

upon  condition,  that  I  should  come  and  pre-
sent myself  to  your  highness,  and  crave  par-
don on  his  behalf  that  he  would  not  let
himself  be  known  in  your  court,  which  he
will  do  on  his  return  from  the  caoile  of
-Armourol  :  in  the  meanwhile,  he  craveth  that
you  would  pardon  him  for  his  offence  past,
and  obtain  for  him  the  same  forgiveness
from  the  king.

1  know  not,  said  the  king,  how  I  should  remit
this  displeasure,  in  that  he  hid  himself  from
me,  who  so  much  desired  to  know  so  signal  a
man  ;  and  now,  seeing  your  armour  so  much
defaced,  I  prize  him  still  more.  O  Sir,  said
the  queen,  whenever  he  comes,  all  must  be
carried  to  his  account,  for  I  cannot  think
such  a  knight  as  he  is  would  desire  to  pass
unknown  to  your  highness,  without  some
earnest  occasion.

Then  said  the  king  to  the  knight,  I  pray  yon
tell  me  who  you  are.  He  replied,  they  call
me  Trofolante  the  Fearful.  I  have,  said  the
kin;;,  often  heard  talk  of  you,  ami  for  this
caute  bold  the  knight  of  the  Damsels  in  still
'2  K  '2


37^

higher  account.  If  you  saw  his  face,  of  what
age  is  he;  and  I  pray  you  tell  me  if  you
know  him  ?

Sir,  said  Trofolante,  I  neither  saw  him,  nor
know  him  ;  hut  I  judge  him  to  be  one  of  the
sons  of  Don  Duurdos,  for  I  do  not  think,
such  strength  and  courage  would  be  found
in  any  others.  And  now  that  I  have  dis-
charged his  commandment,  I  beseech  you
license  me  to  depart,  for  I  have  much  to  do
elsewhere.  You  may  go,  replied  the  queen,
for  there  is  nothing  to  detain  you.  And  I
would  no  other  thing  with  you,  said  the  king,
but  that  you  would  take  a  better  armour  at
my  hands,  because  your  own  is  not  in  case  to
do  you  service,  and  that  you  choose  a  horse
from  my  stable  :  for  though  I  know  your  in-
tention was  always  to  serve  the  emperor  Pal-
merin,  I  would  not  that  any  one  who  came
in  need  to  my  court,  should  depart  with  the
same.  Sir,  answered  Trofolante,  1  kiss  your
hands  for  this  bounty,  but  as  I  come,  so  will
I  go.  Your  license  is  all  that  I  ask,  and  see-
ing you  have  granted  me  that,  God  be  with
you,  I  go  my  ways;  and  with  tbat,    turning


577

bis  back,  he  departed  in  such  plight  as  he
had  entered.  The  king  gave  the  queen  to
understand  who  this  knight  was,  and  ext<
the  prowess  of  him  of  the  Damsels  to  the
stars,  in  that  he  had  conquered  him  so  easily  :
for  Troiblante  was  among  the  most  signal
knights  of  those  times  :  but  he  would  not  be-
lieve that  any  of  the  sons  of  Don  Duardos
would  come  into  his  court,  and  depart  again
without  his  knowledge.

While  they  were  thus  communing,  Gravarei
and  Bar'oosantc,  the  sons  of  the  count  of
Loban,  entered  the  hall  with  their  cousin
Clarisalte  ;  they  were  held  in  that  land  for
especial  knights  in  arms,  and  their  armour
was  broken  in  many  places  ;  having  made
reverence  to  the  king  and  queen,  tiny  came
and  presented  themselves  before  the  ladies,
to  whom  they  rehearsed  their  fortune,  and
that  which  the  knight,  and  the  damsels  had
commanded  them.  And  though  their  mis-
hap  was  resented  by  all,  yet  were  the  ladies
well  pleased  at  the  messages  which  they  de-
liv<  red, and  all  affirmed  that  Polifemahad  re-
>    ived  some  displeasure  from  her  pre'.'

is   ;


378

I  shall  never  be  perfectly  contented,  said  thc
kin;.';,  till  1    know   who    he   is.     A  man  who
having  conquered  Trofolante  the  Fearful,  in
fair  fight,  was  able  thc  same  day  to  discomfit
you  three,  without  hurt  to  his   own  person,
should   not  he  unknown.     Í  will   send  after
him,  that  his  prowess  may  be  rewarded  as  it
deserves.     Believe  me,  said   Gravenel,  after
conquering  us,  he  remained  fit  for  another
battle.     This  is  the  strangest  thing   in    the
world,  quoth  the  king,  for  it  is  the  nature  of
all  men   to  be  tired  of  one  woman  if  she  be
Jong  in  their  company,  and  for  him  it  seems
all  these  are  not  enough.     So  having   given
Mie    knighis    their    license,    they    departed,
well  content  with  the  fame  which  they  had
there  found  of  their  conqueror;  for  by  how
much  the  more  his  feats  were  held  in  esti-
mation, the  less  they  felt  the  shame  of  their
overthrow.

But  now  returning  to  him,  it  is  related  that
he  passed  through  many  adventures  on  his
way,  arising  from  the  same  cause  as  the  fo  -
mer,  the  company  he  took  with  him,  and
which  were  atchieved  with  the  same  honour.


379

At  length  they  came  in  sight  of  the  castle  of
Aiinourol,  and  riding  down  the  Tagus,  where*
being  summer  time,  the  trees  were  lull  of
leaves,  and  the  water  went  with  a  quiet  flow>
they  thought  the  place  so  pleasant,  that  all
the  labour  of  their  journey  thither  was  put
clean  out  of  mind.  Now,  said  he,  we  are  ar~
rived  at  the  place  where  each  of  you  must
display  the  force  of  your  beauty,  in  favouring
him  that  will  enterprizc  the  combat  on  your
behalf,  for  at  the  foot  of  yonder  fortress  is  the
picture  of  Miraguarda,  which  makcth  him
who  defends  it  perform  such  wonders.  It  is
believed,  that  though  he  were  weak  by  na-
ture, and  of  little  worth,  yet  the  picture  be-
fore him  wotdd  give  him  strength  not  to  be
overcome  by  any,  but  they  who  have  better  to
defend,  and  have  been  such  excellent  knights
by  nature,  that  none  could  win  any  honour
from  them  without  bringing  their  lives  into
extremity.  Wherefore,  ladies,  cast  lots  in
whose  name  lam  to  joust,  or  do  battle;  ihat
Í  may  now  see  whom  I  cany  with  me,  and
whether  1  have  spent  my  time  well  in  serving
and  accompanying  you.


380

Now  as  it  is  the  way  of  women,  though
some  of  them  know  how  little  they  are  be-
holden to  nature,  to  he  so  vain,  that  the  ugli-
est will  not  allow  any  one  to  have  the  ad-
vantage of  her  in  beauty;  this  vanity  made
them, so  confident,  that  there  was  not  one
among  them  who  did  not  think  that  all  the
world  mi'ght  have  been  overthrown  in  her
name.  Poli  fern  a,  who  had  the  greatest
opinion  of  beauty  in  herself  among  them  all,
said,  I  know  well,  sir  knight,  that  the  victory
which  they  gain  who  enter  the  combat  for
Mir  aguarda,  proceedeth  of  their  true  and
loyal  love,  which  gives  them  strength  when
they  need  it.  But  you,  who  have  none  to  any,
and  deserve  none  from  any,  do  you  com-
mend yourself  to  yourself  when  in  danger,
and  if  mishap  befall  you,  blame  yourself,  and
not  those  who  have  no  fault  therein.  There
is  none  of  these  ladies  of  so  little  beauty,  but
that  you  might  enter  the  field  in  her  name
against  any  one,  if  the  little  love  with  which
you  treat  them  did  not  prevent  you.  He  re-
plied, I  perceive,  lady,  that  you  are  offended
at  something,  and  treat  me  ill  without  cause  ;
wherefore,  to  put  you  out  of  this  ill  suspicion,


381

I  am  determined  to  enter  lhe  combat  under
the  favour  or'  your  beauty,  when  you  shall
well  perceive  how  erringly  you  have  judged
of  me.

So  riding  on,  they  came  to  the  castle,  at  what
time  Mir  aguar  da  was  coming  forth  to  re-
create herself  in  a  boat  upon  the  water,  being
accompanied  with  her  damsels  and  the  giant
Almourol:  for  at  this  time  she  had  larger
liberty,  owing  to  the  tranquillity  of  the  king-
dom. When  he  of  the  Damsels  saw  her  so
near  that  he  could  fairly  fix  his  eyes  upon
her,  he  was  not  so  much  master  of  himself»
but  he  felt  suddenly  stricken  with  her  beauty  ;
yet  had  he  a  good  quality,  which  served  him,
*or  the  passions  that  tormented  him  by  the
beauty  of  ladies,  were  of  no  longer  conti-
nuance than  while  they  were  before  him.
Then  turning  to  his  damsels,  he  said,  What
think  you,  ladies,  and  what  will  you  have  me
do?  Be  not  dismayed,  replied  Polifema,  wc
think  nothing  of  what  we  have  seen.  Mira-
guarda  by  this  time  seeing  this  new  company,
stopt,  that  she  might  behold  them  moi
leisure.


Florendos,  who  was  not  far  off,  being  armed
in  liis  wonted  armeur,  was  so  transported  in
beholding  lier,  that  he  remembered  not  what
he  had  to  do  ;  this  being  natural  with  unsuc-
cessful love,  for  they  who  are  favoured,  are
not  so  forgetful.  Almourol,  who  perceived
the  confidence  of  the  strange  knight,  and
knew  that  Miraguarda  did  greatly  delight
to  see  him  combat,  called  to  him,  saying,
Sir  Florendos,  look  before  you,  and  do  what
you  have  to  do,  for  the  lady  Miraguarda
stays  only  to  behold  you.

Florendos  then  turned  toward  the  damsels,
and  seeing  their  knight  prepare  himself  to  the
joust,  he  presently  mounted  on  horseback,
and  coming  to  the  stranger,  said,  I  pray  }rou,
sir  knight,  to  tell  me  upon  what  occasion
you  are  come  hither?  if  you  are  compelled
to  travel  with  these  damsels  as  your  penance,
and  must  be  delivered  from  it,  peradventure  I
may  fortune  to  release  you.  Certes,  sir  Flo-
rendos, replied  he  of  the  Damsels,  I  would
give  more  than  1  have  that  any  one  except
yourself  had  guarded  this  pass  to  day,  let  him
he  who  he  would  beside,  that  I  might  have


383

shown  these  ladies  whether  I  am  good   for
any  thing.

I  cannot  tell,  said  Florendos,  what  answer  I
should  make  him  that  hath  so   good  know-
ledge of  me  ;  nevertheless  as  your  horse  seems
so  good  a  one,   I  would    desire   you  break  a
couple  of  lances  with  me,  for  the  service  of  the
lady  Miraguarda  ;  and  if  either  of  us  should
remain    so  discontented  as  to  desire  battle,
it  shall  be  at  your  ehoice  whether  or  not  to
perform  it,  since  you  know  me,  and  I  know
not  you.      The  case  is,   replied  the    other,
that  there  is  not   that  thing  in    the    world
vhich  could  force  me  to  do  battle  with  you>
sir  Florendos.     As  for  the  joust,  I  am  willing
to  satisfy  the  lady  Miraguarda,  for  I  desire
to  do  her  pleasure,  for  your  sake,  though  it
should  be  at  my  own  cost.  And  after  we  have
jousted,  if  sir  Almourol  should  wish  to  break
another  pair  of  lances  with  me,  and  to  do
battle  afterwards,  he  shall  have  his  will,  that
these  my  ladies  may  confess  what  there  is  in
me.     It  is  plain,  quoth  Florendos,  that  these
words  arise   from   the  confidence  which  you
have  in  your  deeds.     Let  it  be  as  you  please,


3Z±

for  as  for  Almourol,  he  I  know  will  be  pleased
with  what  you  pi  i  >e.  Here  breaking  off,
they  took  their  ground,  and  with  their  spears
in  rest,  ran  against  eaeh  other,  both  being
desirous  of  victory  ;  for  in  such  a  place,  aud
jn  the  presence  of  women,  who  would  be
contented  without  it  :


385


CHAPTER  124.


While  these  knights  were  preparing  them-
selves to  the  joust,  Almourol  stepped  between
them,  desiring  them  to  stay  a  little  till  Mira-
guarda  could  take  her  place  at  the  window;
for  seeing  what  was  about  to  be  done,  she
had  retired  into  the  castle.  The  knights  at
this  set  their  staves  to  the  ground,  and
stayed  till  one  of  tbe  windows  was  made
ready  for  her  :  it  was  not  very  high,  so  tbat
Floreados  could  well  behold  her,  and  h%ving
done  this  longer  than  was  necessary  at  such
a  time,  he  turned  to  him  of  tbe  Damsels,  and
begging  pardon  for  this  delay,  ran  his  career
against  him,  who  received  him  in  bis  strength.
They  met  in  the  midst  of  tbe  career,  with  such
great  force,  as  the  truuehcons  of  their  laivce
VOL.  m.  G  L


386

flew  up  into  the  air,  and  they  passed  on,  no-
thing shaken  at  all.  Then  taking  other
lances,  they  ran  a  second  time,  and  with
such  fury,  that  both  missed  their  encounter  ;
and  as  neither  of  them  was  accustomed  to
fail  of  his  mark  on  such  occasions,  they
turned,  being  resolved  to  take  surer  aim  in
the  third  trial.

Florcndos  was  somewhat  discontented  at
perceiving  the  prowess  of  his  adversary,  and
feared  lest  any  misfortune  should  happen  to
him,  which  might  renew  the  unreasonable
rigour  of  his  lady  ;  and  he  of  the  Damsels
was  sorry  that  he  had  begun  the  joust,  be-
cause of  what  might  happen,  not  regarding
so  much  what  might  chance  to  himself,  as
to  Fiorendos,  knowing  the  temper  of  Aiira-
guarda.  He  therefore  essayed  to  prevent
this,  saying,  Methinks,  sir  knight,  as  we  have
neither  of  us  any  reason  as  yet  for  con-
tentment or  complaint,  we  may  be  satisfied
with  what  is  done  ;  you  cannot  purchase  any
renown  in  conquering  one  of  your  servants,
who  verily  would  be  sorry  that  you  should
receive  any  misfortune  at  his  hands,  in  that


387

it  might  hinrîer  you,  in  place  of  most  hope.
Wherefore,  I  pray  you  give  me  leave  to
break  two  or  three  lances  with  Almourol»
which  will  yield  some  contentment  to  these
ladies  that  bear  me  company.

I  well  see,  quoth  the  knight  of  the  Castle,
that  this  willingness  to  leave  off  before  we
have  pushed  our  proof  to  the  end,  arises
from  no  want  of  confidence  in  yourself,  your
deeds  show  that  ;  and  I  know  not  withal
how  it  would  be  imputed  to  me,  if  before  I
knew  more  of  your  person,  I  should  cease  to
try  myself  against  you,  till  one  of  us  per-
ceived the  other  to  be  the  better.  Either
therefore  you  must  tell  me  your  name,  that
knowing  that,  I  may  determine  as  shall
seem  best,  or  we  must  return  to  our  joust,
and  break  spears,  till  the  victory  or  the  shame
remain  with  one  of  us.  To  tell  you  my
name  so  much  before  hand,  replied  he  of
the  Damsels,  is  what  I  will  on  no  account  do  ;
and  to  joust  again  is  against  my  will,  but  I
do  it  to  satisfy  yours.

Then    placing    their   spears    in    rest   again,
2  L  °


they  ran  their  third  career  with  all  the
fury  that  their  horses  could  cany,  and
meeting  shit-Ids  and  bodies  lull  butt,  the
shock  was  such  that  the  horses  could  not
stand  it,  hurtling  one  against  the  other  also,
so  that  both  came  to  the  ground  with  their
riders.  His  or*  the  Damsels  had  his  shoulder
broken,  that  of  Florendos  burst  open  at  the
breast;  but  their  masters  leapt  off,  and  were
presently  ready.  The  knight  of  the  Castle
being  meiancholick  at  this  mishap,  drew  forth
his  sword  to  enter  the  combat.

Sir  knight,  quoth  the  other,  do  not  so  often
seek  to  try  your  friend,  who  desireth  in
nny  thing  that  he  may  to  do  you  service  ;  I
have  said  that  I  cannot  do  battle  with
you,  and  this  is  not  for  any  fear  I  have  of
your  valour,  but  because  the  duty  of  friend-
ship forbiddeth  me  such  ungentleness.  If
you  are  dissatisfied  that  you  have  not  over,
thrown  me  at  your  pleasure,  I  might  have
had  the  same  reason  for  discontent  with
regard  to  you,  if  I  regarded  nothing  more
than  the  desire  of  victory.  1  pray  you
sheath    your  sword  again,  and    reserve  the


3$9

trial  therewith,  till  such  a  one  come  as
shall  seek  you  with  a  more  malicious  in-
tent than  I  do.

Miragtfarda  heard  the  whole  discourse,  and
could  have  been  content,  for  the  boldness  she
saw  in  the  stranger,  to  see  the  combat  tried
between  them  ;  for  the  better  she  thought  of
him,  the  more  she  wished  this,  according  to
her  humour.     This  is  a  strange   thing,   cried

O  O7

Florendos,  that  you  would  have  me  be  satis-
fied with  having  done  nothing,  and  yet  will
not  tell  me  what  reason  I  have  to  make  me  so  !
J  will  tell  you,  quoth  Artesia,  one  of  his  dam-
sels :  He  is  so  used  to  show  himself  oft'  upon
knights  whom  he  docs  not  fear,  and  so  per-
suade  us  that  every  thing  is  little  for  him,  that
he  will  not  iinish  this  battle,  lest  he  should
Jose  his  credit  with  us  ;  and  he  will  excuse
himself  to  us  by  saying,  that  he  would  not
risk  his  person  against  the  beauty  of  Mira*
guarda,  when  he  had  none  on  his  side  to
favour  him  ;  as  if  each  of  us  were  not  suf-
ficient for  that.  Certes,  madam  Artesia,
said  Polifcma,  you  say  true,  and  lam  glad
you  understand  our  knight  so  well.  And
'2  l  o


390

they  all  affirmed  the  same  after  her,  for  it

was  their  nature  to  wish  to  see  discord  and
danger.  O  Ladies,  cried  he,  J  Bee  that  i
thing  is  lost  upon  you;  but  thanks  to  my-
self, I  am  so  much  the  master  of  my  own
affections,  that  Í  can  do  what  1  will,  and
thence  it  is  that  1  am  seldom  deceived  by
them.

These  words  were  not  spoken  so  low  but  that
Miraguarda  and  her  knight  heard  them  ;  and
though  she  judged  him  to  be  a  man  without
love  and  without  faith,  to  him  they  seemed
to  come  from  one  who  was  at  liberty,  and  to
whom  love  could  do  neither  good  nor  evij.
But  he  himself  desired  not  to  live  in  such
liberty.

The  giant  Ahnourol,  perceiving  that  the
knight  of  the  Damsels  would  not  do  battle
with  Florendos,  caused  to  be  brought  forth
a  goodl}'  bay  courser,  and  sent  it  to  him,
requesting  him  to  mount  it,  and  do  something
with  him  before  the  lady  Miraguarda,  that
she  might  be  recompensed  for  her  disap-
pointment   in  not  having   seen  the  former


Soi

contest  terminated  :  and  because  he  should
have  the.  better  will  to  the  combat,  he  wished
some  prize  should  be  ordained,  in  requital
of  his  pains  that  remained  the  conqueror.
The  knight  made  this  reply  :  Look  what  it  shall
please  you  to  appoint,  and  if  it  be  reasona-
.  ble  you  shall  not  find  me  contrary  thereto.
It  you  aie  willing  then,  said  the  giant,  I  will
risk  the  horse  which  1  have  sent  you,  as
you  are  without  one,  and  which  is  one  of
the  best  1  ever  saw,  on  condition  that  if
yeu  are  conquered  you  give  me  that  lady —
pointing  to  Arlanza, — who  is  the  largest  in
your  eompany  ;  for  since  you  ai  rived  she
hath  appeared  so  well  to  my  liking,  that  I
affect  her  better  than  I  ever  yet  did  other.
And  1  beseech  her  not  to  be  discontented
with  these  conditions,  for  if  [  win  her  she
will  be  mistress  of  me,  and  if  she  r<  main
with  you,  I  know  not  that  sht>  will  be  mistress
of  herself.  I  do  not,  replied  be  of  the  I 'ani-
seis, give  the  things  which  I  greatly-  esti  i  m
so  cheap,  yet  will  I  accept  this,  horse,  if  s<»
he  the  victory  full  on  my  side:  and  if  ii
come  to  pass  that  I  am  vanquished,  it  shall
be  at  her  choice   to  abide   with   which  she


392

will.  Content,  answered  Almourol,  for  I  do
not  hold  her  to  be  of  such  poor  understand-
ing as  that  for  a  man  so  free  as  you  she
should  be  willing  to  reject  a  will  so  devoted
as  mine.

So  without  more  words,  they  placed  their
lances  in  their  rests,  and  being  covered  with
their  sh  elds,  gave  their  horses  the  spurs,
and  <  ncountered  together  so  bravely,  as  the
Damsels'  kjiight  forsook  both  his  stirrups,  but
Almourol  was  cast  to  the  ground  with  his
saddle  between  his  legs,  not  a  little  offended
to  have  such  a  disgrace  in  the  presence  of
his   new  chosen  love.

The  damsels  commended  greatly  this  gallant
beginning,  but  chiefly  the  four  whom  he
won  in  the  valley  ;  for  as  they  were  not  used
to  see  giants,  and  the  sight  of  Almourol  had
dismayed  them,  they  esteemed  the  worth  of
their  knight  the  more.  Almourol  having
recovered  his  feet,  drew  forth  his  sword,
and  came  towards  the  knight,  who  presently
alighted.  He  desired  to  delight  the  damsels,
una  to  appear  well  before  Floreados,  and  to


39$

show  Miiaguarda,  that  not  for  fear  or  her
kniglit  he  had  refused  the  combat.  On  thç
other  hand,  Almourol  judged  that  in  that
battle  he  was  to  win  or  lose  Arlanza,  whom
he  marvellously  affected,  so  that  on  both  sides
they  did  wonders,  putting  out  all  their  force,
and  each  dealing  signal  blows,  to  the  cost  of
him  who  received  them  ;  so  that  in  short
time  their  armour  was  broken  in  many  places,
and  their  bodies  so  grievously  wounded  that
the  blood  ran  from  them  plentifully  ;  but
Almourol  being  not  so  nimble  and  quick  as
his  adversaiy,  was  brought  into  the  greatest
danger.  After  they  had  thus  continued  long
time  without  intermission,  Almourol  would
fain  have  drawn  back  a  little,  to  take  breath-
ing; but  he  of  the  Damsels  would  not  suffer
him,  and  followed  his  intent  so  fast  upon
him  that  he  brought  him  to  the  earth,  with
such  a  wound  in  the  left  thigh  that  he  could
not  move.  Florendos  was  grieved  to  see
him  in  this  plight,  and  Miiaguarda  being
sorry  for  his  mishap,  departed  from  the  win-
dow, commanding  that  he  should  be  brought
into  the  castle.  Florendos  went  with  him
into  his  chamber,  to  see  his  wounds  look)  d
io,  which  were  dangerous.


394

Then  the  damsels,  though  they  disliked  their
knight,  or  at  least  little  loved  him,  seeing
him  wounded,  assisted  him  to  unarm,  and
there  in  the  field,  at  the  foot  of  a  tree,  they
looked  at  his  wounds,  which  were  slight  ;  so
after  they  were  hound  up  he  armed  again,
and  mounted  on  horseback,  intending  to
depart  thence.  But  as  he  was  about  to  set
forward  on  the  way,  two  knights  of  some  far
country  arrived  at  the  castle,  who  came  to
try  the  adventure.  One  of  them  was  in  car-
nation coloured  armour,  beset  with  griffins
of  silver,  and  in  his  shield  was  figured  a
white  hart  in  a  field  vert  :  the  other  was
in  armour  of  black  raid  yellow,  in  the  figure
of  wedges,  and  in  his  shield  he  bore  the  sun
in  a  field  sable.  When  they  came  up,  he  in
the  carnation  armour  said  to  his  comrade,
mcthinks  the  sesta  has  not  taken  us  in  a  bad
place:  for  if  our  luck  should  be  so  much
against  us  as  that  he  which  kcepeth  the
shield  of  Miraguarda,  will  not  do  battle  with
us,  this  knight,  to  rid  himself  of  so  great  a
charge  as  he  hath  with  him,  will  give  us
part  of  bis  company.


395

Certainly,  answered  the  other,  I  had  the  same
thought,  and  if  he  would  not  have  given,
we  would  have  taken  them;  but  who  could
content  himself  with  things  of  so  base  esti-
matioti,  having  before  his  eyes  the  shield
wherein  is  pictured  that  countenance  which
nmketh  every  thing  else  be  forgotten.  At
these  words,  his  companion  raised  his  eyea,
and  seeing  the  shield  of  the  picture  of  Mira-
guarda,  which  the  other  showed  him,  hang-
ing on  the  tree  where  it  was  wont  to  be,  he
answered,  Thou  gayest  true,  and  I  know  nut
who  could  be  so  void  of  understanding  that
he  would  not  rather  lose  himself  for  those
beauties,  than  be  content  with  any  other
hope  of  any  thing,  were  it  ever  so  greatly
to  be  desired.  I  assure  you,  said  the
knight,  I  intend  not  to  depart  from  this
place  without  1  carry  this  shield  with  me:
yet  would  I,  if  it  were  possible,  first  make
trial  of  my  worthiness  against  himt  that  durs
deny  me  to  take  it  hence.  So,  advancing
himself  to  the  tree,  he  offered  to  take  down
the  shield.

The  knight  of  the  Damsels  was,  as  ye  have


3<Jb

heard,  on  horseback,  and  perceiving  his  in-
tent, and  knowing  that  Florendos  was  busy
about  the  hurts  of  the  giant,  and  therefore
knew  nothing  of  what  was  going  on,  be
•would  not  suffer,  that  in  his  presence  any
one  should  offer  him  so  great  wrong:  when-
fore  he  broached  his  horse  with  the  spurs,
and  when  he  came  to  the  place  where  the
shield  of  Miraguarda  hanged,  he  took  the
knight  by  the  arm,  and  pulled  him  off  his
horse,  saying,  It  well  appears  that  you  are
not  one  who  would  try  your  person  in  this
Bdventure,  seeing  you  would  thus  safely  steal
the  shield  from  its  keeper.  But  since  he  is
not  present  to  defend  it,  I  will  lake  his
place,  and  see  if  you  can  carry  it  hence  by
your  manhood.

Miraguarda  heard  all  this,  for  she  had  placed
herself  at  a  jealousy  of  one  of  the  windows,
where  she  could  see  without  being  seen,  to
look  at  that  collection  of  damsels  in  the
company  of  one  man.  And  she  was  as  well
pleased  at  finding  one  who  would  defend  her
shield,  as  she  had  been  discontented  at  see-
ing it  about  to  be  carried  away.    The  knight


397

perceiving  himself  thus  thrown,  down  and
treated  with  such  contempt,  and  being  by
nature  haughty  and  courageous,  drew  his
sword  without  waiting  to  remount,  and  co-
vering  himself  with  his  shield,  came  against
him  of  the  Damsels  in  such  wrath  that  he
could  not  bring  forth  a  word.  But  hi»  com-
panion came  between  then;,  saying,  Amount
upon  your  horse,  Sir,  and  in  the  meantime,
1  ivill  try  if  the  valour  of  this  knight  may
answer  his  insolence  ;  and  giving  his  steed
the  spur,  he  ran  at  him  :  but  he,  who  on  such
occasions  rejoiced  to  display  his  worth,  met
him  with  such  an  encounter,  having  his  full
desireat  him,  as  neither  his  diield,  armour,
nor  mail-coat  could  defend  the  push  of  the
lance,  but  it  passed  clean  thorow  his  body  ;
so  that  the  strange  knight  tumbled  beside  his
horse  to  the  ground  with  the  speai  in  him,
being  altogether  deprived  of  life.

He  of  the  Damsels  past  on,  and    stopt  un-
der the   window  where  Miraguarda    stood,

expecting  the   coming  of  the  other  I  night  ;
who  ran  at  him  with  all  his  mil  .  ke

his  lance  upon  hiirj  :         ;  JO  closely  that

VOL.  ill.


398

lie  of  the  Damsels  had  lime  to  lay  hold  on
the  top  of  his  shield,  which  lie  pulled  from
him  with  so  great  force  that  lie  hurst  the
straps  and  brought  his  head  on  the  neck  of
his  horse  ;  where,  not  permitting  him  the
leisure  to  recover  himself,  lie  gave  him  with
his  own  shield  a  hiow  on  the  crest  of  his  hel-
met, which  made  him  giddy  ;  then  dropping
the  shield,  he  caught  him  by  the  straps  of
his  helmet  and  plucked  it  off  his  head,  and
dealt  him  with  it  another  hlow  which  forced
the  bluud  from  his  mouth  and  nostrils,  and
seat  him  to  the  ground.

At  this  time  I'lorendos  came  out,  who  being
with  the  giant,  heard  the  noise  of  battle,  and
marvelling  at  a  thing  so  unaccustomed  as
that  battle  should  be  done  there,  when  nei-
ther he  nor  Almourol  were  present,  went
to  see  what  it  might  be:  where,  when  he
saw  the  two  kui<rhts  lying  on  the  field,  the
(me  run  through  the  body,  and  the  other
like  one  dead,  he  had  still  more  to  won-
der at.

Sir   Florendos,    4110th   he   of  the    Damsels,,


399

these  are  the  deeds  wherewith  I  would  da
you  service.  I  am  as  yet  ignorant,  answered
Florendos,  in  what  to  think  myself  behold-
en to  you  ;  for  I  sec  two  knights  here  who
should  seem  by  their  armour  to  be  of  some
account,  slain  by  your  hand,  I  know  not
upon  what  occasion.  I  will  tell  you,  he  re-
plied ;  this  one  who  is  still  moving,  would
have  carried  away  the  shield  of  the  lady
Miraguarda,  and  the  other  was  the  favourer
and  aider  of  his  attempt.  I,  knowing  how
this  concerned  you,  went  up  to  them,  and
either  by  favour  of  the  lady  Miraguarda,  or
by  their  ill  fortune,  have  brought  them  into
this  condition.  [  am  sorry  they  were  so
few,  for  by  what  I  felt  in  me  I  could  have
given  you  good  account  of  them,  though
they  had  been  more.

I  beseech  you  Sir  Knight,  quoth  Florendos,
tell  me  who  you  art',  lor  the  more  1  sec  of
your  feats  the  more  do  1  desire  to  know  the
name  of  him  whose  prowess  hath  so  deeply
indebted  me  to  him.  Sir  Florendos,  an-
swered  he,  you  shall  not  hi-  left  with  any
displeasure  from  inc.     1  am   Florian  of  the

'2  M    'J


400

Desert,  your  cousin  and  servant,  who  will  not
suffer  you  to  receive  injury  in  any  place  where
he  shall  be  present.

Now  then,  replied  the  other,  I  do  not  think
much  of  any  thing  which  1  have  seen,  for
any  thing  is  little  for  you.  Howbeit,  do  not
in  addition  to  the  wrong  yon  have  done  mc
in  not  telling  me  this  sooner,  commit  the
greater  one,  of  refusing  to  stay  awhile  with
me  ;  it  will  heal  the  wounds  of  Almourol,
when  he  knows  that  he  received  them  at
your  hands.

I  do  not  think,  answered  the  knight,  that
you  will  wish  me  to  tarry  here,  in  that  I  am
bound  to  be  at  a  certain  place  by  an  appoint-
ed time,  which  if  I  should  tail' to  do,  I  should
lose  something  of  mine  honour  ;  suffer  me
therefore  to  depart  hence  ;  and  as  1  see  this
knight  is  recovering,  I  will  pray  you  to  take
his  oath  of  obedience,  and  then  command
him,  that  on  the  part  ofthé  knight  of  the  Dam-
sels he  present  himself  in  the  court  of  king
Reciudos.  v  »ere  lie  shall  declare  to  the  queen
for  what  occasion  1  did  combat  with  his  fel-


401

low  and  himself:  and  I  request  you  again  to
pardon  me  for  not  tarrying,  as  1  can  do  no

otherwise  than  depart.

Flurendos  laboured  to  dissuade  him  awhile
from  his  journey  ;  but  he  would  by  no  means
be  moved  from  his  determination  :  so  taking
leave,  he  set  forward  on  his  return,  accom-
panied by  the  damsels,  who  every  day  held
him  in  greater  estimation  than  they  had  done
before.


m  :;


402


CHAPTER  125.


The  knight  of  lhe  Damsels  with  his  company
began  to  measure  back  his  way  to  the  court
of  king  Recindos,  intending  when  he  came
thither  to  discharge  himself  of  some  of  the
damsels,  and  retain  none  in  his  company  but
Arlanza,  and  those  that  attended  on  her  to  do
her  service  :  for  from  her  he  did  not  intend
to  separate  till  he  had  seen  her  given  in  mar-
riage, and  honoured  according  to  her  worth,
and  the  will  he  had  to  requite  her.  And  though
his  intention  was  to  travel  with  much  speed,
he  met  with  some  adventures  which  delayed
him  ;  and  among  others  one  which  obliged
him  to  increase  his  company  when  he  would
fain  have  lessened  it  It  is  related  in  the
chronicles  of  his  atchievements,  that  as  they
were  one  day  riding  along  a  river  side,  where


405

tlie  country  was  full  of  high  trees  and  thickly
set,  he  heard  the  voice  of  a  woman  crying
pitifully,  from  the  closest  part  of  the  thicket;
it  seemed  as  if  some  one  were  endeavouring
to  force  her,  and  her  voice  was  almost  spent.
Upon  this  he  gave  his  horse  the  spurs,  and
rode  toward  the  sound;  and  because  the  trees
were  so  close  that  he  could  not  well  pass,  he
alighted  and  advanced  on  foetsword  in  hand.
Having  reached  the  water  side,  he  saw  on  the
other  side  of  the  river  a  knight  of  ,reai  sta-
ture, whose  armour  was  of  azure  and  gold,
and  bearing  in  his  shield  a  golden  Lion,  in  a
silver  field  ;  at  Ins  feet  he  held  a  damsel  by
the  hair  of  the  head,  the  beauty  of  which
deserved  not  such  usage  ;  he  held  his  sword
drawn  in  his  hand,  wil  h  which  he  threatened
her,  saying,  thai  if  she  did  not  consent  he
would  cut  or!  her  head.

Not  far  oil",  he  espied  another  knight  lying
among  the  green  leaves,  who  laughed  at  this
pitiful-sight  heartily,  beholding  what  hard
shift  the  damsel  made  to  help  herself:  and
after  he  had  laughed  a  good  while,  he  said,
It  doth  me  good  to  see  you  take  such  great


404

pains,  for  by  this  means  I  shall  be  eased  of
such  labour,  when  I  come  to  take  my  plea-
sure on  her.

He  of  the  Damsels  seeing  such  villainy  iu
men  who  seemed  equipped  for  far  different
deeds,  and  that  he  could  not  cross  the  river
by  reason  of  its  depth,  called  out  to  him
not  to  treat  the  damsel  thus,  for  one  who
wore  such  goodly  arms  was  bound  rather  to
protect  women  than  to  wrong  them.  He  who
held  her  by  the  hair  lifted  up  his  eyes  at  this,
and  seeing  him  on  the  other  side,  said,  I
suppose  you  venture  to  reprove  me,  because
the  water  is  between  us,  and  you  think  1
cannot  come  to  chastise  you  ;  but  you  are
deceived,  for  I  know  the  fords,  and  have  a
swift  horse  ;  so  if  you  are  wise  you  will  make
off  in  time.  Let  him  be  !  cried  his  comrade,
for  I  think  I  see  petticoats  of  many  colours
in  his  company  ;  and  perhaps  after  we  are
tired  with  this,  we  may  find  better  choice
among  them.  I  beseech  you,  quoth  he  of
the  Damsels,  show  me  the  ford  !  for  I  would
rather  feel  the  force  of  your  blows,  than  see
them  tried  upon  so  weak  a  thing  as  a  woman.


405

If  you  desire  that,  said  the  one,  swim  for  it,
for  the  ford  is  far  off;  and  saying  this  lie
again  laid  hand  on  the  damsel.  But  such  was
the  wrath  which  the  good  knight  felt  at  seeing
this  foul  action,  that  forgetful  of  all  dan-
ger, he  fastened  his  shield  on  his  breast  and
leapt  in,  and  as  the  river  though  deep  was
not  wide,  presently  gained  the  further  side.
The  knight  that  lay  among  the  green  leaves
said  to  his  companion,  Do  not  disturb  your-
self, but  do  what  you  are  about;  and  while  you
are  taming  her,  1  will  tame  this  fellow.  Mow
that  may  be  I  know  not,  quoth  he  of  the
Damsels  ;  but  this  I  know,  that  1  am  on  the
right  side  of  the  water,  where  I  can  show  you
how  little  you  shall  have  your  will  upon  this
damsel,  and  how  much  less  you  shall  chuse
among  mine.  And  then  putting  forth  all
his  might,  he  soon  laid  the  other,  though
he  was  a  doughty  one,  on  the  earth,  with-
out his  left  arm.  And  leaving  him  stretch-
ed out  he  turned  to  the  other,  who  leaving
the  damsel,  came  to  help  his  companion.
But  as  he  had  been  the  principal  in  this  vil-
lainy, he  of  the  Damsels  being  full  melan-
cholic kj  laid  hands  on  him  in  such  wise,  that


406

lie  demolished  his  armour  first,  and  then  hi?
flesh  and  bones;  till  the  other  having  no  other
hope  of  life,  thought  it  best  to  crave  aid  at  her
hands,  whom  he  sought  to  have  abused.  I
beseech  you,  Lady,  said  he,  let  your  virtue
be  greater  than  my  misdeeds,  and  intreat  thi»
knight  to  save  my  life,  for  as  it  is  for  your
cause,  peradventure  for  the  love  of  you  also
he  may  spare  me.  He  of  the  Damsels  held
his  hand,  to  see  what  she  would  command  ;
for  having  eyed  her,  he  saw  that  she  was  one
whose  will  deserved  to  be  obeyed.  She  had
not  yet  recovered  sufficiently  from  her  fear
to  be  able  to  speak  ;  but  at  length  pity  for
the  state  in  which  she  saw  him  prevailing
over  her  anger  for  the  wrong  which  he  would
have  done  her,  she  said,  I  beseech  you,
Sir,  since  the  works  of  this  wicked  man  have
already  in  part  received  their  due  punish-
ment, that  you  give  him  his  life,  to  use  it
better  in  future,  or  to  end  it  according  to  his
misdeeds.  Who  do  you  think,  Lady,  he  re-
plied, could  see  you,  and  refuse  to  do  what-
ever you  should  enjoin  ?  This  knight  deserves
severe  chastisement;  but  all  rules  are  to  be
broken  through  for  you.     Then  he  ordered


407

him  and  his  companion  to  go  as  well  its  they
could  to  the  court  of  king  Recindos,  and  in
hisname  present  themselves  before  the  queen's

ladies,  and  relate  what  they  had  done,  and
swear  never  to  wear  armour  again,  without  it
were  their  pleasures  to  suffer  them  ;  and  if  they
obtained  that  permission,  never  to  employ
arms  in  disservice  of  any  one.  All  this  they
promised,  being  in  such  fear  that  they  would
gladly  have  accepted  any  terms  of  life,  though
they  had  been  far  more  rigorous.  Their  es-
quires made  a  litter,  whereon  they  laid  the
last  knight,  who  being  the  worse  wounded
of  the  two,  could  not  go  on  horseback  ;  the
other  mounted,  and  so  as  well  as  they  could
they  set  off  on  their  journey.

lie  of  the  Damsel»;  then  walked  down  the
liver  to  see  if  lie  could  discover  a  lord,  where
his  horse  might  be  brought  him;  and  he
took  the  damsel  in  his  hand,  who  was  still
so  little  recovered  from  the  fear  she  had  been
in,  as  not  to  remember  that  her  squire  was
tied  to  the:  foot  of  a  tree,  with  a  gag  in  his
mouth;  but  now  calling  him  to  mind,  they
turned  back  to  release  him.     Hard  by  them


408

the  two  palfreys  were  fastened  to  the  boughs  ;
the  knight  bade  him  mount  one,  and  ride
along  the  river  side  till  he  found  some  place
where  he  could  pass  and  bring  him  his  ho

In  the  mean  while  thai  the  squire  went  about
that  he  was  commanded,  he  unarmed  him-
self, to  dry  his  garments  which  were  full  of
water;  and  then  he  questioned  with  the  dam-
sel, how  she  happened  into  that  place,  and
upon  what  occasion  the  knights  so  sought  to
force  her.

Sir,  she  replied,  I  was  born  in  this  country,
and  am  somewhat  of  kin  to  the  lady  Mira-
guarda,  of  whom  it  may  he  you  have
heard.  The  name  of  that  lady,  replied  he
of  the  Damsels,  is  renowned  so  far  and  wide,
that  I  know  not  where  it  can  be  unknown.
So  it  is  then,  said  the  damsel,  that  it  being
some  time  since  I  had  seen  her,  I  was  new
going  thither  with  leave  obtained  of  my  mo-
ther, when  I  chanced  to  unci  with  these
two  knights,  who  demanded  of  me  to  what
place  my  journey  lay:  Í  then  mis-doubting
no  harm,    declared    unto    them  the    whole


40$

state  of  my  journey  ;  whereupon  one  of  these
knights  said  to  his   companion,  I  think  it
good,  in  revenge  of  the  shame  we  have  re-
ceived   at  the  castle  of  Almourol,  that  we
should  ease  our  anger  on  this  damsel,  since  she
is  a  handsome  one,  and  belongs  to  the  house.
The  other  knight  being  equal  with  his  fel-
low in  this  ungracious  intent,  did  presently
agree.     So   they  cast  lots   which  of   them
should  abuse  me   first,  and   it   fortuned    to
fall  on  him   whom  you   saw  pulling  me   so
cruelly  by   the  hair  of  the  head.     And  be-
cause   my    squire    cried    aloud,  they   dealt.
with  him  as  you  have  seen.     Jiut  it  pleased
God,  that  to  prevent  their  purpose  you  came
and  succoured  me  in  good  time.

Certes,  lady,  answered  the  knight,  1  rejoice
that  it  was  my  chance  to  be  your  rescue  ;
yet  had  it  been  better  for  me  not  to  have
come  hither  at  all,  such  a  wound  have  1  re-
ceived by  your  singular  beauty.  It  is  not
much  that  they  should  have  sought  to  force
you,  since  your  eyes  have  forced  me.  I
beseech  you   therefore    bestow   that  on  me

VOL.    III.  2     N


410

by  gentleness,  which  they  would  have  taken
from  you  perforce.

The  damsel  noting  his  words,  regarding  his
sweet  countenance,  remembering  his  noble
behaviour  and  knightly  courtesy,  made  him
answer,  but  I  know  not  how  :  if  it  were  in-
cident to  his  purpose,  he  is  best  able  to  an-
swer it  ;  if  not,  then  there  was  no  harm  done.
A  new  accident  willcth  me  to  let  them  alone,
and  hearken  to  the  damsel's  squire,  who  now
came  hastening  back,  saying,  Methinks,  Sir,
there  are  more  robbers  than  could  have  been
supposed  in  this  valley!  Help  your  company,
for  a  knight  in  black  arms  is  carrying  away
one  of  your  damsels,  who  seems  to  be  the
chief  of  them  ;  and  because  she  will  not
willingly  consent,  his  squire  is  got  up  behind
her  to  ride  off  with  her  by  force.  So  greatly
was  he  enraged  at  hearing  that  they  were
forcing  away  Arlanza,  that  without  waiting
to  arm  himself  completely,  he  threw  himself
a  second  time  into  the  river,  telling  the
damsel  to  cross  with  her  squire,  and  join  the
others,  for  he  would  be  with  them  presently.


411

As  soon  as  lie  had  passed^  he  heard  great
lamentations  among  them,  and  perceived
Poli  tema  come  towards  him,  crying  and
tearing  her  hair,  that  he  should  make  haste
to  succour  her  mistress;  but  the  knight  that
carried  her  away  had  found  his  horse  grazing,
and  hamstrung  him  to  prevent  pursuit: — he
was  fain  therefore  to  follow  on  foot;  and  such
was  his  fortune,  that  before  they  had  got  half
a  league,  he  came  up  with  them  ;  for  Arlanza
being  strong  and  of  great  stature,  the  squire
could  not  manage  her  so  well  but  that  she
oftentimes  got  off  the  palfrey,  and  before  he
could  place  her  on  again,  some  delay  was
occasioned  ;  and  moreover  the  beast  went
slowly,  being  tired  and  unable  well  to  bear
them  both.  He  of  the  Damsels  came  up
when  she  was  on  the  ground,  and  he  who
carried  her  off  was  striving  to  put  her  again
on  horseback;  then  he  clapt  on  his  helmet,
which  hitherto  he  had  borne  in  his  hand  that
it  might  not  heat  him,  and  without  speaking
a  word,  made  at  him.  The  knight  put  him-
self in  a  posture  of  defence  ;  but  Arlanza,
who  had  a  manly  heart,  and  was  now  made
stronger  by  her  anger,  got  up,  and  caoghl
2  N   2


412

hold  of  li  is  right  arm,  and  being  of  the  race
of  the  giants,  held  it  so  firmly  that  he  could
make  no  use  of  it,  so  that  he  of  the  Dam-
sels, who  did  not  dare  to  strike  him  for  feat
of  hurting  her,  without  any  opposition  took
him  in  Ids  arms.

Now  he  was  marvellously  strong, and  the  me-
lancholy which  he  resented  making  him  still
stronger,  he  griped  him  so  hard  that  he  fair-
ly took  away  his  senses,  and  then  threw  him
to  the  ground,  meaning  to  cutoff  his  head:
but  presently  thinking  it  better  to  send
him  also  to  the  ladies  of  the  queen  of  Spain,
before  whom  he  was  desirous  of  appearing
well,  he  bade  his  own  squire,  who  was  with
tears  beseeehing  mercy,  disarm  him  ;  and
when  he  eame  to  himself  he  commanded
him  to  deelare  his  name.  I  am  called  Ro-
camor,  said  the  knight,  a  friend  to  those
two  knights  which  you  vanquished  on  the
other  side  of  the  river  ;  and  as  1  could  not
succour  them,  in  revengement  of  their  in-
jury I  intended  to  earry  away  this  lady.

Well  then,  quoth  he,  accomplish  the  charge


413

I  shall  commit  to  you,  or  you  shall
life  and  your  wicked  intentions  at  once.    ll<
answered,  I  will  do  any  think  which  you  shall
command,  so  that  I  may  not  die  thus,

I  will  then,  said  he  of  the  Damsels,  that  you
presently  take  your  way  to  the  king  of  Spain's
court,  and  there  present  yourself  to  the  ladies
attendant  on  the  queen,  reporting  to  them
what  hath  passed  between  you  and  me  ;
and  you  shall  never  while  you  live  hear  arms
again,  without  it  shall  please  them  to  licence
you.  This  is  that  you  may  follow  the  same
law  as  your  friends.  AVho  shall  1  say  liassent
me  r  said  the  other.  The  knight  of  the  Dam-
sels, he  replied,  for  so  they  call  me  ;  and  this
journey  you  must  take  upon  your  squire's  pal-
frey, for  I  shall  take  your  horse  in  the  place
of  that  which  you  have  killed  for  me.  So
mounting  it,  and  placing  Arlanza  on  a  pal-
frey winch  was  brought  her,  he  returned  to
his  company,  talking  to  her  ib  they  went
on  with  less  anger  than  he  had  resented  when
he  came  up.  Lady,  said  he.  great  niusl  the
cause  be  that  should  make  me  go  from  you
again,  and  leave  you  to  the  courtesy  of  the
knights  of  this  land.


414

When  he  was  come  to  the  rest  of  his  com-
pany, he  saw  amongst  them  Silviana,  which
was  the  name  of  her  whom  the  knights
would  have  ravished,  and  they  all  came  with
great  joy  to  meet  him,  and  embraced  Arlan-
za,  as  if  they  were  meeting  her  after  a  long
absence.

The  night  drew  on  apace,  and  there  they
concluded  to  pass  that  night,  because  they
knew  of  no  other  provision  near  at  band;
every  one  Look  a  modicum  of  their  small  re-
fection, and  afterward  they  laid  them  down  to
their  rest  :  but  Silviana  could  not  suffer  any
sleep  to  enter  her  eyes,  for  the  remembrance
of  what  had  past  with  her  deliverer  kept
her  waking  :  as  for  him,  'he  thoughts  which
might  else  have  spoilt  his  sleep  were  at  an
end,  and  he  siept  soundly,  according  to  his
condition.

EX  D    OF    VOL.    III.


Printed  by  IF.  Pople,
22,  Old  Boswell  Court,  Stnmi.


Cri       t


'V-  Vife*


»  ■   ■  •  c  <r  j
c<  Ci        fi.


*-*«-   V   <-  «-              ^

,?**"    *     c   <            !S

J2&-  <*     <

«c*          V   1

r  CC


.?  '    ^  «-


[msizsœssm


te
ir\


8

TO
•H
O

c
cd

&H


1

ctí
rH

C    C
CO  Pm

c  o
w
c

«H    -H

o   ^

•H  rH      •

t-i    to    cn

C     Pu,     C

r5  £   C

Oti  O     ..


Ih  D-  CO

o  t>  e

(X,  H  W


University  of  Toronto
Library


DO  NOT

REMOVE

THE

CARD

FROM

THIS

POCKET


Acme  Library  Card  Pocket
LOWE-MARTIN  CO.  limited


.


■



PALMERIN OF ENGLAND
VOLUME IV

Ç_  <;•■     /■^   -«.        'KT       •^<"       '*''
;  <-•   -r     'Ht  vi         ir<

•  ••  <-         «■  '  t


«Í^ÃT^H^t^MãilBitnèáiãllíí^jl


iV-''-


^mmtin  of  Cnjstônti,

IN    FOUR    VOLUMES.


CORRECTED    BY


ROBERT  SOUTHEY,

FROM    THE   ORIGINAL   PORTUGUEZE.


î&almertn  of  Cnslanï,
iFranctóco  fie  á^oraes.


VOL.    IV.


LONDON:

FRINTED  FOR  LONGMAN,  HURST,  REES,  AND  ORME,
PATERNOSTER    ROW.

1807.


U  ror-

Pirns'

554550

l^    IC    ^'^


fV.  Pople,  Printer,
22,  Old  Boswell  Court,  Strand.


CONTENTS,


VOL.   IV.


Chap.  Page

126.  Of  zchat  passed  between  Florendos
and  the  van([iáshed  knight,  and  how
the  hnights  uhom  he  of  the  Damsels
had  conquered  arrived  at  court,  and

of  what  happened  there  -         1

127.  Of  what  befel  the  knight  of  the
Savage  in  the  kingdom  of  Navarre,

at  the  caal/e  of  the  princess  A  malt  a     \{)

128.  Jiozi)  Alhay~ar  presented  himself  be-
fore the  queen  of  Thrace,  and  em-
barked for  Turkey  -  -       3'Z

32.0.  Of  Tihat  happened  to  the  knight  of
the  Ti/ger  on  his  zcai/  to  Constan-
tinople, after  he  left  the  Perilous
Island  -  -  -       4?


CONTENTS.

Cr,:p.  Page

1:J().  lioTC'  lhe  Icuight  nf  the  Tijger  look
leave  of  Armisia  and  the  hing  her
fatlieVf  itnd  of  tchut  he  did  upon  the
Tcaij  -  -  -       58

131.  IIow  the  knight  of  the  Ti/ger  reached
the  emperors  court,  and  of  an  ad-
venlttre  rchicli  presented  itself  there       70

132.  Of  the  talk  uhich  Falmerin  had
with  his  ladij  ■-.  -       81

133.  Relating  the  coming  of  certain
knights  to  the  court,  and  oj  the
neus  of  the  feet  of  the  Turks  9i

148.*  O/'  an  adventure  zchich  befel  the
knight  of  he  Savage  before  he  ar-
rived at  Co7is!nn(inople  -     103

149-  Hon  /'ie  of  the  Savage  reathed  the
court,  and  hozc  Drngomule  king
of  Navarre  arrived  there  icith  ylr-
nalta  -  -  -      117


*  Here  the  chapters  spoken  of  in  the  Preface  are  omitted.
Those  which  follow  are  nu  nbered  as  they  stand  in  the  origi-
nal, for  the  convenience  of  reference.


CONTENTS.
Chap.  Page

150.  How  at  the  emperors  desire  Arne-

dos  king  of  France,  and  Recindos

king  of  Spain,  came  to  court  with

their    zcives,     and    how    Recindos

brought  zcith  him  Miraguarda  and

the  <fiant  Almourol  -  -     l'Z8


to"


151.  Of  the  speech  which  the  emperor
made  to  all  these  princes,  and  how

the  marriages  were  appointed        -     157

152.  How  the  soldan  Belagriz  turned
Christian,  ajid  hozo  the  marriages
were  solemnized  -  -     151

153.  Of  the  feasts  zi'hich  were  made  in
Constantinople,  and  hozo  the  queen
of  Thrace  was  carried  away  by  a
great  adventure  -.  -     l62

154.  Of  what  happened  to  the  knight  of
the  Savage  in  the  cdventure  of  the
queen  of  Thrace  hi-i  zcije  -     170

155.  Hozc  with  the  help  of  Daiiarte  the
knight  of  the  Savage  recovered  the
queen  of  'Thrace  -  -     189


CONTENTS.

Chap.  Page

lóO.  Of  what  past  in  Constantinople,
and  /tow  Targiuna  sent  advice  of
the  coming  of  the  enemies  -     202

157.  Of  zihat  the  emperor  did  for  the
defence  of  his  land  -  -     2 1 1

158.  Hozc  the  enemies  feet  arrived,  and

of  the  battle  at  their  landing       -     221

159.  Of  the  grief  which  there  was  in  Con-
stantinople for  the  condition  of
Dramuziando,  and  how  the  enemies
pitched  their  camp  -  -     232

160.  Of  what  Albayzar  did  after  his
camp  was  pitched,  and  how  succour
came  to  the  emperor  -  -     246

161.  Of  an  adventure  which  befel  upon
the  coming  of  a  strange  knight,
who  had  a  lady  zvith  him  -     253

162.  In  which  the  manner  of  Florian's
coming  is  related,  and  of  other
things  which  befel  -  -     £71

163.  Of  the  battle  of  twelve  against
twelve,  and  how  the  ladies  put  an
end  to  it  -  -    279


CONTENTS.
Chap.  Page

104.  Of  the  battle  betzceen  Dramuziando

(Hid  Fraiitwitaute  -  -     292

10Õ.  Hozc  the  battle  was  ordered  between

the  'Turks  and  Christians  -     305

166.  riuzc  the  Jirst  battle  was  fought,
and  of  the  great  actions  and  mis-
fortunes therein  -  -     320

167.  Of  zchat  passed  in  the  citj/  after  the
fust  battle,  and  of  the  death  of  the

emperor  .  _  -     346

168.  Of  what  was  done  before  the  second
battle,  and  of  the  great  things  zchich
took  place  in  the  citif  -        -     357

169.  Of  what  happened  in  the  second
battle  -  -  -     Siù'J  "v

170.  How  Daliarte  came  to  the  field  to
look  for  the  dead  that  he  midit  uive
them  burial,  and  of  the  rest  zchich

he  did  -  .  -     408

171.  Of  the  advice  zchich  Daliarte  gave
to  the  people,  and.  hozc  he  carried
the  bodies  to  the  Perilous  Island,
and  of  thii  zcoundcd  princes  -     4  Hi


CONTENTS.
Ch«p.  P«ge

172.  Of  the  obsequies  which  were  marie
in  the  island,  and  of  what  was  ap-
pointed touching  the  education  of
the  princes  -  -     428


CHAPTER  ÎC6.


Ahcx  the  knight  of  the  Damsels  was  de"
jKirted,  FI(jicikU)s,  being  desirous  to  execute
the  ehargc  ieit  with  liiin,  asked  of  the  vaa-
quishcd  knight  who  he  was  :  Sir,  he  rcp'ied,
we  arc  both  natives  of  this  coun'.rv.  I  am
called  Hrandanior,  and  my  ecnijni'Tion  had
to  name  Sicrcralh  ATe  two  havinu;  lon-jç
sought  knightly  adventures  in  eompany/con-
chio'ed  to  make  trial  of  this  shield  of  Mira-
guarda,  and  before  we  saw  the  keeper,  we
did  battle  with  that  knight  of  th?  Damsels
who  is  rujw  gone  his  wav,  in  which  we  were
maltreated  even  as  vou  behold.  In  liuih
answered  Florendo^,  the  discourteous  enter-
prize  you  took  in  hand,  deserved  greater
chastisement  than  yen  have  received,  and
such  should  always  be  the  lot  of  those,  who

VOL.  IV.  B


2

put  íortíi  themselves  in  such  actions.  Bivt
no"'^  as  he  has  left  appointed,  you  iiuisL
promise  tlîat  vou  will  go  and  submit  yourself
in  the  court  oi' king  Recindos,  or  else  endure
more  pain  than  your  wounds  give  you.  lie,
being  still  full  of  fear,  promised  to  obey  all
that  was  enjoined  him.  And  having  bound
lip  his  wound  as  avcU  as  he  could,  he  de-
parted ;  tarrying  no  longer  than  was  necessary
to  bury  his  companion.

In  few  days  after,  he  arrived  at  the  king  of
Spain's  court,  being  very  loih  to  enter  in,
because  he  was  so  well  known  to  the  kin<i,  and
the  chief  of  his  household;  but  holding  it  a
greater  shame  not  to  fulfil  what  he  had  pro-
mised, he  entered  the  palace  at  such  time  as
lhe  king  was  in  the  queen's  apartment.  They
who  beheld  him,  did  not  repute  him  amongst
the  number  of  those  vanquished  by  the
Icnight  of  ihe  Damsels,  because  his  armour
was  fair  and  unbroken,  nor  blemished  in  any
place  ;  and  his  shield  was  no  whit  impaired,
bat  the  device  thereof  to  be  seen  at  pleasure,
so  that  they  looked  at  him  the  more,  ex-
pecting  some  aovelty,    Biandamor  seeing


himself  there,  where  he  had  to  avow  his  fault
ill  the  presence  of  his  friends,  thouglir.  ic
worse  than  death  itself;  nevertheless,  as
one  who  desired  to  have  it  over,  he  made
way  forwards,  and  eoniing  to  the  queen's
est  I  dão  knelt  down,  and  taking  off  his  hel-
met, presented  himself  as  the  knight  of  the
.Damsels  had  commanded  ;  and  though,  as
has  been  said,  he  was  well  known  in  that
land,  yet  was  he  so  disfigured  by  lack  of
blood  which  lie  had  lost  from  that  blow  on
the  head,  that  none  knew  him  :  the  queen
having  demanded  of  him  who  he  was,  asked
for  what  occasion  he  enterprized  to  combat
•with  the  knight  of  the  Damsels.  He  then
told  her  of  the  death  of  his  companion  Sige-
rail,  and  how  the  knight  that  same  day,  be-
fore he  vanquished  them,  had  jousted  with
the  keepc^r  of  the  shield,  and  had  likewise
combated  with  the  giant  Almourol,  and  had
brought  him  in  great  danger  of  hislil'e.

Certes,  quoth  the  king,  this  man  is  the  most
excellent  in  the  world  ;  the  more  I  hear  of
his  valour  tlie  more  I  am  astonished.  You,
knight,  if  30U  liad  not  for  your  excuse  tli^
c  2


beauty  of  ]\îiragnarda,  v>  liicli  makcth  men
commit  a  thousand  faults  contrary  to  llicir
condition^  would  deserve  a  punishment  equal
to  that  of  your  companion,  and  it  would
become  mc  to  see  it  executed;  for  I  must
iioL  consent  that  such  robberies  be  com-
niiued  within  my  realm.  Brandamorat  this
vent  to  kiás  his  liand  for  the  inercy  which
he  had  found:  and  when  he  drew  nearer
tiie  ki.Tg  knew  him,  vvhicli  made  liim  marvel
the  morej  for  he  was  held  to  be  a  good
Ivnight:  so  he  commanded  his  chirurgeons
should  use  good  respect  unto  hiiri,  being
sorry  to  behold  him  in  such  plight.  Ihrce
d:iys  afterwards  the  two  knighls  that  would
bave  ravisned  Silviana  arrived  at  the  court,
being  so  feeble  and  weak,  as  they  were  con-
strained to  lean  on  their  squires'  shoulders:
he  that  had  the  least  hurt,  having  mads
obeisance  to  the  kir.g  and  qr.eeu,  addressed
htmtclf  lo  tne  king  without  kneeling,  which
be  could  not  do  ior  v.eakness,  and  said.  Most
mighty  prince,  we  having  been  conquered
by  the  knigiit  of  the  Damsels,  arc  come
hither  by  liis  comrnand,  to  present  ourselves
to  the  ladies  of  this  court,  \iliuia  we  inlreat


so  lo  work  on  our  behalf  with  your  majesty,
that  we  may  not  be  judged  as  the  oHence
deserves  tor  whieh  we  are  sent  here.  And
tlien  he  related  the  cause  of  the  battle.
Certes,  cried  the  king,  well  might  God  chas-
tise me  for  not  chastising  those  who  deserve  it
so  well;  f  beinghis  minister  in  the  land,  ought
not  to  s'lfrcr  such  things.  And  if  Í  did  not
think  thai.  Nour  being  sent  here  by  the  knight
of  tlie  Damsels  obliges  me  to  inliict  no  far-
ther punishment  uj>ou  ye  than  ye  bring
witli  ye,  the  villainy  which  yc  oiT'ered  to  a
weak  damsel,  who  was  travelling  without  fear
in  my  dominions,  should  be  punished  as  the
crime  deserves.  The  more  1  hear  of  this
knight  the  more  I  am  indebted  to  him;  for
what  [  by  my  negligence  do  not  attend  to,
he  goes  about  ])unisliing,  and  amending  by
his  prowess.  I  know  not  why  he  will  not  let
himself  be  known,  that  we  might  requite
some  part  of  his  deserts  ; — to  reeompence  all
would  be  impossible.  Your  highness,  re-
plied the  knight,  hath  reason  thus  to  esteem
of  him,  for  never  was  there  such  valour  in
man  as  there  is  in  him  :  and  now  that  our  fault
is  forgiven,  we  beseech  you  that  the  ladie»
B  3  '


6

may  suíTcr  my  comp.nnion  and  mc  to  bear
aims,  vvliich  we  inubt  not  do  till  they  pciinit
us.  They  uiil  do  as  tlicy  think  best,  re-
plied the  king;  ask  notliing  from  me.  Tne
knights  seeing  the  king's  (iispleasure,  then
bcsouglit  tiic  (|ULcn  to  favour  them,  and
command  her  Jadics  to  entertain  them  into
tlieir  favourable  judgments  :  promisir)g  irom
thenceforth  to  employ  their  time  and  ntrengih
in  their  services  and  in  iliat  of  all  damsels.

Before  the  queen  could  answer  liini,  another
knight  of  no  Jess  stature  and  goociiy  appear-
ance entered  the  iiall,  and  kneeling  before  her,
presented  himself  to  the  ladies  on  the  part  of
lhe  knight  of  the  lamsels  ;  for  this  was
he  who  would  have  carried  away  Arlanza
■while  he  was  busied  in  baitle  with  the
other  two-  And  he  related  all  the  manner
of  his  adventure,  and  how  the  knight
had  taken  his  horse  in  place  of  that  which
he  had  killed,  and  made  him  take  this  jour-
ney on  foot,  for  the  little  way  whieh  he  had
been  by  him  constrained  to  run  after  him  :
and  as  he  was  not  to  bear  arms  without  leave
granted  by  the  ladies  of  tliat  court,  he   be-


sought  her  highness  to  favour  him.  Mç*
thiiiKs,  saidihe  queen,  iliatwhik'  the  knight  of
the  Damsels  contmiies  in  this  land,  we  sliall
always  liear  of  great  tlwngs  ;  and  the  iadies
cannot  now  chu.-e  l)ut  be  greatly  beholiien
nnio  liiin.  Ihis  iavour  which  you  ask  of
mc  hath  just  been  requested  also  by  these
oilier  knights,  who  have  been  sent  hi! her
Ujion  like  oce<.sion  -I  know  not  what  else
to  do,  Icflt  1  should  constrain  their  pleasure,
hut  commit  you  all  three  to  their  discretions;,
to  whom  you  are  sent.  The  knight  no
sooner  bcheid  the  otlier  two,  but  he  pre-
sciiily  knew  them  to  !.e  they  whom  he  of  the
Damsels  had  conquered  the  same  day;  and
then  he  thought  less  of  his  own  overilnow,
for  the  one  of  them  was  Ferabroca,  the  other
Grulafora.  and  both  were  of  the  race  of  tlife
giants,  and  not  accustomed  to  be  vanquished.
'J'lie  king  knew  not  what  to  say,  seeing  such
great  atchievements,  which  he  iield  to  be  far
différent  Irom  the  deeiis  ol  other  men;  and
much  more  did  he  think  so  when  he  learnt
the  names  of  tlie  knights,  and  that  the  third
Mas  Roeamor,  who  was  greatly  at-couiited  of
ill  that  court.     The  ludics  beinu'  coinnuuukd


8

by  the  queen  to  determine  concerning  them
us  they  thought  good,  agreed  to  restore  iliem
from  their  full,  and  grant  them  leave  to  bear
arms,  on  condition  that  they  never  employed
them  to  the  hurt  of  dame  or  damsel,  nor
ever  refused  gift  or  service  which  should
by  dame  or  damsel  be  demanded  of  them,
■whether  it  were  Just  or  unjust.  A  hard  con-
dition did  this  appear  to  all,  and  difficult  to
fulfil.  The  king  would  have  had  ihem  remit
it  ;  but  as  it  is  their  nature  to  be  unreasonable
in  every  thing,  they  would  not  be  persuaded,
and  as  women  must  have  their  wa\',  they
were  forced  to  accept  the  terms  ;  which  done,
they  departed.

Some  days  past  before  any  thing  to  be  spoken
of  happened  in  the  court.  At  length  one
Sunday,  after  vespers,  the  king  lieiug  with
the  queen  and  her  ladies  in  a  varanda  of  her
apartment  which  was  over  the  place  before
the  palace,  there  came  into  the  place  th;ce
goodly  and  gallant  knights,  armed  in  rich
arms,  who  made  their  obeisance  as  they
past  under  the  varandas,  and  then  taking
their  post  in  another  part  of  the  place,  rested


the  hilts  of  their  spears  upon  the  ground^
aijcl  leant  upon  iliem,  while  one  of  their  squires
went  with  a  message  to  the  king.  Ail  deemed
that  this  would  prove  to  be  some  new  adven-
ture, and  waited  to  hear  what  thebiddingwould
he.  The  squire  being  come  before  the  queen,
lie  humbled  himself  on  his  knees  before  her,
sa3Íiig,  Lady,  these  three  strange  knights
commanded  me  to  let  your  highness  under-
siand,  that  they  have  travelled  a  long  time
in  the  service  of  the  three  daughters  ot  duke
Cali-t;ao  of  Aíragon,  who  were  judged  fair
in  tlieireycs;  aloeit  they  were  found  false  in
their  love.  For  they,  after  they  had  long
time  entertained  these  knights  as  chief  of
their  aifections,  were  married  unto  three
others,  who  were  brought  up  in  their  father's
court,  and  unwortliy  of  tliem  in  every  res-
pect ;  neveitheiess  are  they  satisfied  v.  ith
tiie  exchange,  as  many  are  wont  ip  be  at  fust
v.iiii  their  error,  not  considering  the  olfencc
they  liave  couimitted,  in  be;ng  àu  lorgelful  ol
tliL-ir  ov\  n  honour,  as  to  u;ai  ry  with  such  as  her
seemed  not  their  degrees  ;  llie  appetitr  w  hicli
guided  then),  having  Lliniled  ail  judgment.
Thcic  three  knights  are  so  highly  olfeudçd


10

hercat,  as  tbcy  have  concluded  never  to
espouse  any  other  damsels,  but  only  such,  as
being  weary  of  their  own  servants,  will
vouchsafe  to  admit  ihem  entertainment.  But
if  any  such  as  are  forsaken  of  their  ladies,
shall  alledjre  that  this  change  is  not  equal,
they  will  justify  the  ihness  thereof  against
them  by  combat.

And  because  these  ladies  may  favour  them
in  tbeir  demands,  without  any  prejudice  to
their  renown,  I  will  declare  to  you  the  es-
tates of  these  knights.  The  first  is  named
Lustramar,  the  eldest  son  to  the  marquis
Astramor.  The  second  is  called  Arpian,  heir
to  the  dutchy  of  Archeste.  The  third  is
Gradiante,  the  count  of  Artasia.  Now  lady,
with  leave  of  your  highness,  the  ladies  inay
shew  their  liking;  what  they  request  is,  that
there  may  be  no  impediment  to  this,  and
here  will  they  abide  all  this  day,  in  the  same
manner  as  you  see,  to  make  proof  of  arms
against  the  servants  of  those  who  shall  be
willing  to  accept  them.

But  if  it  so  fall  outj  that  they  find  the  ladies


11

of  this  court  more  desirous  to  keep  their  old
servants  than  to  entertain  these  newly  come,
they  will  be  content  to  depart  heucC;,  even
as  they  came  hither,  and  visit  other  courts,
to  try  if  fortune  will  be  so  favourable  to  them,
as  to  knit  up  their  earnest  desires  to  their
contentment.

A  new  manner  of  adventure  did  this  appear
to  the  king;  and  though  it  were  of  a  nature
worlbv  of  mirth,  vet  were  there  some  gal-
lants  in  the  court  whom  it  put  in  fear,  not
trusting  so  much  in  the  constancy  of  thoise
whom  they  served  as  to  think  themselves  se-
cure, especially  seeing  the  knights  were  of  such
rank.  Moreover,  he  who  knows  what  wo-
men arc,  should  never  rely  so  much  upon
their  show  of  love,  as  to  think  that  tjjeymay
not,  even  when  it  is  greatest,  change,  ac-
cording to  their  natural  condition.  AVell
would  this  truth  have  been  seen  in  that
court,  if  shame  had  not  imposed  some  little
constraint;  for  there  were  some  dames  there
who  would  lightly  liave  forsaken  servants  of
long  standing,  to  have  married  either  of
the  three  companions.    The  knights  having


12

received  reply  from  the  king  and  qtu-en^  that
they  gave  leave  to  the  JatUes  to  use  tlu-ir
pleasure,  and  to  their  rejeeted  or  cast-oiT
servants  todo  batdc  thereupon,  wailed  great
part  ol'  the  day,  without  any  one  aeeepting
the  oiler.  Just  as  the  sun  was  setting,  the
knight  of  the  Damsels  arrived,  his  arms  bat-
tered and  broken,  and  the  colour  of  his
shield  etîaced,  upon  a  large  and  goodly
horse.  Great  wasjheslir  and  expectation
which  his  coming  occasioned,  and  he  was
presently  given  to  understand  tlie  cause
which  had  brought  these  three  adventurers
there  :  whereat  his  damsels  were  much
moved,  and  well  pleased  withal  ;  for  being
wear}"  of  him,  or  of  seeing  thai  lie  was  so
of  them,  they  thought  to  exchange  for  these
knights.  Now  ladies,  said  he,  you  have
an  opportunity  of  showing  the  love  you  bear
me,  and  I  of  seeing  what  I  have  gained  by
mv  lonîî  services;  for  these  knii;hts  seek  dis-
contented  ladies,  with  whom  they  will  con-
tent themselves.  I,  cried  Artisia,  have  been
so  imdeceived  by  your  company,  that  if  the
knights  seek  for  one  who  is  willino;  to  chance
old  thoughts  for  new   love,  here  am  I  who


13

v,\l]  make  the  exchange.  And  ue  arc  of  the
same  mind,  said  they  whom  he  had  won
from  the  knights  in  the  forest  ;  upon  this>
they  sent  to  the  three  knights,  and  willed
them  to  come  and  deliver  them  out  of  his
hands,  uho  would  compel  them  to  stay  in
his  company.  Tlie  knights  upon  this  placed
themselves  in  order  to  joust,  not  with  any
intent  to  marry  them,  if  they  should  con-
quer, for  their  demand  was  not  to  that  end.
]\'Jethird<s,  said  the  king  to  the  queen,  these
knighrs  have  hit  upo-.  a  bad  time  for  their
enterprize,  for  he  of  the  Damsels  will  not
part  with  them  without  their  full  price.

Artisia  and  her  companions  forsook  the  other
company  of  Arlanza,  and  put  themselves
aj)art  from  them,  ihat  it  might  he  seen  the
contest  was  on  their  account.  The  ladies  of
the  court  could  not  chuse  but  marvel  thereat,
knowing  well  the  prowess  of  the  knight  that
had  eondiicud  them  :  somejudged  the  occa-
sion to  be  the  damsels'  desire,  that  they
might  be  at  their  own  liberty:  others  re-
puted the  cause  to  some  dislike  which  they
resented,  ami  which  made  them  abhor  liiui;

VOL,  IV.  C


14

s


hut  the  main  reason  was,  that  they  alway
want  what  is  new,  and  any  thhig  which  they
are  long  used  to  tires  them.


Gradiante  seeing  the  day  waste  apace,  ad-
vanced himself  forth  first,  making  show  of
the  joust.  He  of  the  Damsels,  who  as  little
wished  for  any  dela}',  laid  heels  to  his  horse,
and  ran  at  him,  and  encountered  him  in
such  sort,  that  he  bore  him  out  of  his  saddle,
clean  over  the  crupper.  Then  turning  to
Artisia,  he  said.  For  this  time,  lady  mine,
you  must  be  at  my  disposal.  Then  he  received
another  lance,  that  one  of  the  king's  pages
brought  him,  the  king  having  some  always
ready  for  such  occasions,  and  with  it  he  un-
horsed Arpian  in  like  manner,  himself  re-
maining as  firm  in  his  seat  as  if  he  had  not
been  touched  ;  whereat  the  three  compa-
nions were  full  discontent,  for  they  had  not
been  wont  to  be  so  lightly  vanquished.  Lus-
traman,  who  was  the  best  among  them,  as
soon  as  he  saw  him  ready  ran  at  iiim,  full  of
anger  and  melaucholy  ;  and  though  from  the
strength  of  this  knight  he  of  ihe  Damsels
received  some  hurt,  for  besides  having  his


15

arms  pierced  and  receiving  a  slight  wound  he
lost  a  stirrup,  he  did  not  the  less  send  him  to
the  ground  also.

This  victory,  though  it  was  no  little  one»
did  not  scein  of  great  account  in  the  court,.
fey  reason  of  the  great  lame  of  him  who  had
aichieved  it.  The  tliree  companions  would
have  done  battle  with  the  sword,  and  chieily
Lustramar  did  seem  most  desirous  of  it:  but
he  of  the  Damsels  excused  himself,  seeing
the  day  departing  so  speedily,  and  the  dark
night  ready  to  overtake  them  ;  \'et  would  not
Lustramar  be  content  with  his  excuse,  but
still  persisted.

I  pray  you,  sir  Knight,  said  Polifcma,  chuse
the  least  evil,  and  be*content  with  what  you
have  received,  for  our  keeper  is  so  accus-
tomed never  to  be  conquered,  that  none  can
receive  any  dishonour  in  being  con(|uere(l  by
him.  I  have  found  so  small  assurance  an-
wered  Lustramar,  in  women's  words,  as
for  your  counsel  I  will  not  forbear  to  follow
my  enterprize.  Nevertheless,  said  Artisia,  I
advise  you  by  all  means  not  to  reject  it.  Ikit
c  1


16

at  this  time  the  l<ing  came  clown,  for  the  de-
sire he  had  to  kiiow  the  knight  oi  i'.ie  Dam-
sels   would    not    let   him   rest  ;    and    hy   tiis
authority   preventing    the    battle,    he   took
them  ail  in,  for  the  others  also  wtre  worthy
of  that  honour.     He  of  the  Damsels  entered
the  palace  accompanied   by  his  whole  bevv,
and  leadmg  Arlanza  by  the  hand  ;  for  on  all
public   occasions    he   treated   her    witii    the
most   deference.     And    coming    before   the
cjui  en   he  kiitlt  down,  and  took  his  helmet
olf  to  kiss  her  hanrl.     But  so  soon  as  he  had
discovered  his  face  the  king  knew  him  and
took  hiui   in   his   arms,  saying,    You  need
think   nothing  now,  lady,  of  all  which  yoa
have  heard  of  this  km  .ht's  pro  we-",  for  he
is  wont  to  atchievc  grviiter  thiiiL,  .     This  is
Florian  of  the  Desert,  tiie  knight  oi  the  Sa-
vage Man,  son  of    Dun  Dnardos  and   the
Lady  rierida  your  friend.     The  queen  hear-
ing these  words,  rose,  and   embracing  him
graciously^  charged  him  wilii  hisdiseourtesyy
ulicn  he  passed  by  the  court  and  would  not
suli'er  himself  to  be  known.

iiUstramar  and  his  companions,  knowing  that


17

hewhiclihad  vanquished  them  was  the  knigîit
of  the  Savage  Man,  of  whose  exploits  the
vorld  was  full,  they  made  no  account  of
the  foil  they  had  received  ;  but  on  the  morn-
ing when  they  departed  thence,  they  desired
that  he  would  rank  them  in  the  hst  of  his
friends,  saving  that  thev  should  think  their
mishap  fortunate  in  procming  them  that
name.  He  of  the  Damsels  requited  them
villi  equal  courtesy,  and  advised  them  by  all
means,  for  their  own  sakes,  to  pursue  their
present  enterprizc  no  farther,  and  not  to
think  much  of  the  wrong  their  ladies  had
done  them,  for  love  in  thcni  is  never  so  firm
buí,  that  any  thing  may  shake  it.

The  knight  of  the  damsels  would  then  fain
have  departed  also,  but  the  queen  perforce
detained  him  for  some  days,  for  she  rejoiced
greatly  to  see  iiim  in  lier  house,  as  well  for
his  great  prowess  and  for  his  friendship  with
her  sons  Beroldo  and  (Jnistaldo,  as  because
ho  was  the  son  of  Fierida,  with  whom  she
had  been  bred  up.  After  ten  days  he  took  his
leave  of  the  king  and  queen,  leaving  Silviana
tbcc  in  the  eouit,  where  she  was  well  knoww,
c  .'.'


18

as  also  ArLisia  and  her  companions,  -vihm
voukl  keep  him  compitny  no  longer  :  nevui-
theless,  the  rt-membraiice  oi"v.  hat  had  happen-
ed occasioned  them  some  regret,  which  made
ihcm  bid  him  tlic  lareuell  wiih  tears."  Tlie
queen  bestowed  marks  of  favour  upon  Ar-
lauzaj  and  jiave  lier  things  of  great  price,
uhcii  the  knight  took  Ids  leave;  for  her  and
her  damsels  he  took  with  him,  in  the  intent
%vliich  yc  have  heard.  The  king  accom-
panied hiui  good  way  out  of  the  cit}',  and
then  coffiiiicnding  his  sons  to  him,  and  be-
seeching hun  to  kiss  the  emperor's  hand  in
his  name,  and  remember  him  to  ail  his
friends,  he  returned  to  his  palace,  wliere
every  thing  now  seemed  solitary,  after  the
great  pleasure  they  liad  of  late  enjoyed  ;  but
now  it  wap  as  if  some  misfortune  had  hap-
pened. Thus  always  it  is  when  any  one
departs,  especially  tliose  to  whom  we  arc
bound  by  reason  and  iriendship.


19


CHAPTER     127.


lîe  of  the  SavagG,  before  he  departed  from
the  king  of  Spain'à  court,  ordered  new  arms
to  be  made,  with  his  old  device  of  the
Savage  Man,  because  lie  had  greater  de-
light therein  than  in  any  other.  In  this
manner  he  travelled  atchieving  many  adven-
tures, which  I  lot  pass,  because  tlicy  were
not;  of  such  importance  as  to  be  placed
amono-  his  other  kni^htlv  deeds.  It  was  his
fortune  at  length  to  arrive  in  a  [)leasant  val-
ley, even  tlicre  where  the  castle  of  Arnalta
stood.  It  so  chanced,  that  Arnalta  had  at
this  time  ridden  abroad  w  ith  her  merlins,  and
Vt'as  then  beholding  a  combat  in  which  Dra-
gf)naltc,  the  son  of  did<e  Drapos,  conquered
u  knight,  who  would  not  concede  to  what
he  uS  the  keeper  of  the  valley  required,  that
Aiaalia  was  the   fairest   lady  oil  the  earth.


Î30

and  the  most  worthy  to  be  served.  His
arras  were  striped  ni  bars  with  grey  and
goldj  and  he  bare  in  his  shield  the  same  de-
vice wliich  jSliragiiarda  had  enjoined  liim,
when  he  came  with  tlie  princess  to  the  castle
of  Ahnourol,  and  lost  the  honour  of  the  day.
Arnaha  was  now  1  sing  the  anger  which  siic
resented  at  his  foil,  when  her  beauty  was  the
(juarrcl:  for  th-jugh  in  women  dislike  be
more  dmable  than  love,  yet  as  she  saw  hiin
persevere  so  long  in  her  service,  being  more-
over a  young  and  comely  gallant,  her  incli-
nation changed,  and  she  in  the  end  began
to  favour  his  courteous  deeds  with  more
regard  than  she  had  done  before.  And  no\T
seeing  him  of  the  Savage  coming  with  Ar-
lanza  and  her  damsels,  Arnalta  knew  by
the  device  upon  his  shield,  that  this  was
he  who  had  deceived  her,  and  on  whom
she  desired  to  be  revenged  ;  and  she  had
pity  on  the  damsels  in  his  company,  think-
ing that  ihey  accompanied  him  against
their  will,  some  envy  being  mingled  with
that  compassion,  for  she  also  thought  that
peradventure  there  might  be  one  among
them  who  was  ha])py  enough   to  have  him


Cl

for  her  ?ervant.  So  turning  to  Dragomiltç
she  said,  Behold,  here  comes  the  man  in  the
world  who  hath  done  me  the  most  wrong,
and  of  whom  1  most  deáire  to  be  revenged
now  :  therefore,  Í  desire  to  see  the  utmost  oi"
your  redoubted  behaviour.  And  if  you  pass
happily  through  this  danger,  it  «hall  be  the
last  you  shall  enter[)rize  for  me,  the  crown  of
all,  and  the  commencement  of  your  repose  :
i'or  [  wiil  not  fail  to  recompcnce  you  to  your
full  contentment.  So  great  a  promise,  re-
plied he,  ouglit  to  be  of  such  power,  that
the  victory,  should  I  win  it,  must  be  as-
cribed to  that  and  not  to  my  own  strength.
I  have  never  failed  to  conquer,  except
when  vour  favour  failed  me;  and  nowhaving
that  in  this  great  bounty,  v/hat  excuse  would
there  be  if  I  should  fail  in  atchieving  even
uluit  is  impossible?  In  truth,  Í  should  think
it  sufticient  revenge  upon  whom  1  wished
great  evil,  to  see  him  so  bunhened  v.ith
women;  but  as  this  does  not  satisfy  you,  I
will  sword  \'\  hand  do  your  pleasure,  at  the
cost  of  his  b'ood.

While  these  words  passed,  he  of  the  Savage


22

drew  nigh.  Sir  Knight,  said  Dragonalte  in
a  loud  voice,  according  to  the  custom  of
this  valley,  you  must  either  make  trial  of
my  might,  and  be  at  the  disposa'  of  ihi»
lady  princess,  or  yon  must  confess  that  she
is  the  fairest  lady  in  the  world,  and  the  most
worthy  to  be  served  ;  an  1  moreover,  laying
aside  your  arms,  you  must  yield  yourself  to
her,  that  she  may  receive  satisfaction  for
a  wrong  or  disservice  which  you  have
wrought  her  :  and  that  you  may  not  in  all
things  receive  displeasure,  she  will  admit
these  damsels  into  her  service  ;  you,  I  ween,
will  part  with  them  with  a  good  will,  to  rid
yourself  of  so  great  a  load.

If  she  so  greatly  desires  their  service,  replied
he  of  the  Savage,  ill  have  you  done  in  not
seeking  me  sooner,  when  I  had  as  many
more,  and  the  service  would  have  been
doubied.  Hov/beit,  neither  shall  these  serve
her,  nor  will  I  confess  what  you  demand,
which  wouid  be  to  confess  a  lie.  I  am  my-
self the  servant  of  such  a  lady,  as  she  may
no  way  equal  in  beanty,  and  that  1  shall
make  you  confess  before  1  depart.


Ol


This  occasioned  great  melancholy  in   Dra-
gonake,  and  gave  Arnalta  great  displeasure:
for  she  was  full  vain,  and  could  not  brook  ta
hear  another  praised.      Dragonalte  having
taken  a  lance  and  righted  hiniseli'  in  the  sad-
dle, looked  at  Arnalta,  that  she  might  favour
him  in  the  encounter,  and  broached  his  horse
against  the  knight,  who  likewise  prepared
himself  to  the  joust:  they  encountered  toge-
ther valiantly  ;  i3ragonalte  pierced  the  other  &
shield,  and  brake  his  lance  upon  his  armour,
making  him  bend  something  back  upon  the
crupper,  but  he  himself  was  east  forth  of  his
saddle.   Upon  this  the  other  dismounted,  and
such  a  battle  began  as  had  not  for  many  a  day
been  seen  there,  for  Dragonalte  was  a  right
sood  knicfht,  arwl  worthv  to  be  ranked  among
the  worthy  ones  of  those  times.  And  remem-
bering the  earnestness  with  which  his    lady
had  asked   him    to   revenge  her    upon  this
enemy,  and  that  by    the  issue  of  this  battle
he  should  cither  obtain  the  guerdon  of  all
his  labours,  and  become  king  of  Navarre,  or
lose  all,  and  life  withall,   he    did   wonders  ;
never  at  any  time  had  he  displayed  such
valour:  but  what  did  it  avail;  for  he  uf  thei


C4.

Savnge    bafilcd  all   this  prowess.     Long  did
their  slrile  ciukiic,  beiuie  uiiy  Viuitage  could
be  perceived  in  ciliier;  but  at  It  ngili,   Dra-
goiialie's  strength  began  to  fail,  lor  he  was
badly  woundetl.     HeoFtlie  bavage,   unwil-
ling to  pursue  it  to  the  end,  for  he  knew  wht>
he  was,  drew   back  to  let  liim  take  breath,
and  while  he   rested  besought  him   to   give
over  the    battle,  and'coiiiiiiue   to  keep  ilie
pnss,  ior  he  would  [iroeecd  iijh)Ii  hisjournev.
J.  know,  replied  Dragonalie,  liuit  these  terms
would  not  be  bad  oijes  for  me,  if  Jiie  were
tiie  thing  which  I  most  regarded;   but  inas-
much as  that  is  wliat  1  least  think  ot,    let  it
go,  and  the  battle  be  rencwee,  for  I  ui^h  not
to  preserve  that,  when  oilier  hopes  are  lost.
'1  iieii  turningagain  to  the  combat,  aller  short
while,  despairing  to  conquer  so  mighty  an
enemy,  his  strength  and  spiiii  failed  him  for
loss  of  blc'od,   and   he   ieii  senseless  at  his
enemy's  feet.

Cruel  as  Arnnlta  v/as  slie  could  not  forbear
coming  to  help  him,  seeing  him  in  such
plight,  for  the  knight  of  the  Savage  took  oíF
his  helmet,  and  made  shew  as  if  lie  would


cut  off  Ills  head  ;  and  coming  up  to  him  shr
said,  [  beseech  yon^  sir  Ktiight,  in  atone-
ment for  some  wioni»-,  it"  vou  liave  done  me
any,  do  not  take  his  lile;  victory  is  sufficient
lor  an  iionouiabie  mind,  all  beyond  is  cru-
cicy.  How  that  may  be  1  know  not,  replied
he  of  the  Savage,  but  this  I  know,  that  I
will  not  hold  my  hands,  without  he  recant
his  i'ornier  words,  or  you  promise  me  a  gift
tiiai  I  bhall  d(  niand.  ill  be  x'our  ioilune,
cried  Arnalta,  who,  not  content  with  con-
(jiiciing,  require  a  pledge  for  sparing  him.
Leave  him  then,  for  1  promise  the  boon,
provided  it  be  no  dishonour  to  me.  Now
then,  said  he,  give  order  that  his  wounds  be
looked  to  ;  I  will  then  tellyou  what  1  require.
Then  Arnalta^  danjsels  disarmed  Drago-
nalte,  who  coming  to  himself,  so  abhorred
liis  life,  that  he  refused  all  remedy  for  it^
uttering  words  whicli  it  was  piteous  to  hear;
for  love  makes  brave  men  betray  weakness
in  cases  wherein  he  seems  to  forsake  them.
They  conveyed  him  into  the  castle,  and  drest
his  hurts  with  great  care  ;  but  the  worst  pain
which  he  felt,  aid  the  hurt  which  most
afíhcted  bim^  was  to  think  that  he  had  uo*^'
VOL..  IV,  D


26

utterly  lost  all  hope  of  winning  his  lady  ;  and
for  this  cause  he  loathed  iile.

Arnalta  ordered  the  knight  of  the  Savage  to
be  lodged  out  of  the  castle,  in  an  apartment
which  she  was  wont  to  allot  to  those  persons
whom  she  wished  to  show  little  courtesy  to,
and  she  now  despaired  ever  to  have  tiie
vengeance  upon  him  wliich  she  wished.
After  three  days,  Dragonalte  being  some-
thing recovered,  she  wished  to  dismiss  liijn
of  the  Savage,  her  heart  not  enduring  to  see
him  in  her  house  who  had  done  her  such
wrong,  and  whom  she  so  greatly  haled.  And
going  to  visit  Dragonalte,  as  she  was  some-
times wont  to  do,  she  found  him  there  ;  and
with  language  beseeming  her  person,  she
besought  him  to  say  now  what  it  was  that
he  was  minded  to  require  of  her.  Lady,  he
replied,  you  are  so  fair,  that  were  you  not  so
melancholick  also,  your  servants  could  by  no
one  be  overcome,  nor  is  there  any  one  in  the
world  who  would  deny  what  they  affirm.  I
am  so  sensible  of  this  truth,  that  if  I  had
not  been  commanded  to  acknowledge  it  by
force,  I  should  have  done  so  by  my  own  free-


27

will.  Yet  I  have  been  in  the  court  of  Eng-
land uheie  there  are  lair  ladies^,  and  in  that
of  Spain  as  well.  I  have  seen  Florenda,
daiigîitcr  of  Arnedos  king  of  France,  who  is
extolled  by  many,  and  above  all  the  court  of
the  emperor  Palmerin,  wherein  all  beauty  is
contained.  1  know  Gridonia  and  Flerida,
whose  charms  are  still  unladed  ;  the  princess
Polinarda,  the  queen  of  Thrace,  Sidela,
daughter  of  the  kingTarnaes  of  Lacedemonia,
and  many  others,  the  fame  of  whom  fills  the
world.  I  have  also  seen  Targiana,  the  daugh-
ter of  the  Great  Turk,  for  whom  Albayzar  the
soldan  of  Babylon  doth  such  wonders  :  in
my  judgment  all  these  might  confess  some
vantage  in  you,  and  so  they  speak  of  yoa
who  speak  ^xitho^t  affection.  But  you  are
of  so  rigorous  a  condition,  so  cruel  and  hard
to  be  satisfied,  that  it  doth  something  abate
the  worth  of  your  beauty.

This  (let  it  not  offend  you  that  I  speak
plainly,)  you  cannot  deny  yourself,  making
so  light  account  as  you  do  of  sir  Dragonalic
h-^ro,  not  remembering  that  being  such  a  per-
son as  he  is,  so  great  a  prince,  so  singular  a
P  Q


n<5

knight,  and  of  the  consort  of  the  most  fiimous
and  best  of  these  tunes;  he  iorsalces  iheir
company,  conversation,  and  friendsliip,  to
serveyou,  offering  himseirto  so  many  dangers,
to  do  your  pleasure.  Now,  therefore,  be-
cause it  is  not  fitting  that  beauty  so  excellent
should  be  accompanied  by  suchdiiferent  (|ua-
lities,  the  boon  wiiich  I  have  required  of  you
is,  that  in  recompencc  of  liis  noble  deserts,
you  accept  him  as  your  husband  :  so  shall
you  both  fuliil  your  promise  to  me,  and  ac-
complish the  commandinent  which  the  king
your  father  charged  you  should  fulfil  :  mar-
rying conformably  to  your  rank  and  person,
and  with  one  who  by  his  love  deserves  you,
a  thing  which  ought  to  be  esteemed  above
all  others.  Í  now  expect  your  answer^  to
see  what  assurance  mav  be  built  upon  your
word.  Sir  knight,  said  Arnalta,  tell  me  I
beseech  you  first,  who  yon  are,  for  I  would
be  resolved  of  that,  before  I  determine  what
you  require.

The  knowledge  of  me,  fair  lady,  said  the
knight  of  the  Savage  Man,  shall  be  no  hin-
drance to  the  matter  ;  I  am  called  Florian  of


í29

the  Desert,  son  to  Don  Duardos,  the  English
prince,  and  I'ieiida  daughter  to  the  emperor
Pahiierin.  Hearing  these  words,  Certes,
cried  Dragonahe,  if  in  the  victory  you  have
ohtained  1  should  lose  nothing  else  hut  re-
putation, I  could  not  be  any  jot  offended,
being  vanquished  at  his  hands  who  always
returneth  iiom  the  combat  conqueror  :  but
seeing  Í  risk  the  hope  that  should  yield  me
content,  and  that  I  cannot  complain  of"  hav-
ing been  conquered,  seeing  who  hath  beea
the  conqueror,  I  must  complain  of  fortune
if  in  the  rest  she  should  prove  contrary  to
me.

Arnaltahuns;  her  head  a  little  when  sheheartl
his  name,  ren)embering  what  had  passed,
and  full  willingly,  notwithstanding  the  hatred
which  she  resented  towards  him,  would  siie
have  been  to  match  with  him  in  marriage  5
hut  knowing  well  that  he  would  not  accept
her,  and  being  moreover  full  of  vanity  at
the  praises  which  he  had  bestowed  upon  her,
for  she  fancied  they  were  sincere,  she  deter-
mined to  content  herself  with  his  request.
Then  looking  up  with  a  show  of  checrlill-
D  3


30

re«;-i,  î  did  not  think,  sir  kniç^ht,  said  shf-,
that  he  which  could  so  nobly  vancpiisli  men»
could  be  content  to  deceive  women.  The
feats  which  I  have  beheld  of"  sir  Dragonalte
are  such,  as  beside  my  promise  unto  you,
win  me  to  assent  :  but  it  is  upon  this  con-
dition, that  within  a  year,  he  shall  bring  nie
to  the  court  of  the  emperor  Palmerin,  lor  Í
desire  to  see  the  greatness  thereof,  and  to  re-
main in  the  conversation  and  friendship  of
those  ladies  which  you  have  named.

This  condition,  said  the  knight  of  the  Savage
Man,  is  what  Í  ought  to  have  requested  ;  for
the  emperor  I  know  will  hold  his  court  ho-
noured by  your  presence.  Let  your  highness
give  me  your  hand,  that  I  may  kiss  it  for  the
favour  thus  bestowed  upon  me  ;  but  she  em-
braced him  courteously,  and  Dragonalte
would  have  humbled  himself  at  his  feet,  think-
ing now  that  his  defeature  had  been  a  bles-
sing sent  from  heaven,  when  it  was  thus  re-r
quited  :  and  he  now  I'elt  his  wounds  the  less,
for  they  were  drestby  the  hands  of  Arnalta.
I'inee  da^-s  afterwards  the  governors  of  the
realm  were  convened,,  ançl  they  knowing  her


31

intention,  and  also  the  prowess  and  good
c|ualiiies  oF  Dragonalte,  approved  the  mar-
riage as  good,  and  convenieiit  to  the  state
and  aulhority  of  their  lady.  It  was  solem-
nized in  the  same  castle,  for  he  of  the  Savage
being  desirous  to  pursue  his  journey,  would
not  wait  the  time  which  the  governors  re-
quested for  the  preparation  of  suitable  feasts:
so  it  was  cuected  then  with  all  the  solemnity
which  the  place  would  pcíniit.  The  knight
of  the  Savage  then  took  his  leave,  leaving
JDratronalte  in  lull  contentment,  and  the
queen  salisfietl  with  his  promise  to  carry  her
to  the  emperor's  court.  The  history  now
ceases  to  speak  of  them  and  returns  to  Albay-
zar,  whose  deeds  it  is  well  to  record,  because
they  were  not  such  as  deserve  oblivion.


S'2


CHAPTER  128.


Albayzar,  soldau  of  Babylon,  three  days  after
the  joust  between  him  and  the  knight  of
the  Savage  Man,  taking;  his  farcweii  of  tlie
]{ing,  the  queen,  the  ladies,  and  those  knights
of  the  court  who  were  his  friends,  set  for-
ward oil  his  way,  accompanied  with  two
squires,  making  such  speed  both  by  sea
and  land,  tliat  in  forty  days  time  he  attain-
ed to  the  city  of  Constantinople.  And  be-
ing, as  ye  have  heard,  of  a  proud  and
haughty  nature,  neither  offering  show  of
courtesy  to  any  one,  nor  seeming  from  any
one  to  wish  it,  he  entered  the  chamber  of  pre-
sence,  where  he  found  the  emperor,  the  em-
press and  her  ladies,  beside  tlie  chief  princes
and  knights  of  the  court  :  and  placing  his


S3

eye  upon  the  princesses  and  ladies  who  wcra
there  present,  he  presently  judged  whieh  wuá
the  queen  oF  Thrace,  whereof  he  was  certi-
fied bs'  noting  that  her  ph\ce  was  equal  with
Poliiuirda's.  'I'hen  forcing  somewhat  his  con-
dition, he  presented  himself  before  her  on
one  knee,  saying,  Lady,  when  I  was  about  to
depart  from  the  king  of  Spain's  court,  a
knight  arrived  there,  accompanied  with  nine
damsels  ;  and  he  trying  the  jousts  with  the
chiefs  of  that  country,  unhorsed  them  all.
IJe  and  1  defied  each  other,  and  having  bro-
ken some  lances  without  vantage  on  either
part,  I  was  at  last  conquered.  He  then  com-
manded me  to  submit  tnyself  before  you,  for
the  condition  was  so  made.  Am\  lie  bi.de
me  say  it  grieves  him  that  this,  which  is  the
first  c.\{)loit  lie  hath  atchieved  in  ytjur  name,
is  not  of  such  account  as  he  would  wish  it.
1  have  fidillled  this:  now  then,  lady,  see  what
you  will  ordain  coixíerning  me.  Albaxzar
being  well  known  in  the  court,  great  the  stir
was  on  all  siilcs  ior  his  arrival,  and  the  em-
peror liiuiself  was  well  pleased,  having  dread-
ed lest  any  n)isadventure  shouiil  l)ei'ai  him,
winch  he  v.yuld  not  for  any  price  shcfsld  be.


34


so  greath'  diclle  dtsire  to  requite  Targiana
for  what  lie  was  beliolden  to   her.

The  queen  of  Thrace,  ■who  was  little  accus-
toniefl  to  such  things,  and  was  moreover
somewhat  abashed  at  seeing  so  great  a  priace
before  her,  and  one  whose  presence  seemed
so  much  to  rejoice  the  emperor,  remained
awhile  without  answering  him;  and  then
taking  his  hand  she  made  him  rise,  saying,
"What  I  would  have  is,  that  you  should  do  as
it  shall  please  the  emperor  to  command  you,
vhich  1  judge  shall  be  nothing  hurtful,  see-
ing the  great  de.-.ire  he  hath  to  rejoice  the
princess  Targiana  with  your  presence.

This  determination  Albayzar  regarded  as  a
favour,  and  then  having  saluted  the  empress
and  Gridonia,  he  came  to  the  emperor,  who
took  him  in  his  arms,  and  said,  \\  ith  how
much  better  a  will^  sir  Albayzar,  would  sol-
dan  Olorique,  your  father,  have  received  my
embrace!  Nevertheless,  I  am  satisfied  with
thinking  that  I  fulfil  my  old  friendship  with
him,  and  the  love  which  I  bear  to  the  lady
Targiana  J  this  house  is  hers; — I  am  grieved


S5

that  you  will  not  think  it  yours  also,  for
as  the  son  of  your  father,  and  the  husband  of
Targiana,  I  would  fain  hold  you  in  the  like
account.

Sir,  replied  Albayzar,  every  thing  might  be
expected,  and  every  thing  believed  or"  your
person,  nor  am  I  of  so  simple  understanding
but  I  can  well  perceive  what  great  honour
you  have  always  aíTorded  me  ;  but  yet  I  can-
not forget  the  shame  I  received  here  in  your
court,  when  I  was  vanquished,  and  above
all,  tliat  here  I  saw  the  princess  Targiana,
^vho  had  been  stolen  by  your  grandson,  the
knight  of  the  Savage  ;  and  this  being  a  thing
so  worthy  of  chastisement,  your  reason
availed  nothing,  nor  the  represenlations
olTered  by  the  Turk,  requiring  you  to  do
him  Justice  yourself,  or  to  deliver  him  up,
that  it  might  be  done  in  his  court:  insff-ad
of  this,  you  have  denied  him  that  right
Av'  ich  you  are  wont  to  ob'serve  towartl  ail,
not  merely  withholding  what  he  requires,
bu.t  also  hearing  his  euibassies  with  scorn,
love  and  kindred  availing  \\ith  you  more
than   reason  and  justice;  which  is  it  fault


56

deserving  of  greater  repreliension  In  prince»
than  ill  any  other  persons.

I  well  know,  replied  the  emperor,  ihnt  when
the  will  is  warped,  reason  and  exeuse^i  avail
little  in  setting  it  right;  though  what  you
say  might  well  he  answered,  it  being  eltiir
and  manifest  that  the  lady  Targiana  eaine
Iiither  on  her  own  good  will,  and  not  enforced
thereto.  But  not  to  weary  you  with  reasons
to  which  3'on  will  not  listen,  let  us  leave  the
matter.  I'akc  now  your  rest,  and  appoint
your  departure  when  it  pleases,  sinee  this
galleys  of  the  Turk  await  you.  Albayzar  re-
plied, Í  take  the  time  now  to  be  so  commo-
dious, that  it  will  be  best  not  to  lose  so  good
an  opportunity.  Even  as  please  you,  said
the  emperor,  let  your  pleasure  be  done  ia
every  thing.

The  ambassador,  who  was  awaiting  him  and
liad  been  present  at  all  this,  after  going
through  his  ceremonies  and  courtesies  to-
ward Albayzar,  after  the  manner  of  the
Turks,  told  him  that  he  might  embark  that
same  hour,  for  the  galleys  were  ready,  the


57

sea  in  q'ood  case,  and  the  wind  well  for  their
voyage.  Albayzar  having  license  of  the  em-
peror and  empress,  took  leave  of  the  rest,
and  departed  as  he  came,  accompanied  by
his  squires,  the  ambassador  of  the  Turk  fol-
lowing him  with  iiis  train.  V^  ith  the  ambas-
sador, to  do  him  honour,  went  kmg  Polendos,
JBclcar,  and  some  others  wiio  liad  been  pri-
soners and  were  his  friends.  Piniiaicoa
also,  at  the  emperor's  command,  forcing  his
iiiciination,  which  was  never  to  show  cour-
tesy where  it  was  so  ill  received,  accom-
panied him  till  he  had  embariiec!.  Dra'mi-
ziando  went  with  him,  he  happening  at  that
lime  to  be  in  the  court,  and  seeing  how  drily
luul  haughtily  Albayzar  took  leave  of  Prima-
leon,  could  not  dissemble  at  sucli  unreason-
.al)Ie  demeanour.  Certes,  Albayzar,  quotli
he,  any  courresy  is  ill  Ixstowcd  upon  you,
who  receive  it  like  one  who  understands  it
not!  It  is  the  emperor's  fault;  he  wiil  de-
mean himself  according  to  his  o.v\n  nature
towards  those  who  deserve  it  not,  and  so  liis
people  are  treated  witli  co-'tempi.  it  is  plain,
answered  Albayzar,  that  nothing  in  me  can
please  you  !  for  that  I  cart;  iiitle,  lor  iliough
VOL.  IV.  Jt


135

your  friendship  fail  me,  I  may  find  others
vhich  will  excuse  it.  But  that  you  may  not
judge  of  my  actions  contrary  to  their  intent,
this  I  tell  thee,  that  a  noble  mind  disdaineth
familiarity  to  them  whom  he  accounteth  for
his  enemies.  I  am  an  enemy  to  all  this  house  ;
and  having  so  proclaimed  myself,  having
avowed  hatred,  and  feeling  hatred  in  my
heart,  what  reason  is  there  that  I  should
make  other  semblance  ?  Let  them  do  so  who
liave  no  confidence  in  themselves.  Brave
men  use  no  disguise  ;  and  hence  it  is  that  I
do  not  use  such  ceremony  towards  Sir  Pri-
maleon  as  his  rank  requires,  and  his  person
deserves.  If  this  docs  not  seem  good  to
you,  let  it  seem  as  ill  as  you  like!  and  if  I
live,  I  will  ere  long  show  you  in  deeds  be-
fore these  walls,  what  you  now  discover  in  my
will.  •

Dramuziando  answered.  This  I  can  tell  you,
that  that  time  seems  long  to  one  of  my
condition,  for  I  want  to  find  opportunity  of
taking  satisfaction  for  the  shield  of  Mira-
guarda,  which  you  stole  from  me  ;  and
which  I  shall  ever  resent    till  I   revenge


59

myself,  not  being  contented  that  another
should  revenge  tlie  wrong  which  was  done
unto  inc.

Albayzar  was  about  to  make  him  answer,
but  Piiinaleon,  who  was  by  nature  harsh  ia
language,  lest  he  should  now  give  way  to  his
inclination,  departed,  taking  Diamuziando
with  him,  and  with  the  other  knights  return-
ed to  tiie  palace.  There,  when  they  related
what  had  passed,  it  pleased  all  but  the  em
peror,  who  always  desired  that  his  enemies
should  be  entirely  to  blame  ;  but  it  plainly
appeared  to  him,  and  to  all  his  court,  that
the  deep  hatred  which  Albayzar  always  avow-
ed would  seek  how  to  be  satisfied.

The  Turkish  gallies  having  cleared  the  port,
hoisted  sail,  and  having  wind  at  will,  caine
in  few  days  to  the  harbour,  where  the  Great
Turk  expected  them  And  as  it  is  natural  to
be  always  apprehensive  in  things  which  aic
greatly  desired,  and  to  rejoice  the  more  when
they  are  attained,  so  was  it  upon  Albayzar's
arrival  ;  tor  tl»e  Turk  bearing  in  mind  the
base  treason  which  he  had  used  towards
fi  2


40

the  knights  of  the  emperor,  when  they
brought  him  back  his  daugliter,  feared  that
now  he  had  relei.sed  tlicm,  the  hke  would  be
done  to  Albayzar;  but  seeuig  him  now  re-
turn, his  Joy  was  doubled.  He  went  out  with
all  his  train  to  meet  him  at  his  landing,  with
such  love  as  if  he  had  been  his  father;  and
he  would  ni)t  let  c.uy  embassy  on  the  part  of
the  emperor  be  debvereU  unto  him  ;  this  did
he  that  they  might  not  speak  of  his  great-
ness and  virtue,  nor  of  the  good  entertain-
ment which  they  had  received  ;  for  the  more
these  were  praised,  the  worse  did  the  offence
appear  which  he  had  committed  against  Po-
lendos  and  his  companions.  <'

Albayzar  remained  a  certain  time  in  the
Great  Turk's  court,  attending  the  coming  of
the  principal  estates  of  Babylon,  whom  he
would  have  there  present  at  the  second  so-
lemnizing of  his  marriage,  which  was  cele-
brated with  greater  feasts  and  rarer  inven-
tions than  had  ever  been  seen  in  that  coun-
try. There  weve  ])resent  the  solclan  of  Per-
sia, the  king  of  Bythinia,  the  king  of  Ca«pia,
the  king  of  Trebisond^and  many  other  princes


41

and  knights.  From  wliose  meeting  it  came
to  pass,  that  when  the  feasts  were  over,  they
consulted  upon  the  destruction  of  Constan-
taiople,  each  swearing  that  at  an  appointed
time,  he  would  come  with  all  his  own  power^
and  all  that  of  his  allies  and  kinsmen.  Thii
great  enterprize  heing  thus  determined  upon^
liiey  all  returned  into  their  own  kingdoms,
and  we  àxí\\\  speak  of  them  ia  due  time.


E  3


42


CHAPTER  129.


The  knight  of  the  Tyger,  of  whom  our  his-
tory halli  been  silent  a  long  time,  entered
the  foist  with  Argentao,  tho  governor  of  the
^Profound  lòle,  at  wliat  time  the  wind  was  so
contrary,  as  he  was  fain  to  take  landing  in  that
same  isle,  where  he  sojourned  few  days,  the
long  desire  he  had  to  reach  Constantinople
making  him  imagine  the  titne  too  tedious
till  he  came  thither.  As  soon  as  the  weather
permitted  he  departed  thence  in  a  gnlley,  ac-
companied with  only  Seiviam,  being  in  a  new
armour  which  he  caused  to  be  made  in  the
Profound  Isle,  hut  kee[)ing  his  device  of  the
Golden  Tyger,  which  was  renowned  through
all  countries  in  Christendom.  In  short  time
he  came  to  the  coast  of  Scotland,  where  his
m  nd  served  him  well  to  go  on  shore.


43

On  the  tliird  d;,y,  at  cveninir,  he  came  into
a  goodly  valley,  along  the  midst  whereof  ran
a  great  river,  so  deep  that  it  coidd  in  ïew
places  be  forded.  He  had  not  proceeded  far
along  its  banks,  before  he  saw  a  duelling  of
noble  appearance  and  newly  edified,  on  the
same  side  of  the  river;  and  before  it  was  a
bridge,  the  which  was  kept  by  a  knight  in
armour  of  red  and  green  with  borders  of  gold,
who  bare  in  his  shield  a  White  BuiJ,  in  a
field  sable;  by  which  device  he  knew  that  it
was  his  brollier  Pompides.  He  rode  upon  a
large  iron-grey  horse,  and  being  a  man  of
great  stature  and  one  who  became  his  arms,
so  did  the  adornments  of  his  person  make
him  appear  goodlier.

On  the  other  side  the  bridge  was  another
knight,  who  seemed  of  not  less  estimation
than  he  of  the  Bull,  for  in  person  he  was  no-
thing behind  ni  in,  and  in  bravery  of  arms
had  soinethnig  the  vantage.  And  because
no  one  might  pass  the  bridge  without  he
did  first  combat  with  him  that  defended  it,
or  yield  himself  to  Armisia  the  king  oÇ  Scots*
daughter,  to  whom  the  house  belonged  ;  this


44

strange  knight  was  attending;  when  he  of  tlie
Bull  should  be  ready,  that  he  miglit  win  the
passage  by  force;  for  as  for  submitting  to  the
other  condition,  that  would  he  not  do  for  any
force,  as  well  knowing  that  Armisia  had  esta-
blished this  custom  only  for  his  sake,  none
such  having  existed  in  old  time,  and  that
bridge  being  the  main  place  of  passage  in
all  the  realm.  The  bridge  was  so  large  as
four  knights  might  easily  combat  thereon,
and  it  was  so  well  fenced  on  either  side,  that
horses  entered  upon  it  without  fear.

lie  of  the  Tyger  staid  awhile,  to  see  the
end  of  the  combat  between  these  knights,<
and  viewmg  well  the  knight  of  the  Bull,  who
had  lifted  up  the  beaver  of  his  helmet  to
speak  to  a  damsel  which  stood  looking  forth
at  a  window,  he  was  then  assured  that  it  was
his  brother  Pompides  :  the  talk  which  he
held  with  her  was  short,  and  so  low  that  it
could  not  be  heard.  He  of  the  Bull  then
closed  his  beaver, and  entered  upon  the  bridge,
lance  in  hand.  JMethinks,  cried  the  other  in
a  loud  voice,  you  would  have  all  the  day  past
in  ceremonies  !  for  having  kept  me  a  good


45

uhile  waiting  before  you  came,  you  have  now
till  lied  in  amorous  talk, or  in  making  oflers  at
anoiher'scost.  If  Ihave  made  such, replied  lie
of  the  Buil,  I  shall  fulfil  them,  as  1  have  been
long  accustomed  todo.  Now, quoth  the  other,
I  pride  my^clf  upon  breaking  customs,  so
look  to  yourself!

Without  more  words  they  ran  together,  and
encountered  in  the  middle  of  the  bridge
with  ail  their  might;  their  spears  brake,  and
they  met  body  to  body  with  such  a  shock,
that  both  fell  to  the  ground,  being  well  nigh
astound.  Both  rose  as  well  as  they  could,
and  grasping  their  shields  began,  sword  in
hand,  so  terrible  and  fierce  a  battle,  that  the
like  had  never  before  been  seen  at  that  pass  :
for  though  he  of  the  Bull  hud  now  kept  the
bridge  two  months  at  Armisia's  request,  and  ia
that  time  had  performed  many  ieats,  answer-
able to  his  person,  an(i  had  conquered  some
famous  kniuhtSjyet  none  had  ever  come  who
wasriiual  w'tii  liiisin  hardihood, and  strength,
and  skill,  lîoof  theTyger  thought  it  one  of
the  best  fought  battles  he  had  ever  witnessed,
and  feared  lest  Pompides   should  be  over-


46

come  ;  but  at  length,  when  both  were  hardly
handled,  und  their  armour  well  nigh  demo-
lished, he  could  perceive  that  the  other  was
the  weaker.  Both  at  last,  being  unable
longer  to  continue  in  such  strife,  drew  back  ;
the  strange  knight  sjte  himself  down  upon
one  of  the  benches  of  the  bridge,  and  he  of
the  Bull  leant  against  the  side.  Now,  sir
knight,  said  he,  I  perceive  that  if  I  have
made  any  promises,  1  am  able  to  perform
them  ;  but  by  what  I  see  of  your  worth,  I
would  fain  that  it  should  be  reserved  for
other  occasions,  and  not  come  to  its  end
here.  \  ou,  in  j'ielding  yourself  into  the
hands  of  the  lady  Armisia  would  lose  nothing,f
since  you  see  that  others  who  have  done  so
have  received  no  hurt.  To  go  on  with  the
battle  is  what  cannot  be  done  without  great
risk  :  and  inasmuch  as  none  should  put
himself  in  danger,  save  only  in  cases  wherein
his  honour  would  else  sutler  impeachment^
my  advice  is  that  you  should  do  as  1  say.
Sir  knight,  replied  the  other,  what  profit  or
loss  miiiht  result  to  me  from  doinc;  what  vou
advise,  1  know  better  than  you  ;  let  us  re-
new our  battle,  that  and  fortune  will  decide  ;


47

I  am  prepared  for  any  thing.  And  without
wailing  answer^  he  made  at  the  knight  of  the
Bull.

But  though  in  this  second  struggle  the
strange  knight  put  forth  all  his  strength,  and
did  wonders  ;  not  heing  able  to  withstand
such  blows  as  were  dealt  him,  he  fell  upon
the  ground,  overwearied  and  well  nigh  dead.
He  of  the  Bull  took  oft"  his  helmet,  saying.
Since  you  w«uld  not  take  my  advice  when
you  might  have  done  it  with  less  danger,
you  inust  now  yield  3'ourself  perforce  to  the
lady  Armisia,  or  I  must  cut  off  your  head.
Certes,  sir  knight,  replied  the  stranger,  I
know  not  which  be  the  worst  danger;  but
that  it  may  be  said,  I  rather  chose  to  die  than
to  yield  m^^self  to  her  who  desires  to  be  re-
venged on  me,  do  what  you  please  ;  1  will
rather  yield  to  you,  than  to  one  whom  no-
thing can  satisfy.  He  of  the  Bull  seeing  him
so  obstinate,  and  not  knowing  the  cause,
asked  him  to  tell  his  name  Neither  will  I
tell  you  that,  he  replied,  for  if  I  have  any
hope  of  life,  it  is  that  the  conqueror  may  not
know  whom  he  has  conquered.     He  of  the


48

Bull  being  well  inclinetl,  held  his  hand,  and
sent  by  his  squire  to  tell  Arinisi.-i  what  h;id
past  between  them,  besceeliing  her  to  think
it  good  to  give  the  knight  his  hfe,  seeing
there  was  no  reason  why  he  should  lose  it.
And  Arniisia  being  also  of  a  merciful  nature
where  she  resented  no  hatred,  commanded
one  of  her  damsels  to  tell  him  that  he  should
learn  who  the  knight  \\iii=i,  and  let  iiim  go.

The  damsel  coming  to  them,  and  setting  eyes
upon  the  vanquished,  knew  iiim  to  he
Adraspe,  son  to  the  duke  of  Sisania,  who
had  slain  prince  Doriel,  brother  to' her  lady,
for  the  revenííe  of  wliose  death,  the  yuarding
of  that  passage  was  first  ordained.  Upoa
this  she  began  to  cry  aloud  and  tear  her  hair,
and  lament  the  death  of  Doriel.  The
princess  Armisia  understood  what  it  was;
and  as  all  her  sex  have  little  moderation  in
taking  revenge  and  satisfying  their  wills,
she  came  down  immediately,  with  her  wo-
men waiting  on  her,  both  she  and  they
weeping  bitterly  ;  and  she  said  to  the  knight
of  the  Bull,  What  are  you  about,  knight,  that
you  do  not  ea^e  me  of  the  desire  which  hath


451

most  tormenled  me  r  This  whom  you  Iiave
at  your  feet  is  he  who  slew  my  brother^  and
hath  made  the  old  age  of"  the  king  my  father
wretched;  the  enemy  of  my  honour.  Put
an  end  to  his  hfe^  tliat  mine  may  be  at  peace.

Certes,  said  he  of  the  Tj'gtr  to  Selviam^  ilie

anger  of  a  woman,  when  she  can  execuie  it,

is   more   dangerous   than  the  might  of  ten

thousand   men.     Take  ni}'  horse,  and   I  will

go  see  if  by  my  entreatance  his  hfc  maybe

saved.     Tlien  came  he  on  foot  ro  the  bricige,

and  desiied   the  knight  of  the  Bull  to  (ielay

awhuc,  ;.nd    turning  to  Arniisia  he  said.  If,

laily,   any  ancient    enmity  causcth   you    to

desiic  the  death    of  this  knight,  1  pray  you

admit  to  memory  that  one  of  so  great  calling

as  you  are,  ought  not  to  be  void  of  mercy,

and  chieily  at  such  a  time,   when  you  have

power  to  execute  the  extremity  of  your  will.

It  is  not  seemly  where  God  and  nature  have

hti^towcd   si.cli  gilts,  lh;iL  you   should  stain

them  with  cruelty.     Suilicient  revenge  is  it

for  the  conqueror  that  the  conquered  knows

he  hath  received  life  at  his  hands  ;    and  if  my

reasons    be  not   suificienL  to   appease^  your

VOL.  IV.  r


50

anger,  1  pray  you  yet  consider  with  yourself,
tlííit  no  person  ever  refused  mercy  who  did
not  afterwtuds  etand  in  need  of  it.

These  and  other  lii<e  speeches  of  reason  and
virtue  did   the  kniii'nt  of  the  T  Viicr  use,   to
appease   Arraisiu;    but   what   avails    reason
where  there  is  uo  reason?  Instead  of  hearing
hiui  she  commanded  hitn  of  the  Bull  to  cut
off  the  head  of  her  enemy.     He  shall  not  kill
him,  cried  lie  of  the  Tyger;  for  it  you,  lariy,
are  determined  at  all   events  to   have  your
will,   I   will  defend   him.     It  is   to  preveiit
wrong  that  I  bear  arms.     I  would,   said  llie
knight  of  the  Bull,  that  it  might  please  th§.
princess  to  abate  her  anger,  and  :,!  ant  life  to
him    who   deserves   it   not  :    but  since  3'oa
would  defend  him   with   threats,  I   will  per-
form her  bidding,  and  then,  wounded  us  you
see  me,  try  you  what  you  can  do  to  revenge
liim  !

The  knight  of  the  Tyger,  though  he  had  said
that  he  would  defend  him,  had  no  jnicniion
so  to  do,  for  Pompides  could  not  have
stood  against  him:  he  had  only  •=aid    this.


51

tliinking  that  Armisia  for  fear  of  what  her
knight  uiight  sutîer,he  behig  already  so  liardly
handled,  would  relent  ;  but  it  availed  no-
thing, for  in  persisting  in  their  will  they  are
firm,  and  nothing  inconstant  then.  Bui  for-
tune had  so  decreed  it,  lest  farther  hurt
might  befall,  that  wliile  they  were  thus  dis-
puting, the  knight  gave  up  ihe ghost,  for  loss
of  bloud.  Armisia  seeing  Adraspe dead,  could
not  be  yet  contented  tlierewith,  because  his
head  was  not  smitten  oif  as  she  commanded.
W  herefore,  because  Pompides  had  not  ac-
complished whtit  she  willed  him,  she  with-
drew m  anger  to  her  chamber,  leaving  hirn
upon  tlie  bridge.  He,  who  was  passionately
enamoured  of  her,  and  had  lor  that  reason
liept  the  passage,  remained  in  such  sorrow,
thai  not  bemg  able  to  stand,  he  sate  himself
upon  the  border  of  the  bridge,  lie  ot"  the
Tyger  compassionating  his  trouble,  as  having
hnuself  resented  the  like,  came  to  comfort
him,  which  Pom{)ides  seemed  to  disdain,
Lecause  he  judged  that  his  presence  pro-
cured his  misfortune.  At  this  time  Selviam
came  up,  who  seeing  what  had  passed  left
the  horses  tied  to  an  ash  tree.  As  so'on  as
F1Î


the  knight  of  the  Bull  saw  him  he  knew  that
he  of  the  Tyger  was  Pahneriii,  a. id  being
full  of  joy  he  cried,  Now  1  know  not  what
ill  can  befall  mc,  for  which  this  pleasure
would  not  atone  !

Palmerin  took  off  his  hclrnet,  and  em-
braced him,  and  Ix^eran  to  give  him  com-
fort in  his  passion,  for  as  for  his  wounds
they  were  slight  and  required  no  care.  It
was  not  long  before  a  damsel  came  down  to
invite  them  in,  by  Armisia's  desire;  for  re-
collecting that  she  had  had  her  revenge,  and
anger  having  yielded  to  her  nature,  which
was  in  truth  noble,  she  repented  of  what
she  had  done,  and  sent  to  reque.^t  pardoa
of  the  knight  of  the  Tyger,  desiring  him  to
go  into  the  apartment  wherein  he  of  the  Bull
was  wont  to  be  lodged.  When  ihey  were  un-
armed, shecame  to  visit  them,  andhavingnow
laid  aside  her  anger,  she  said  to  the  knight
of  the  Tyger,  I  beseech  you.  Sir  Kaight,  to
excuse  me,  in  that  your  words  were  not  re-
ceived by  me  as  they  deserved  to  be,  and
impute  the  fault  to  anger,  justly  excited,
which  deprived  me  of  reason  at  the  time;


53

«s  great  griefs  are  wont  to  do,  when  that
V  hich  occasioned  them  is  present.  Anã  'in-
asmuch as  I  know  not  whether  you  are  ac-
quainied  with  the  cause  oi"  my  hatred  to  that
knight,  I  will  tell  you,  that  you  may  not
condemn  me  whithersoever  you  go.  I  am
daughter  of  king  MeHade  of  Scotland,  who
owns  this  country.  This  dead  knight,  whose
name  is  Adraspe,  eldest  son  to  the  duke  of
Sisania,  one  of  the  principal  lords  of  my  fa-
ther's reahn,  being  in  his  house,  became
amorous  of  me  ;  but  though  he  was  an  excel-
lent one  in  arms,  and  the  best  of  this  coun-
try, there  were  so  many  faults  in  his  con-
dition, that  I  would  never  listen  to  his  suit.
Kevertheless  he  was  so  importunate  and  void
of  reason,  as  he  would  not  be  answered  :
whereupon  I  was  constrained  to  com-
plain to  prince  Doriel  my  brother.  Whcu
Adraspe  perceived  himself  to  be  not  favoured
by  him,  and  hated  by  me,  he  devised  how  he
might  compass  that  by  force  which  by  my
own  consent  he  never  could  do,  and  so  laid
his  plots,  that  one  day,  when  my  brother
was  gone  hunting,  he,  with  a  company  of
others,  as  wicked  as  himself,  fell  upon  him
r3


54

and  slew  him.  My  father,  greatly  as  this
treason,  being  wrought  upon  his  own  blood
and  liisown  son,  grieved  hiin,  is  so  old  and
feeble  that  he  never  could  take  vengeance
for  it,  and  the  duke  moreover  is  <-o  mighty,
that  he  dared  not  meddle  with  liim.

Yet  was  not  his  heart  free  from  continual
sorrow,  in  respect  that  nature  could  not
otherwise  cliuse;  which  Í  piivi  ig,  and  willing
to  assist  my  father  to  the  uttermost  I  could,
and  to  revenge  my  brother's  death,  left
the  court,  and  caused  this  house  to  be  erect-
ed in  this  place,  wliich  being  the  chiefest
passage  in  all  this  realm,  I  enierprized  to
have  some  valiant  knight  defend  this  bridge,
promising  to  marry  him  who  should  kill
Adraspe,  his  rank  being  such  as  should  be
no  disparagement;  for  I  knew  that  his  pride
would  bring  him  here.  Some  undertook  the
charge  in  hope  of  this  guerdon,  and  he  came
and  slew  or  conquered  them  all.

But  after  the  knight  of  the  Bull  took  this
charge  upon  him,  Adraspe,  fearing  it  may
be  his  noble  prowess^  remained  two  moutns


oo


before  he  came  hither  again  :  to-day,  howe-
ver, not  able  to  resist  his  own  proud
thoughts,  and  his  hour  being  come,  he  came
to  prove  himself  against  him,  and  met  with
the  fate  which  you  have  witnessed.  This  is
the  cause  Í  had  to  desire  his  death;  if  it
sufiices  to  excuse  me  for  the  discourtesy  Í
showed  you,  1  pray  you  carry  it  to  account.

Certes,  lady,  replied  the  knight  of  the  Tyger,
if  1  had  known  at  first  what  you  now  tell
me,  so  far  from  asking  his  life  1  would  have
hastened  his  death,  for  the  very  earth  should
not  sutler  upon  her  surface  those  that  prac-
tice any  treason  against  their  prince.  \  ou,
lady,  have  done  what  you  owed  to  your
father  and  to  yourself;  it  remains  now  to
fullil  it  to  Sir  Pompides,  my  brother,  who  in
the  quality  of  his  person  will  nothing  dispa-
r;ige  you,  ibr  heis  grandson  to  king  i*adrii|ue
of  Eijglaiul,  and  son  of  Don  i)unrdos,  my
lui'd,  and  }our  near  kinsman.

I  sec  now,  quoth  Armisia,  how  much  I  owe
to  this  day's  fortune;  to-day  1  have  seen
my  desire  accomplished,  the  old  ^ij£,c  of  my


56

father  comforted,  and  the  death  of  my  bro-
ther avenged,  and  all  this  by  the  hand  of
one  with  whom  Í  çain  honoiu"  and  tuli  con-
tentment.  Tlierc  is  one  thing  only  of  winch.
I  can  complain,  and  that  is,  that  Sir  Pom-
pides  should  have  been  so  loiii^  in  tills  iii'id,
und  should  never  let  it  be  known  who  he
was.  Of  you.  Sir,  1  would  know,  wlKithcr
you  be  Paimerin,  or  ilorian,  not  that  I  am.
aliectioned  more  to  the  one  than  the  other,
but  because  I  would  know  which  of  them
fortune  hath  made  me  so  hapijy  as  to  see.

Florian,  replied  he  of  the  Ty^er,  is  fur  oflf
this  place;  I  am  Paimerin, your  scr "ant  ;  and
now  indeed  for  other  reason  to  be  regarded
a.s  your  brother,  even  as  much  as  Doriel,
were  he  alive.  Worthy  welcome  then  did
Armisia  afford  him,  not  merely  because  he
■was  so  great  a  prince,  but  also  for  îheir  near-
ness of  kin,  for  her  father  anil  the  mother
of  Don  Duardos  were  brother  and  sister.

The  death  of  Adraspe  was  reported  the
same  day  in  the  king  of  Scots'  court,  which
was  but  four  lea<jue»  from  that  place,  and  the


51

name  of  the  l:night  that  had  slain  him  :
whereupoîî  the  king  on  the  next  morning
got  into  a  htier,  and  being  accompanied
with  many  worthy  knights,  came  to  see  Pal-
meiin:  and  having  given  him  many  gracious
salutations,  he  took  Pompides  in  his  arms,
calling  him  Doriel,  and  saying  that  he  ac-
cepted him  for  his  son.  Then  gave  he  a
thousand  blessings  to  Armisia,  who  had  been
the  cause  that  his  grey  hairs  did  not  go
down  with  sorrow  to  the  grave.  Forthwith,
they  espoused  each  other;  but  before  the
marriage  was  solemnized,  Pom'pides  went
witli  an  army  towards  Sisania,  to  kill  or  take
the  duke;  in  this  however  there  was  little
ado,  for  the  (hike  being  advertised  of  his
intent,  fled  into  Ireland,  whereupon  his
estates  fell  into  the  king's  hands.  1  hoy  in
England  having  knowledge  of  Pompides'
marriage,  made  triumphs  and  bonfires  for
the  good  fortune  that  had  happened  to  him,
who  was  well  beloved  of  every  one,  as  well
for  being  the  son  of  Don  Duardos,  as  for  hi*
virtuous  bounty  and  knightly  courage.


C.  jf  *


6^


CHAPTER  Í30-


When  the  nuptials  of  Pompides  were  so-
lemnized, to  the  great  contentment  of  the
kin^  of  Scots  and  his  whole  realm,  the  knight
of  theTyger,  took  his  leave  of  the  king  and
the  princess  Armisia;  his  hrother  Ponip'des
accompanied  him  to  the  place  where  he  em-
barked, to  whom  he  gave  to  understanding
the  charge  wherein  all  princes  wore  boinid
that  received  royal  dignity,  desiring  hi  n  ear-
iiestly,  since  fortune  liad  brought  him  lo
so  great  felicity,  that  he  would  uso  himself
modestly  and  wisely,  because  fortune  v\as  ^o
uncertain  in  herself,  that  sjinetime  -he  put
those  persons  in  greater  fear,  whom  she  had
placed  in  most  assurance  :  so  having  given
him  Uiuch  gowd  advice  to  this  effect,  they


S9

«mlíraced  one  nnother,  Pompides  Teturhcd
to  the  city,  and  Talmerin  entering  the  ship,
caused  their  sails  to  be  hoisted,  wlien  the
wind  serving  them  well,  in  few  days  they
5nished  their  voyage.  Some  days  he  tra-
velled without  meeting  any  adventure  ;  but
as  he  beguiled  the  time  in  talking  with  Sel-
"viura  of  his  love,  he  resented  this  idleness
the  less.  i\t  length  he  entered  the  kingdom
of  Hungary,  where  he  found  more  to  do  ;
for  that  country  being  inhabited  by  many
knights,  he  began  to  meet  with  adventures^
and  some  thereof  great  and  perilous.  One
there  was  which  is  worthy  to  he  recorded.
On  the  fifth  day  of  his  travels  through  that
lani,  it  was  bis  chance  to  arrive  at  even-
song time  in  a  goodl3'  forest,  wherein  the
trees  were  so  high  and  thick  that  they  kept
off  the  rays  of  the  sun  from  the  earth,  and
in  the  midst  thereof,  among  some  ash  trees,
he  came  to  a  fair  fountain,  which  was  covered
with  an  arch  of  marvellous  workmanship;
and  hrcause  the  weather  was  hot,  he  alighted
To  refresh  himself  at  this  fotmtain  and  pass
the  scsta  under  these  ash  trees.  In  the  mean
uhilc  iielviam  sullcred  his  horses  to  graze  in


GO

the  pasture.     This  repose  did  not  continue
]on<i,  for  while  he  of  the  Tyger  was  washing
liis  hands  and  face,  his  hehnet  being  placed
upon  a  stone  beside  him,  there  rushed  out
a  damsel  from  the  thici<cst  of  the  woorl,  with
her  iiair  dishevelled,  her  face  str.  aming  with
tears,  her  colour  gone,  and   her  appaiel  all
torn   by  tlie  trees  :  at   last   she   espied  the
knight,  to  whom  she  came  running  a  great
pace,  and  casting  herself  at  his  feet,  she  re-
mained fearfully  looking  about  her  a  good
while,  having   not  the  power  to  speak  one
word.

Moved  with  pity  at  heholding  her  in  this
state,  and  weening  he  that  had  feared  her
was  at  hand,  he  reached  his  helmet,  which
he  had  no  sooner  clasped  on  his  head,  but
he  beheld  coming  the  way  that  the  damsel
came,  a  giant  strongly  aruiod,  carrying  in
his  hand  a  huge  mace;  he  seeing  the  damsel
had  betaken  herself  to  the  knight's  protec-
tion said,  Weak  protection  have  you  found  !
and  so  without  more  words  he  struck  at  him
with  his  mace.


Cl

He  of  the  Tyger  received  the  blow  on  his
shield,  Avliich  was  broken  in  two  by  its  force,
buL  the  requital  he  made  was  such,  that  cut-
ting through  every  tiling,  he  reached  the
giant's  right  arm  with  such  a  stroke,  that
none  of  the  blows  which  he  afterwards  dealt
with  it  were  of  any  effect.  The  damsel
having  now  recovered  her  recollection,  and.
seeing  the  giant  before  her,  and  not  believ-
ing that  he  of  the  Tyger  could  stand  against
hiin,  would  have  fied  to  hide  herself  in  the
forest,  but  Selviani  detained  her,  and  advised
her  to  stop  and  see  the  end.  Ah!  squire,
cried  she,  do  not  do  me  so  great  wrong  ;  what
I  have  already  suffered  is  enough  !  Why
would  }  on  have  that  devil  kill  me  after  he
has  killed  your  master?  for  nothing  can
withstand  his  strength.  Still,  quoth  Selviam,
1  will  have  you  see  what  fortune  may  deter-
mine.

Jle  of  the  Tyger  having  no  shield  for  his  de-
fence, availed  himself  of  his  skill  and  nimble-
ness.  But  though  the  giant  put  forth  all  his
endeavours,  the  loss  of  blood  from  his  arm
was  such  that  he  could  scarce  lift  bis  mace,

VOL.  IV.  G


G2

nnJ  full  glad  would  he  have  been  if  «iiiccouf
had  reached  him  ;  for  by  the  device  of  Uie
lygcr,  and  by  the  blows  which  he  received,
he  knew  that  more  strength  than  he  now
.posscst   was  needed  against  such   an  ene-
my»    Nevertheless,  doing  all  lie  could,  he
took  the  mace   in   his  left  hand;  but  Avith
that  he  had  no  skill,  and  knew  not  how  to
aim  his  blows  ;  so  that  he  now  began  to  think
only  how  he  might  defend  himself.     He  of
the  Tyger,  perceiving  liis  weakness,  besvir-
red  himself  so,  that  it  seemed  as  if  there  was
no  interval  between  his   blows;  andas  the
giant  to  avoid   them  shifted  from  one  place
to  another,  and  was  heavy  by  reason  of  his
great  size,  he   became  weaiy,   and   placing
his  back  against  one  of  the  ash  trees,  he  sate
down  at  the  foot  thereof,  in  which  posture
he  made  better  resistance  than  he  had  done
before;  for  having  his  back  protected  by  the
tree,  the   knight  could  only  strike  at  him
straight  forward,  and  that  he   could  not  ap-
proach to  do,  he^having  no  shield  to  protect
himself  from  the  mace,  which  the  other  now
wielded  with  both    hands.     Greatly  was  he
of  the  Tyger  confounded,  seeing  that  a  giant


63

who  was  already  conquered^  saved  himself
by  so  simple  a  remedy;  and  that  he  also
mii^ht  rest  himself,  he  leant  himself  against
a  tree  likewise.  I  beseech  thee,  said  the
giant,  to  let  me  know  what  is  thy  name,  be-
cause I  have  evermore  thought  that  no  ten
of  the  best  knights  on  the  earth  could  do  as
much  as  thou  hastdone,ueitherthatthe\  could
have  been  able  to  resist  me  half  this  while.

I  am  content,  answered  the  knight  of  the
Tyger,  on  condition  thou  wilt  promise  to
tell  me  thy  name  also,  and  ^\hat  thou  dost
iti  this  land,  and  the  cause  why  thou  didst
pursue  this  damsel,  that  being  a  thing
which  appears  so  shameful  to  the  brave.
So  much,  quoih  the  giant,  thou  shalt  com-
mand at  my  hands  ;  therefore  understand
that  I  am  called  V^iscalion  of  Orranto,  sou  to
the  giant  Lurcon,  wlio  was  slain  at  Constan-
tinople, by  the  iiands  of  Primaleon*,  with
whom  he  was  so  hardy  as  to  enter  the  com-
t>at,  .to  revenge  the  death  of  Don  Perrcquiii
of  Duazos,  and  to  have  in  marriage  Grido-


♦  Trimalcon,  P.  i,C.  17.


64

nia,  heiress  to  the  duchy  of  Onnedcs,  wlio
was  afterwards  espoused  to  Primaleon.  At
that  time  my  father  was  slain,  he  left  me  and
one  brothcf,who\vasnanied  Darmaco  after  liis
grandfaihcr,  and  a  son  of  Don  iJuardos  who
is  now  much  talked  of,  slew  him.  I,  whom
fortune  never  yet  failed  in  any  adventure
uhich  presented  itself,  could  not  rest  for  the
desire  of  revenging  my  father  and  brother.
And  because  I  could  not  do  this  upon  Pri-
maleon, behaving  ceased  to  put  himself  4n
peril,  1  determined  to  go  through  this  coun-
try, and  the  empire  of  Greece,  and  satisfy
my  wrath  upon  the  innocent,  seeing  that  Í
could  not  upon  the  gui.ty  ;  and  believing  that
I  might  peradventure  meet  with  the  slayer
of  my  brother,  or  some  other  so  nearly  allied
to  Primaleon,  that  I  might  be  contented.
To  day  I  met  this  damsel,  going,  as  she  tells
me,  to  the  court  of  the  emperor  Pahricrin,  to
Lionarda  the  princess  of  Thrace  :  now  for  that
I  am  desirous  to  do  all  the  injury  that  I  may
to  any  of  that  emperor's  court,  I  resolved  to
ravish  this  damsel.  But  at  the  time  I  was
about  to  fulfil  my  pleasure  on  her,  a  squire
*of  hers,  who  had  escaped  my  hands,  came


65


and  hindered  me,  with  the  aid  of  fivekniirhts,
'  whom  1  iiave  lelt  lo  hold  combat  with  ten  of
mine,  some  of  whom  are  of  my  kindred,  and
will  give  good  aecouni  of  them.  So  leaving
them  to  take  their  prey,  I,  on  foot  as  I  was^
f(;llo\ved  the  damsel,  who  took  herself  to
flight  so  soon  a.s  she  saw  the  five  knights
begin  to  cliarge  me.  Thi:s  have  I  told  you
the  whole  circumstance;  now  it  vemdineth
that  yon  reveal  yourself  to  me,  according
as  at  first  yon  promised.

Believe  me  Vascalion,  answered  the  knight
of  the  Tyger,  he  who  placeth  his  happiness
in  evil  actions,  meeteth  for  the  most  part
the  punishment  thereof,  the  proof  thou
mayest  now  behold  in  ihys(  li  :  for  thou,
being  not  content  with  the  death  of  thy  fa-
ther and  his  nrother,  wlio  wcmc  slain  in  equal
battle,  seckcst  to  revenge  thy  villainous  will
on  this  innocent  damsel.  Know  that  1  am  a
kinsman  to  Primaleon,  and  am  called  Pal-
merin  of  England,  son  to  Don  Duardos  and
rierida,  the  sister  of  Primaleon.  Look  lu
thyself,  for  I  hope  to  rid  the  world  of  thee
and  thy  cursed  intentions.
c  3


66


Tiill   sorry   was  Vasculion    at  hc^.ring  that
threat  name,  ior  he  was  in  no  coiiditioii  to
resist  him.     Nevertheless,  courage  and  de-
spair supplying  him  strength,  he  rose  as  well
as  he  could,  heing  resolved  to  show  him  that
he  should  purchase  the  victory  dearly.     Rut
while  he  had  heen   silting   much  blood  had
flowed  from  his  aim,  so  that  he  was  greatly
enfeebled  ;    and  in  spite  of  all  his  courage,
when  he  felt  himself  rigorously   handled  by
his  enemy,  and  had  no  hope  of  life,  he  would
fain  have  interrupted  the  battle  with  another
parley,  believing  that  succour  migiit  happily
reach  him.     But  this  was  also  in  the  mind  of
the  knight,  who  now  felt  the  victory  to  be
his,  and  waxing  impatient  that  it  was   de-
layed, prest  upon  him  fiercer  than  before,
and  cut  the  mace  from  his  hand.    The  giant
having  no  other  remedy,  sought  to  sei^^e  him
in  his  arms.  He  of  the  Tyger  drew  back,  and
charged  him  anew  with  so  many  blows,  that
he  felled  him  to  the  ground  ;  and  not  con-
tent to  see  him  so  conquered,  he  set  his  foot
upon  him,  and  when  he  had  taken  off  his
helmet,  presently  parted  his  head  from  his
shoulders.     The  sight  hereof  made  the  dam-


67

scl  SO  glad,  as  she  had  before  been  sorrowh'.!.
Ludy^  said  he  of  the  Tyger  to  her,  the  iiv<;
kuiiihts  wlio  sLiecoured  you,  cannot  chiisL
but  be  in  2;rcat  danger:  Í  will  go  seek  thciu
I'orili  ;  in  the  mean  while  you  may  come  fair
an(i  sofily  ui'ter  with  my  squire,  wlio  sh;i!i
iidvc  you  ri[)  htliiiid  liim  on  liis  hor.se.  Thei
uiouniing  on  liis  own,  which  Selviam  held  i;i
readiness,  he  took  that  way  which  he  sa^s
the  giant  come,  wiieu  he  pursued  the  dam-
sel, and  it  was  not  long  before  he  heard  thv
clasliinc;  of  the  swords,  which  seemed  to
him  either  to  be  far  off,  or  dealt  with  liit;--
force.  This  battle,  however,  was  nigh  ;  .
hand,  but  tluy  who  were  engaged  in  ii
^vere  now  so  weary,  that  they  could  sea:  •.
lioUl  their  «words,  and  the  hilts  turn^'d  ,  •
their  grasp.  There  were  hve  on  the  o.u
bide,  and  six  on  the  other,  and  four  lay  dea-
he  well  perceived  ihat  the  six  were  the  giaii
knighls,  for  among  thein  were  two  of  gia.ii
stature,  who  uoxa  the  whoiC  brunt  of  t  .•
battle;  aniong  the  five  he  kuevv  Urumia  ;■;>  ,
the  son  of  king  Kecin.ios,  i>y  liis  dev
Then  rushuig  among  them,  he  struck  ou>  -
the  two  liuge  ones  vitli  such  ni  q*i.  uj  .


6S

his  helmet,  that  the  blow  reached  the  head
and  brought  Iiiir.  (iown.  The  others  seeing
him  (lead,  the  giant  not  at  hand,  and  their
enemies  thus  succoured,  began  to  be  so
dismayed,  that  they  had  now  no  other
thought  than  how  to  save  theinselves.  And
as  he  of  the  Tyger  was  not  yet  wearied,  and
his  strength  unUke  that  of  the  others,  he  and
his  companions  soon  made  an  end  of  tliat
fray  witli  the  hves  of  their  opponents,  wUo
either  for  love  or  for  fear  of  the  giant,  not
one  of  them  yielded  to  the  conquerors  ;  such
is  true  fidelity.  By  this  time  tlie  damsel
came  up  with  Selviam,  and  when  the  others
saw  him  they  knew  the  knight  of  the  Tyger,
"whereat  their  joy  was  the  greater,  especially
when  they  learnt  the  death  of  the  giant,  for
they  were  all  his  friends  and  of  the  emperor's
household.  They  were  Dramiante,  and
Frisol,  son  to  duke  Drapos  of  Normandy,
Luymanes  of  Burgundy,  Tremovain,  and
Blandidon  :  all  these  five  knights  were,  how-
ever, in  such  plight  as  somewhat  abated  the
joy  of  the  victory.  Blandidon  and  Trcmoram
especially,  had  been  so  handled  by  the  two
nephews  of  the  giant,  that  they  were  forced


Ç9

to  be  conveyed  on  litters^  which  their
squires  and  Sclviani  made^  to  a  little  town  no'.
I'ar  tVoin  tlie  i'orest,  where  they  were  earcíuliv
ait  ended  till  tljeir  wounds  were  healed,  be-
ing still  aeeompanied  by  their  i'nends,  auii
by  the  damsel,  who  till  they  were  restoi-
ed  to  perfòet  liealth  would  not  leave  then:.
The  knight  oï  the  Tyger  remained  there  w  jtii
them  while  their  health  was  doubtful  ;  when
he  thought  them  sate  he  tooic  his  leave  auil
resumed  his  juiiri)ey,  the  desire  he  had  to
arrive  at  the  end  making  him  lose  all  otlii.^r.,.
But  before  he  reached  Constantinople,  lb*:
death  of  V'ascalion  and  his  ten  knights  was
rumoured  there,  for  the  news  of  great  ad-
venture!>  is  always  bruited  far  and  wide.


70


CHAPTER  131.


He  of  the  Ty2;er  continued  to  long  in  travel,
as  at  length  he  came  into  the  empire  of
Greece,  without  the  finishing  any  adventure
^vorthy  the  rehearsal  :  for  the  device  ot  the
Tvj^er,  and  the  report  of  him  in  all  places
abroad,  struck  fear  into  all.  But  the  nearer
he  approached  to  Constantinople,  the  more
he  found  himself  passioned  for  the  love  of  his
lady,  remem  ering  her  unkind  speeches,  and
the  sharp  entreatance  she  used  to  him,  \\hen
irst  he  departed  from  the  court,  and  not  re-
membering that  at  that  timeit  was  not  known
who  he  was,  neither  had  he  performed  any
feats  worthy  of  estimation  ;  and  that  she  had
since  repented  of  her  anger.  But  Selviam
still  comforted  him,  and  made  him  lay  aside


71

these  fonrl  imaginations.  At  length  one  holy
day,  about  the  hour  of  tierce,  they  came  in
sight  of  the  city;  and  tliey  stood  looking  at
it  awhile  from  a  hill,  for  he  of  the  Tyger  de-
lighted to  content  his  eyes  and  indulge  his
fancy  upon  the  palace  of  the  emperor,  and
the  apartment  of  tiis  lady,  which  nDght  well
be  seen  from  that  eminence;  revolving  in
himself  many  amorous  thoughts,  which  snme-
timcs  gave  him  pain  and  sometimes  ple;isure,
for  of  these  changes  and  contrarieties  is  love
composed.  At  last,  as  one  resolved  to  end
these  musings,  though  he  could  not  end
their  cause,  he  went  down  the  hill,  and
lacing  on  his  helmet,  a.id  taking  his  shield
and  his  kince  from  Stlviam,  advanced  with-
out him  ;  for  knowing  that  that  court  was
always  frequented  with  adventures,  and  the
place  of  the  palace  in  j  ar'icular,  he  wished,  if
any  should  present  itself  on  li:s  arrival,  to
go  through  it  before  he  was  discovered  by
means  of  belviam  :  and  for  this  cause  he  bade
liim  follow  at  a  distance,  and  keep  an  eye
upon  him,  that  when  lie  (iismotmted,  he
might  be  at  hand.  Now,  as  if  that  li  >  ex-
pectations might  have  the  iisue  lUcy  dciired.


il  came  to  pass,  that  a  knisht  luul  arrived  at
trie  emperor's  court  the  clay  bofurc,  liavinir
:  ".()  squires  attending  on  him,  who  carried
')':>  hehnet,  shield,  and  hmee  ;  by  the  great-
;  Í.  ^s  of  his  stature  and  of  liis  limbs  lie  soem-
v;\  made  for  great  things;  haughty  was  he  in
deeds,  and  arrogant  in  words,  as  he  plainly
manifested.  He  coming  proudly  into  the
vmperor'j  presence,  said  to  him  with  a  loud
M'icc,  High  and  mighty  .prince,  know  that  I
;  in  Arnolfujord  of  the  Isle  Astronica,  iNJy*-
!;  ilicr  and  the  giant  Bravoranie  were  great
iViends,  for  that  their  governments  were  near
<  lie  another;  and  to  eonfuiii  this  friendship
lijug  continued  between  them, they  both,  con-
cluded that  I  should  marry  with  Arlanza,
Ihavorantc's  daughter;  but  because  both
f.'ur  years  and  discretion  served  not  as  then,
(licy  prolonged  our  marriage  for  the  space
ni'  live  years.  In  which  time  liravorante  de-
!>arted  this  life,  so  likewise  his  sons,  Cam-
l;'.)ldam,  Culfurnio,  Bracolam,  and  Balcato,
V.  JTo  were  slain  by  the  sons  of  Don  Duardos.
And  to  abolish  altogether  the  house  of  Bra-
V;  rante,  Colambar  his  wife,  by  the  counsel
ci'  ilîe  magician  Alfernao,  seat  her  daughter


73

Arlanza^  my  lady,  into  this  country^  to  the.
end,  that  by  their  deceit  they  might  lead  the
knight  of  the  Savage  Man  from  this  court,
that  revenge  might  be  taken  on  him  for  the
death  of  her  sons,  which  would  remedy  her
inward  sorrows,  or  at  least  in  some  sort  com-
fort them  ;  but  the  issue  hath  been  that  Al-
fernao  is  dead,  and  Colambar  ilso,  and  her
lordship  lost,  and  her  enemies  in  possession
thereof,  and  worse  than  all,  Arlanza  is  in  the
hands  of  the  great  destroyer  of  her  blood.
I,  who  u'ithout  her  do  not  wish  for  life,  am
come  hither  to  prove  myself  with  this  knight
of  the  Savage  ^Jan,  and  by  force  of  arms  to
deliver  her  who  holdeth  me  captive.  But  I
learn  that  he  is  not  here,  whereat  I  am  less
contented  than  1  should  be  to  die  by  his
hands  ;  fo;-  I  should  not  feel  it  shame  to  be
conquered  by  liiin  who  was  never  yet  con-
quered by  any,  and  then  shouki  I  be  freed
from  thtse  careful  thoughts  which  torment
me;  for  this  purpose  1  intend  lo  wait  liis
coming.  Now,  if  in  ihe  menu  while  you
will  give  me  leave  to  make  some  trial  at
arms  against  the  knights  of  your  court,  I
shall  count  myself  liighly  pleasured,  for  Wi't

VOL.  IV.  H


74

is  so  hateful  to  me  that  I  would  willingly  at
its  cost  satisfy  some  part  of  my  desire.  And
if  there  be  here  any  who  are  akin  to  the  sons
of  Don  Duardos^  I  should  do  battle  with
them  more  willingly  than  with  any  other.

You  have  undertaken  an  enterprize,  knight,
replied  the  emperor,  in  which  I  know  not
what  you  may  gain  Neither  the  knight  of
the  Savage  Man,  nor  Palmerin  his  brother,
is  at  this  time  in  my  court,  whom  I  could
wish  to  be  here.  Nevertheless,  if  in  the
time  you  elxpect  their  coming,  you  be  so
desirous  to  make  known  your  valour,  I  grant
you  the  liberty  of  the  field,  where,  as  the'
knights  of  my  court  are  not  wont  to  be  idle,
they  will  not  fa.il  to  visit  you.

J  desire  nothing  more,  said  Arnolfo,  and
so  V,  ithout  more  words  he  entered  the  field.
That  same  day  before  the  sun  went  down  he
jousted  against  three  knights,  two  of  them
being  unhors^cd,  and  the  third  vanquished
in  the  combat  with  the  sword  ;  and  though
the  battle  was  of  short  continuance,  Arnolfo
plainly  gave  proof  that  great  resistance  was
needed  against  his  blows  and  strength.


75

•On  the  next  morning  he  entered  the  field
again,  being  in  black  armour,  and  having
painted  in  his  shield  Httle  flames  of  iire  in
a  field  of  sable,  and  there  he  waited  who
should  come.  He  who  came  was  the  knight
of  the  Tyger,  clad  in  his  accustomed  armour,
which  was  broken  and  battered,  and  the  de-
vice upon  his  shield  was  so  bruised  and  de-
faced that  it  was  scarcely  distinguishable.
As  he  past  under  the  empress's  apartment
he  beheld  his  lady  there,  whereat  he  was
so  suddenly  moved,  that  he  remained  awhile
like  one  beside  himself;  but  the  courage
which  at  such  times  upheld  him,  recalled
him  to  himself.  He  seeing  Arnolfo  ready
for  the  joust,  enquired  the  cause  thereof,
Avhich  was  declared  unto  him  by  one  of  the
judges  of  the  field.  Then  turning  his  eyes
there  whither  love  and  inclination  guided
them,  after  he  had  satisfied  them  with  the
sight  of  her  who  destroyed  him,  he  said
within  himself.  Lady,  1  would  fain  you
should  see  me,  that  you  might  know  1  re-
member you  ;  not  because  1  can  need  your
favour  in  so  slight  a  danger  as  this  ;  it
would  not  be  well  to  attack  any  enemy  with
n  'Á


76

80  great  vantage,  for  so  should  he  be  honour-
ed ill  liis  ovcrtlirow,  and  the  conqueror  could
have  no  merit  to  plead  before  you.     Having
said  this,  and  seeing  that  the  emperor  and
Primaleon,   and    all  the  court  ^Yere  eyeing
him^  and  that  some  said  it  was  the  knight
of  the  Tyger,  for  they  could  distinguish  his
device,he  advanced  iiimself  against  theother,
saying,  Know,   Arnolfo,  that  thou  hast  here
before  thee  a  kinsman  to  the  knight  of  the
Savaoe   Man,   therefore    if  thou   hast    anv
thing  to  revenge  on  his  lineage,  ihou  hast
now  the  time  to  doit.     Ar;iolfo  was  nothing
sorry  at  these  words,  all  his  desire  being  to
prove  his  prowess  upon  one  of   that  race,
and  with   this  hope  he  gave  his  horse  the
spur  and  ran  against  him.     He  of  the  Tyger
received  him  as  he  came  ;  both  hit  the  mark  ;
he  of  the  Tyger  lost  a  stirrup,  and  his  shield
was  pierced  in  the  encounter  by  his  enemy's
spear;  Arnolfo  went  to  the  ground.     This
beginning  gave  the  emperor  and  Primaleon
much    to    think    of;  for   as   they  had   seen
proofs  on  the  yesterday  of  Arnolfo's  prowess,
they  knew  that  the  strength  of  his  opponent
must  perforce  be  great.     The  knight  of  the


It

Tyger,  whose  horse  was  feeble  and  weary
with  long   travel,  alighted,  and  met  Arnolfo
on  foot,  who  came  to  attack  him.     Certes,
if  the  encounter  which  he  gave  had  been
that  of  a  mighty  man,  the  blows  which  he
delivered  appeared  not  less  so  \  and  all  was
necessary  to  resist  Arnolfo,  for  not  only  was
he  a  good  knight,  but  the  anger  and  melan-
choly which  he  resented  at  seeing  himself
overthrown,  gave  him  new  strength,  and  he
was  resolved  to  sell  his  life  at  the  dearest
price   he   could.     Moreover,  having   heard
his  enemy  say  that  he  was  akin  to  him  of  the
Savage,  he  thought  that  peradveriture  this
might  be  he  who  had  conquered   and  slain
the  brother  of  Colambar  ;  ail  these  things
kindled  him  and  gave  him  the  greater  cou-
rage.    Both  went  on  foyning  and  smiting
awhile,  the  battle  being  such  that  it  might
well  be  accounted  amoni;  the  most  famous
that  had  ever  been  seen  there.     Neither  of
them  failed  one  jot;  they  laid  on  with  might
and  mam,  and  demeaned  themselves  as  dcli-
verlv  as  ficrcelv,  and  no  weakness  could   be
seen  in  either.     Truly,  said  the  emperor,  .Ai-
nolto  had   reason  to  be  confiilcnt  ih  himscif,
H   .'3


78

and  yet  inethiiiks  Foi  luiic  will  soon  cut  short

his  imaginations,  tor  by  what  1  juùge  of  hi»

opponent,    greater  strength   is  required    to

withstand  him.     It  is  well,  replied   Prima-

leoD,  that  the  evil  ones  should  be  punished,

and   their  deviees  irustratcd.     Arnolib  and

the  knight  of  the  Tygcr  had  now  so  hacked

one  another,  as  their  armour  witnessed  their

cruel   rage  and    tury,    especially    ArnoHo's,

wliich  in  many  places  showed  the  flesn,  and

was  coveted    with    blood  ;    the    great    loss

thereof  caused    him    to  give  over  to  take

breath  awhile,  when  he  desired  the  knight

of  llie  Tyger  to  tell  him  his  name.

Know,  Arnolfo,  he  replied,  that  thou  hast
before  thee  a  near  kinsman  to  the  knight
of  the  Savage  -Man,  who  will  put  an  end
to  thy  imaginations,  as  he  has  ere  now  to
others  which  were  as  bad  as  thine,  isow
then,  quoth  Arnolfo,  hap  what  may  hap,  I
cannot  be  discontented  ;  if  I  conquer  thee,
1  shall  think  that  I  have  taken  veniieance
upon  mine  enemy  ;  and  if  1  be  overcome  I
shall  be  content  to  visit  Bravorante  and  his
sous.     Do   therefore  \Yhat  thou  canst  !  He


79

of  the  Tyger,  seeing  him  so  desperately
minded,  that  death  or  victory  would  alike
content  hiin,  began  to  avail  hiiifself  of"  all  his
skill  and  i'orce  ;  and  as  he  had  now  wound-
ed hi  HI  in  many  places^  from  which  much
blood  hud  ran,  he  let  it  How,  asking  him
oftentimes  if  he  would  yield  himseli.  But
-Arnolfo,  who  would  not  do  this,  fought  on
till  all  his  strength  and  senses  failed  him,
and  he  fell  at  his  feet.  The  other  took  off
his  helmet,  and  seeing  he  had  no  life  left  in
him,  he  kneeled  down,  and  thanked  G'od  for
his  victory.

Then  came  Primaleon,  and  king  Polendos,
ani  oiher  princes,  who  cotulucted  the  knight
of  the  Ty^-er  inîo  the  empress's  chamber,
where  taking  off  his  helmet,  he  kneeled
down  before  tlie  emperor,  who  embraced
him,  wee|)ing  for  joy;  for  as  nature  now  by
reasoii  of  his  great  age  began  to  fail  within
him,'  iiny  great  Joy  or  sorrow  made  him
shed  tears,  as  is  natural  to  those  uho  are  in
extreme  old  age.  Tii.-  knight  of  tlie  Tvger
ha\ing  kissed  his  hands,  came  and  humided
iiiuiseli"  before  lhe  empress  aiul  Gridonia,  and


80

going  then  to  the  other  ladies,  Lionarda  the
queen  of  Thrace  embraced  him  with  great
love,  for  the  benefits  which  she  had  received
from  him.  But  when  he  came  to  his  lady
and  mistress,  such  was  their  behaviour,  as  it
caused  suspicion  of  their  love  to  all  then
present  ;  for  in  both  might  change  of  coun-
tenance be  perceived,  and  faltering  speech,
whereat  the  emperor  and  empress  were  well
contented,  for  tlicy  had  sometime  tallied  of
marrying  them  together,  and  now  perceiv-
ing that  their  inclinations  were  conformable,
they  concluded  fully  thereupon.  These
courtesies  being  performed,  Primalcon,  Po-
lendos,  and  the  other  chivalry  accompanied
him  to  his  wonted  lodging,  all  being  full
joyful  ;  for  the}'  held  that  having  Palmerin
in  the  court,  the  height  of  all  chivalry  was
there.  They  found  Selviam  in  his  apart-
ment, who  took  his  arms,  and  then  .he  rested
with  his  friend»,  being  now  favoured  by  his
love,  time  and  fortune  giving  him  now  some
repose,  which  till  now  he  had  never  enjoyed.


81


CHAPTER  \32.


Simic  clays  Palmerin  jibodc  in  tlhc  cotiil  so
busied  with  visits,  tliat  lie  had  no  leisure  tu
profit  by  the  time  as  he  would  have  wiáhcd;
but  when  tliia  was  soincihinii  abated,  and  he
could  attend  to  what  his  heart  desired,  the
thoughts  which  never  left  him  so  tormented
liini  that  they  never  let  him  rest,  this  being-
the  way  with  true  lovcis.  And  as  at  that
season  there  were  lew  leasts  or  dances,  which
were  the  occasions  when  he  could  with  least
suspicion  ifllk  with  Dramaciana,  he  knew  no
means  to  compass  how  he  might  speak  with
her,  and  beseech  her  to  fulHl  the  promise;
wlhch  she  had  given  him  at  their  parting.
]iut  talking  with  Selviam,  who  was  the  par-
taker of  all  his  secrets,   and  \\ho   had  tVe-


S2

quent  entrance  into  the  empress's  house,  he
bade  him  consult  with  her,  and  devise  how
she  might  speak  with  him.  This  Selviam  did
as  Palmerin  wished,  for  Dramaciana  was  so
much  his  friend  that  little  urgency  was  need-
ed. That  same  night  she  spoke  to  him  at
her  chamber  window,  which  looked  ont  into
the  court  of  the  ladies' apartment  ;  this  place
being  surrounded  with  arches  was  shadowed.

Palmerin  received  no  less  contentment  in
speaking  with  Dramaciana,  than  he  would
if  it  had  been  to  her  lady  ;  for  knowing  that
she  made  her  acquainted  with  all  her  secret
passions,  he  judged  that  the  hour  of  his
good  fortune  could  never  come  to  pass  with-
out her  assistance.  Dramaciana  coming  to
the  window  and  finding  him  awaiting  her,
said,  Sir  Palmerin,  you  may  well  think  thai*
she  who  adventures  thus  much  to  do  you  ser-
vice, would  be  loth  to  hide  any  thing  from
you  that  might  return  you  benefit;  and  this
you  may  persuade  yourself,  that  the  dutiful
good-will  I  bear  you  maketh  me  so  hardy,
not  knowing  whether  I  am  deceived,  or  if
my   friendship   be  worse  bestowed  than  I


85

make  account  of.  It  is  not  meet^  said  Pal-
merin,  that  I  should  requite  with  words  one
to  whom  1  owe  so  much.  CertiiV  me  now,
I  beseech  you,  w  hat  end,  as  you  think,  will
my  long  service  come  unto  ;  for  the  hope  I
have  received  by  your  means  hath  evermore
sustained  me  until  this  present,  from  the
cruel  extremities,  which  else  had  been  suf-
ficient to  kill  me.

He  that  knows  so  well, said  Dramacianii>,  how
to  declare  liis  grief,  shall  never  make  me  be-
lieve that  he  can  be  deprived  of  good  hope,
considering  also,  that  your  noble  behaviour
cannot  be  blemished  by  forgetfulness.  And
this  you  may  build  upon,  that  the  lady  Poli-
narda  hath  been  as  grievously  passioned  dur-
ing the  time  of  your  long  absence,  as  you
have  been  daily  tormented  with  fearful  and
displeasant  thoughts,  which  you  say  you  have
suffered.  If  these  news  deserve  a  guerdon,
I  ask  no  other  than  that  you  redeem  the
promises  which  1  have  made  for  you.  I
have  devised  that  she  shall  speak  to  you,  at  a
Tkindow  no   bigger  than  this,   narrow,  and


84

mude  still  narrower*  Dy  au  iron  bar  from
fop  lo  ])Ot.tom  ;  it  is  in  one  of  ihese  cham-
bers which  look  into  the  Garden  of  Flerida.
I  must  tell  vou  that  this  was  no  Utile  thini;
to  obtain  from  one  of  her  condition.     Now
do  you  make  such  use   of  the  opportunity
that  you   shall  not  need  to  speak  together
again  so  secretly,  for  neither  is  the  place  such
as  to  permit  it,  nor  her  courage  sufficient,
whatever   may   be    her  inclination.     Miîie,
answered    Palmerin,    hath    never    deceived
me  in   the  confidence  I  had  (if  your  good
will,  whirh  when   I  called  to  remembrance
caused  me  to  abandon  all  the  unhappy  fears
wherewith  I  have  been  too  long  acquainted,
and  now  I  lose  them  altogether,  liaving  your
favourable   furtherance  on   my    side.      But
when  I  consider  the  g^reat  favour  I  shall  re-
ceivc,  having  the  means  to  speak  with  my
gracious  lady,  I  find  myself  dismayed  in  re-


*  The  fitness  of  narrow  windows  and  iron  bars  must  have
been  well  known  to  the  emperor  ard  empress,  both  from
their  own  adventures,  and  those  of  t  eir  daughter  Flerida.
Palmerin  de  Oliva,  C.  47.     Primalcon,  P,  2.  C.  27.


85

spcct  of  my  nnwortliincss  and  her  lionoin-
abie  dignity,  so  that  1  shall  be  abashed,  and
icar  that  ihis  will  withhold  me  from  discours-
ing my  long  and  tedious  travails  for  her
sPike.  Certes,  Sir  I'almerin,  said  Dramaciana;,
they  have  been  sueh  that  you  may  fairly
discourse  them  any  where.  For  if  you  have
been  so  valiant  and  hardy  as  to  spend
your  time  hitherto  in  travails  of  exceeding
flangcr,  and  yet  have  finished  them  all  wor-
thily, it  is  needless  you  should  now  dismay
yourself^  presenting  your  person  in  the  })lace
that  is  free  from  any  hazard.  Anú  if  yon
Avill  tell  me  how  this  fear  doth  alway  accom-
pany great  aíTection,  1  know  that  it  Avill  last
no  longer  than  the  beginning  of  your  talk  ,
for  then  yon  will  dismisa  it,  and  will  find  so
much  to  say,  that  I  fear,  instead  of  telling  true
services,  you  will  mingle  false  ones  with  the
relation,  which  is  the  way  of  love,  when  this
fear  is  gone.

Talmerin  would  fain  have  chid  her  for  this,
Init  night  was  short,  and  as  their  conference
had  begun  lute  she  would  tarry  no  longer,
only  telling  him  the  [)l;\ce,and  appoil>ting  him

\OL.  IV.  I


86

the  hour  to  speak  wiih  his  ladV'     Palmeriii
went  to   his  chamber,  where  he  spent  lhe
night  in  thinking  on  the  talk  that  had  passed
between  thern;  and  the  good  hope  he  had
through  her  means  deprived  him  of"  sleep,
wliich  in  these  cases  is  as  much  destroyed  by
unexpected  joy  as  by  continual  sorrow.     The
lime  being  come  which  Dramaciana  had  ap-
pointed, he  took  his  way  to   thr  appoiiHed
place,  being  privily  armed,  and  attired  as  be-
came the  occasvon  ;  and  leaving  Selviam  with-
out to  keep  watch,  he  got  into  the  garden.
And  certes,  when  Palmerin  found  himself
alone  there,  and  remembered  where  he  was
going,  this  seemed  to  him  the  greatest  dan-
ger that  he  had  ever  past  through.     For  in
the  contest  wherein  he  was  about  to  engage,
his  arms  and  courage  would  avail  him  not,  it
was  only  his  deservings  which  could  any  way
profit  liim,  and  how  these  might  aid  him  he
knew  not,  seeing  that  they  were  to  be  plead-
ed before  one  who  was  herself  of  such  desert,
that  all  other  appeared  little.     The  nearer  he
approached  to  the  window  the  greater  this
fear  became.     His  limbs  trembled,  his  breath
failed,  neither  had  his  understanding  strength»


87

cnough,at  that  hour,  to  help  him  in  this  dis-
may.    Then  stopping  a  Httle  to  recover  him-
self, he  took-  heart  from  the  remembrance  of
^vhat  he  had  exploited,  and  of  the  true  faith
^vilh  nhich  he  had  served  her  ;  and  he  went
up  to  the  window  where  his  lady  had  waited
ior  him,  and  seen  him  how  falteringly  lie  ad-
vanced.    And  then  being  half  confounded,
and  forgetting  to  offer  any  such  courtesy  as
the  occasion  required,  he  began  to  sav.  Lady,
if  my  fortune  hath  reserved  this  guerdon  for
me  after  so  many  long  and  laboursome  tra-
vails,! have  no  reason   to  find  myself  ag-
grieved, for,your  presence  hath  the  power  to
make  mc  forget  all.     To  have  endured  them
m  your  service  is  of  itself  so  great  a  reward,
that  it  is  I  who  remain  the  debtor  :  but  Í
would  not  that  this  acknowledgment  should
lie  to   my  hurt,  though  I  know  that  those
things  which  I  prize  the  most  have  the  most
troubled   me.     The  fault  lies  in  your  condi-
tion, which  is  of  so  free  a  quality  that  no-
thing satisfies  it.     For  this  I  am  sorry,  not
so  much  for  what  concerns  myself,  as  because
I    know  it  may  be  some  stain    upon   you.
This  is  wiiat  I  feel,  for  as  for  the  i^st  I  am
I  2


88

so  iiccnstomed  to  suiTer  all  tilings,  that  no
ovil  wliicli  might  befal  me  could  be  deemed
ííiievous,  since  as  a  remedy  1  should  have
the  knowledge  that  it  came  from  you.  Ill
could  I  h;nc  endured  my  life  had  it  not  been
for  this  remedy.  You,  lady,  who  know  that
these  are  not  mere  words,  since  the  actions
with  which  Í  have  served  you  sufficiently
prove  their  truth,  see  now  if  after  such  long
proof  some  recompence  should  not  follow,  if
only  to  show  that  you  are  sensible  of  them;
for  towards  you  I  am  so  easily  contented,
that  i  neither  dare  to  ask  any  thing,  nor  to
plead  my  services,  least  1  should  seem  to  ask
any  thing  thereby.  Do  you,  who  know  what
they  have  been,  judge  of  them,  and  if  you  do
not  thiiik  good  to  recompence  them  with  an
equal  guerdon,  be  it  as  you  will,  for  your  will
cannot  but  in  some  degree  be  mine  also.

Î  did  not  tliink,  sir  Pahnerin,  replied  Poli-
xiarda,  that  it  was  to  reveal  this  you  had  made
me  come  here  ;  but  two  things  deceived  me—
the  relationship  between  us,  and  the  com-
panionship of  our  childhood,  which  made
me  desjre  to  see  you,  and  question  you  con-


cerning  your  adventures, — and  Dramaciana,
whom  I  now  suspect  to  be  a  greater  friend
to  you  than  to  me.  But  seeing  the  fault  is
in  mc,  I  rather  blame  myself  than  you,
though  you  seek  to  satisf}'  your  desire  at  the
expence  of  my  honour,  and  with  no  hazard
of  yours:  it  costs  you  a  few  words,  and  if
I  should  be  deceived  by  them,  I  should  be
thought  ill  of  b}^  you  yourself,  and  know  not
Avhat  I  should  gain.  I  do  not  deny  but  that
the  knowledge  of  this  your  affection  makes
me  feel  myself  something  indebted  unto  yon,
but  not  so  much  so  as  that  it  cannot  be  paid
without  danger  of  my  fame.  It  is  not  rea-
sonable that  you  should  wish  your  exploits
to  be  rewarded  at  my  cost  ;  they  are  such
that  they  have  brought  with  them  their  own
reward;  the  satisfaction  which  you  feel  in
them  is  not  so  little  but  that  it  well  repays
you  for  the  labour  they  have  occasioned.  If
the  intention  wherewith  you  say  you  serve
mc  be  as  your  words  describe  it,  it  is  ineet
for  you  to  make  it  known  to  the  emperor
your  grandfather  and  mine,  and  also  to  my
father;  they  r»ill  lie  willing  to  match  us  both
-together,  for  not  only  arey  our  rank-tínd  estates
I  3


90

such  as  should  be  sought  for,  but  your  deeds
H-láo  have  been  such,  thai  nothing  can  be
denied  yon.  When  they  shall  be  so  pleased,
you  may  lay  aside  other  fears,  ior  she  who
hath  inclination  enough  to  point  out  to  you
this  course,  cannot  want  it  to  set  your  heart
at  rest.  This  is  what  you  can  obtain  of  me,
and  do  not  think  this  is  little,  for  1  am  dis-
satisfied with  myself  that  it  is  so  much,  and
know  not  how  you  will  esteem  of  me.

I  now  sec,  lady,  replied  Palmerin,  that  my
deeds  have  not  tliat  value  in  your  eyes,which
you  admit  them  to  possess  elsewhere,  since
you  vvould  have  their  guerdon  come  from
the  will  of  others,  and  not  from  that  to
which  I  look.  Little  comfort  is  it  to  know
tlmt  my  remedy  is  to  come  from  other  than
the  one  who  intlicted  the  wound.  1  do  not
say  that  my  joy  will  not  be  sufficiently  great
that  the  emperor  and  prince  Primaleoii
should  be  willing,  as  you  say  :  but  theirs
should  be  the  last  wills  to  win,  and  I  would
fain  that  when  their  consent  was  asked,
yours  should  so  fully  have  been  given,  that
theirs  v»cre  only  to  be  asked  for  form's  sake.


91

in  this  I  know  that' I  am  asking  much;  but
the  faith  and  love  with  wliich  I  have  ever
served  you  embolden  me,  and  that  faith  is
60  proud  of  what  it  thinks  it  has  merited,  that
it  cannot  be  contented  with  any  recompence
given  by  another.  But  if  such  be  your  con-
dition, that  you  can  be  fain  to  repay  my  af-
fection tUus  unworthily,  do  your  pleasure  in
all  things.  I  thought  that  of  all  evils  which
love  can  suffer,  absence  was  the  worst;  but
now  I  see  that  it  is  otherwise,  for  in  absence
love  hath  alway  some  fond  imaginations  to
console  him,  but  in  the  presence  of  the  be-
loved mistress  he  cannot  thus  deceive  him-
self, and  tlicn  what  is  made  apparent  destroy-
eth  allcontidencc.

I  did  not  think,  vSir  Palmerin,  said  Polinarda,
to  receive  such  answer  for  my  words  ;  ill  me-
thinks  have  you  requited  them  !  1  excuse
you,  however,  on  the  strore  of  that  love
which  you  profess  towards  me  ;  and  since  I
perceive  that  love  hath  so  blinded  you,  as
he  will  not  sufier  you  to  see  the  more  than
modest  readiness  in  me  to  pleasure  you,  I  am
content  to  give  you  yet  a  further  and  greater


92

.-issurance.  You  are  so  great  a  prince,  anâ
of  such  qualities,  that  you  think  you  deserve
every  thing;  1  would  not  have  you  b'.-iicve
that  this  persuades  me,  for  it  weighs  less
with  me  than  the  love  which  I  know  you
bear  towards  me,  and  in  that  1  trust  tnat
what  you  most  desire  will  always  be  ihat
which  most  beseems  my  honour  and  person.
Speak  to  the  emperor  and  to  my  fatiier,  and
obtain  their  consent,  and  be  assured  of  mine.
If  this  sufficeth  not,  I  know  not  what  more  to
promise,  nor  what  more  you  ought  to  ask.

Kay,  quoth  Palmerin,  if  I  weie  discontented
now,  it  were  fit  that  vou  refused  whatever
more  I  asked.  I  am  not  so  thankless  as  not
to  perceive  that  this  is  the  aim  and  scope  of
all  my  good  fortune.  Then  Taking  iicr  hand
he  kissed  it  many  times  not  without  tears
on  her  part,  love  and  shame  forcini;  them
from  those  who,  like  her,  find  inemselves
thus  making  their  first  avowal.  And  after
.other  talk  between  them,  they  espoused
themselves  in  the  presence  of  D.ramaciana
and  the  queen  of  Thrace,  by  whom  the
{oriucess  had    already   been    advised   to    do


this,  and  slic  wisUed  that  Loth  should  be
jnesciit,  that  she  might  entirely  lose  all  the
lear  and  suspicion  which  still  lurked  in  her  of
that  queen.  For  such  is  the  nature  of  great
love,  that  in  these  things  it  fears  equally
friend  and  foe,  dreading  every  thing,  and
trusting  nothing.  And  now  as  the  night
was  far  spent  and  the  day  began  to  break,
Palnierin  took  leave  of  his  lady  and  his
friend-;,  his  care  being  now  the  less,  but  his
love  the  same;  for  when  that  is  gieat  nothing
destroys  it.


94


CHAPTER  133.


During  the  time  this  great  joy  was  in  the
court  ot"  Constantinople,  for  the  coining  ot"
Piilmerin,  tidings  came  which  gave  tlic  em-
peror enough  to  thinic  on,  tor  it  now  appear-
ed that  the  threats  of  Alhayzar  were  not  idle
words,  he  having  with  his  letters  and  mes-
sengers stirred  up  the  v\hoie  jNIorisma.  This
was  known  by  an  ambassador  from  the  sol-
dan  Belagriz,  who  had  in  like  muiîiier  been
summoned  by  iiiiu  ;  but  he  rejected  the
<."all,  and  being  mindful  of  his  true  friend-
ship, was  now  making  read}'  to  come  in  aid
of  Constantinople,  well  knowing  the  danger
to  be  so  great  that  every  aid  would  be  full
needful.  And  while  he  was  preparing  all
things  for  war,  he  sent  this  intelligence  to  the


95

emperor, bidding  him  call  uppn  all  his  Aicnds ,
and  provide  for  lhe  deíence  ofhia  empire.

lhe  emperor  being  at  this  time  overcharged
uiih  age,  found   hinisoU'  far  unable  to  deal
in  these  affairs,  otherwise  than  by  hisjudg-
inent,  and  even  that  was  now  at  times  trou-
bled. But  the  greatness  of  this  occasion  some-
Avhat  revived  hiin.andhis  greatage  and  great
experience   in  things  of  great   import   had-
taught  him  not  to  neglect  any  tiling.     So
after  replying  to  tiie  soldan  Belagriz,  and
giving  him  thanks  for  the  good  forwardness
of  his  friendship,  and  the  intelligence  whicii
he  had  sent  him,  lie  dispatched  messengers
forthwith  to  Arnedos,  king  of  France,   his
son-in-law  ;  Kccindos,  king  of  Spain  ;  Dou
Duardos,  of  England  ;  the  emperor  \'ernao,
of  Allemaigne  ;  Mayortes,  the  Great  Khan,
and  all  the  lords  and  princes  of  Christendom  ;
for  there  was  not  one  who   had  not  some
bond  of  relationship, or  near  friendship,  with
bis  house,  and  if  any  had   been  without  it,
they  would  have  held  themselves  for  exiles
and   ignoble   persons.     Incontinently,  when
they   had   leceived    these    tidings,  they    al^


9G

woil  in  person  to  visit  the  empcior,  leaving
their  force  in  readiness  fur  when  it  should  be
wanted  ;  for  as  they  had  their  sons  dwelling
in  that  court,  where  they  had  been  brought
up,  and  thereby  exposed  to  the  coming  dan-
ger, this  was  also  another  reason  for  repair-
ing thither,  to  be   present  with  them.     As
soon   as  this   news   was   bruited   abroad,  all
errant  knights,  who  were  seeking  adventures
in  divers  places,  laid  aside  all  other  labours,
and  hastened  to  Constantinople,  where  they
thouQ-ht  to  find  the  crreatest,  so  that  in  short
time  the  city  was  filled  with  right  noble  chi-
valr}'.     And  though  after  their  arrival  jnany
adventures  bcfel,  which  in  other  times  would
have  bound  them  to  depart,  the  emperor  for-
bade this,  and  would  give  none  leave,  for  the
tidings  of  the  coming  of  the  enemy  fieshen-
ed  now  every  day.     And  as  much  as  these
things  arc  always  exaggerated   by  fear  and
rumour,   every   day  the  wonder  grew,  and
marvels  were  reported  of  the  great  fleets  of
the  Turks,  and  their  stores,  and  of  the  names
of  the  giants,  and  their  terrible  fierceness,
great  as  these  things  were,  fear  making  iliem
appear  greater.     But  this  very  rcpoit,  though


97

perad venture  it  were  hurtful  to  feeble  spirits,
only  quickened  the  brave,  and  made  them
the  better  bestir  themselves  in  their  prepa-
rations.

Meantime  advice  came  to  Pahnerin  that  the
Perilous  Isle  was  taken  by  'JVofolante  the
Fearful,  and  Satiafor  the  governor  thereof
slain.  Of  this  Trofolante  mention  hath
many  times  been  made  in  this  history  ;  he
was  an  old  enemy,  of  the  race  of  the  giants,
and  moreover,  of  his  own  condition  hardy
and  cruel.  He,  with  other  companions,
came  with  a  damnable  design  to  the  court
of  the  emperor  when  the  tourney  of  the  new
knigbts  was  appointed  against  the  married
ones  and  strangers,  in  Constantinople.  And
because  he  was  sometimes  vanquished,  his
hatred  was  tlie  more  increased,  and  he  sought
to  satisfy  it  by  cruelty  and  wicked  actions;
for  in  that  same  tourney  he  was  vanquished
by  Plorendos,  and  had  the  like  mishap  the
day  following,  by  the  prowess  of  the  knight
of  the  Savage  Man,  who  guarded  tiie  shield
of  the  Palm  Tree  in  the  forest  of  tbe  Clear
Pountain,  which    the   damsel  frO*n  J)iiliarte

\()L.   IV.  K


98

brouglit  to  the  emperor  Palrneririj  that  he
might  deliver  it  to  the  knight  who  had  won
the  honour  of  the  day  in  the  tournament.     It
was  hkewise  his  fortune  after,  when  he  tra-
velled to  the  castle  of  Almourol  to  fight  for
the  sliield  of  Miraguarda,  to  be  vano^uislied
there   by  Florendos,  wlio  guarded  it.     And
returning  thence  he  met  with  the  kvjight  of
the   Damsels,    when   oft'ering  to  take  them
from  him,  they  fell  to  the  combat,  and  in  tht
end  he  was  again  vanquished.     The  conceit
of  his  so  many  and  sundry  foils,  and  all  by
the  knights  of  the  emperor's  court,  caused
him  to  devise  by  what  means  he  might  work
some  injury  to  them   that  belonged   to  the
emperor  :  and  as  besides  this  reason  he  was
akin  to  Calfurnio,  Camboldam,  and  their  bre-
thren, he  greatly  desired  to  revenge  their
death.      And  for  the    purpose  of  devising
some  means  to  this  effect  with  Colambar,  he
repaired  to  her  island  ;  but  when  he  arrived
there,  he  found  things  far  otherwise  than  he
desired.     Whereupon  he  crossed  over  to  the
Perilous  Isle,  having  with  him  two  knights
who  w  ere  of  the  same  cast,  and  of  the  same
evil  minds  ;  and  there,  under  false  pretences,


99

llicy  (lerciifully  oblained  entrance  into  the
castle,  for  Satiafor,  suspecting  no  ill,  ad-
mitted -tliem  ;  and  when  he  would  have
guarded  against  them  it  \va>^  loo  late,  íoi
Troiolante  and  liis  comrades  were  iniuluy
men,  and  iindingthoic  of  the  eastie  unarmed,
slew  them  ail,  and  Satialor  among  them.

l>ut  tlie  pleasure  of  this  victory  was  very
short  to  ihem,  for  Argeutao,  the  governor  of
the  Profound  Isle,  heariiig  the  treason,  came
by  a  secret  wile  suddenly  on  them  with  his
power,  and  taking  Troiolante,  sent  him  to
the  emperor's  court:  where  heanived  just
at  such  time  as  an  armament  was  preparing
to  set  olV  to  recover  it.  There  was  no  little
joy  at  his  coming,  since  not  only  was  the
jsland  now  secured,  but  great  pain  was  saved
to  all,  inasmuch  as  the  departure  of  Pahnerin
and  his  iriends  was  thus  prevented.

Trofolantc  was  condemned  by  the  law,  and
publicly  executed,  according  as  his  treacher-
ous dealings  desiirved  :  and  Argeniao  wa>;
honourably  rccompenced  for  the  great  ser-
vice which  he  had  pcrforjned.


100

It  was  not  loii!^  before  Daliaite  aniveJ,  unci
at  his  coming  there  were  new  rejoicings,
which  his  person,  together  with  the  need  in
which  they  ulway  stood  of  his  wisdom,  oc-
casioned ;  and  as  he  knew  by  his  art  all  that
passed  in  his  isle,  he  gave  due  thanks  to
those  who  were  ready  to  adventure  in  re-
covering it.  After  him,  there  cante  to  the
court  prince  Floraman,  Albanis  of  Frisa,
Roramontc,  Luymanes  of  Burgundy,  Poli-
nardo,  and  many  other  princes  and  knights,
who  had  every  one  forsaken  their  several
countries,  laying  aside  all  other  thoughts,
to  assist  the  emperor  of  Constantinople
with  their  aid,  because  they  had  heard  of
the';Turk's  preparation.  So  that  there  was
collected  together  the  greater  part  of,  and
well  nigh  all  the  chivalry  of  the  world,
wherewith  the  court  was  so  ennobled  andv
splendid,  that  it  had  never  at  any  time  been-
more  so.

Now  came  news  that  king  Fadrique  of  Eng-
land was  gathered  to  his  fathers,  and  that
Don  Duardos  had  taken  the  sceptre  with
great  solemnity,  and  great  love  on  the  part


101

of  liis  VASsals.  Some  sorrow  did  tiie  news
oi"  Uiis  king's  death  occasion  ;  the  emperor
was  lie  who  most  resented  it,  for  as  they
were  of  the  same  age,  and  he  was  now
very  old,  even  as  it  were  at  the  very  end
of  his  days,  this  appeared  to  him  a  token
of  his  own  departure.  The  worst  infirmity
which  old  age  brings  with  it,  is,  that  it  hath
death  continually  before  its  eyes  ;  and  so
it  was  with  the  emperor,  for  by  the  sor-
row which  he  felt  at  ihese  tidings,  or  by
reajion  of  the  natural  fear  of  death,  he  became
visibly  changed  ;  and  his  speech  was  now
without  connection,  or  if  it  carried  with  it
discourse  of  reason,  it  was  of  short  con-
tinuance, as  one  whose  wits  were  bewilder-
ed. The  death  of  the  king  was  solemnized
with  suitable  obsequies,  and  with  funeral
games,  according  to  the  custom  of  Greece.
The  court  j>ut  on  mourning,  which  how-
ever did  not  last  long,  for  as  princes  and
personages  every  d;iy  arrived,  uhomit  was
meet  to  receive  with  ;i  joyful  welcome,  this
alone  was  of  such  weight  ns  to  put  aside
all  sorrowful  tliought-;,  whiih  also  are  dis-
'sipated  by  course  of  time,  árcording  to
K   S


102

the  order  of  nature.  For  if  the  sorrow
•which  is  felt  for  the  death  of  those  whom
we  greatly  affect  continued  long,  it  would
destroy  those  who  endure  it.


i


103


CHAPTER   148.


The  court  increased  every  day  in  number  of
knii^lits,  wlio  for  the  iaine  of  this  war  with
the  Turks,  hiid  aside  all  other  enterprizes,
to  be  present  in  this  signal  danger.  We  of
the  Savage,  when  the  bruit  thereof  rcaciicd
bis  ears,  knowing  that  he  was  the  cause  of
all  this  mighty  stir,  took  with  all  speed  ll.c
road  to  Constantinople;  not,  however,  leav-
in2f  Arlanza  and  her  damsels,  for  the  obiiy;a-
tion  wherein  he  felt  liimself  bound  to  her
would  not  allow  of  that;  a  remembrance
this  which  obtains  in  none  but  tne  virtuous
ix.n<\  noble,  they  who  are  otherwise  having
no  respect  to  any  tiling  but  their  own  inte-
rest, and  what  may  protit  theiuselves.  Iliree
days  before  they  readied  the  city,  it  bcfei


104

tliai  iti  pasbiiig  ihioiigh  a  forest,  they  came  to
a  little  rivulet,  and  there  alighted  to  pass  the
scMo,  lor  the  day  was  hot.  ft  was  not  long
before  a  ehild  eauie  along  the  same  road,
upon  a  palfrey,  with  his  hands  tied  behind
him  ;  he  was  lamenting  loudly,  and  two  men
on  foot  aecompanied  or  guarded  him.  The
knight  of  the  Savage,  being  armed  but  with-
out his  helmet,  arose  and  crost  their  way  ;
and  taking  hold  of  his  bridle,  enquired  the
cause  of  iiis  lamentations.  To  this  the  two
brigands  would  fain  have  made  him  answer
with  their  bills;  but  he  knew  so  well  how  to
demean  himself  with  them,  that  he  saved
himself  from  their  hands  by  slaying  them
both.  Then  he  turned  again  to  the  ehild,  who
said  to  him.  Sir,  since  there  is  in  you  so
great  virtue  and  strength  as  your  deeds  tes-
tify, I  beseech  you  do  not  waste  time  with
me,  but  go  succour  a  damsel  of  great  worth
and  beauty,  whom  three  knights  are  carry-
ing away  prisoner>  with  the  intent  to  deliver
her  to  one  who  is  her  enemy.  If  you  delay
your  help  will  be  of  no  avail,  for  they  are
taking  her  by  another  road,  which  passes
under   yonder  high   ouk>  ; — pointing  to  the


105

place  with  Iiis  finger  while  he  spake — and
this  clay  she  will  be  given  into  the  hands  of
one  who  will  use  no  mercy  with  her.  He,
upon  hearing  this,  forgetful  of  the  haste
with  which  he  was  travelling,  and  the  place
whither  he  was  going,  took  his  helmet,  and
mounted  his  horse,  desiring  Arlanza  to  wait
for  him^in  that  place;  and  if peradventure
night  should  overtake  her  before  he  returned,
to  repair  to  a  town  which  was  in  sight  hard
by,  and  there  he  would  speedily  join  her  if  he
remained  in  such  plight,  after  the  battle,  that
it  was  possible.  But  as  any  thing  will  strike
lear  to  a  heart  which  hath  been  accustomed
to  misfortunes,  so  great  was  the  dread  which
Arlanza  felt  of  being  left  without  her  pro-
tector in  a  strange  land,  that  she  sate  herself
upon  the  ground,  wringing  her  hands  like
one  bereft  of  her  senses,  and  saying,  ill  do
you  keep  the  promises,  sir  knight,  which
you  have  alway  made  mo,  affirming  always,
tiiat  no  adventure  which  might  betide  soever,
should  make  you  leave  me,  till  you  had
placed  me  in  perfect  repose.  This  is  what
I  ought  to  have  expected  from  you  if  I  had
remembered  the  death  of  my  bïethren  ;  biií


106

for  one  who  hath  placed  her  love  upon  him
who  slew  them,  just  guerdon  of  her  deserts
is  this  which  you  now  give  her.  You  are
going,  and  if  fortune,  as  my  unhappiness
forebodes,  should  not  ordain  for  you  now  as
she  hath  ever  hitherto  done,  I  am  not  known
in  this  country,  and  if  I  should  be,  it  would
be  to  my  greater  hurt,  for  I  know  not  where
the  daughter  of  Bravorante  and  Colambar
could  discover  her  lineage,  that  it  would
not  be  to  her  greater  peril.  But  since  your
condition  is  such  that  you  can  be  content  to
leave  me  surrounded  wiih  such  evils,  kill  me
first,  and  you  will  then  be  rid  of  me,  and  I
also  shall  be  rid  of  myself  ;  for  one  whose
life  is  hopeless  may  well  be  satisfied  with
death.

Lady  mine,  replied  the  knight,  what  con-
fidence could  you  have  in  me  that  I  should
deal  with  you  as  I  ought,  if  you  were  to  see
me  here  before  your  eyes  refuse  to  succour
a  damsel  who  is  forcibly  carried  away,  and
for  whom  succour  is  demanded  ?  1  trust
that  the  wiekedness  of  these  enemies  will
be  in  my  favour,  and  that  1  shall  return  to


107

you  witli  victory  ;  lay  aside  therefore  these
lears  :  for  thou<rh  this  confidence  should  de-
ceive  me,  my  soul  shall  accompany  you,  and
come  to  excuse  my  body,  if  disasters  or  ill
fortune  should  have  taken  possession  of  that.
As  he-  was  ending  these  words,  he  saw  the
knights  and  the  damsel  pass  along  the  road
which  the  child  had  pointed  out.  Clapping
spurs  to  his  horse  he  followed  them,  but
the  distance  was  so  great,  that  before  he
came  up  to  them  they  had  crost  two  hills  ;
but  he  got  before  them  by  striking  across
the  valley,  and  before  they  came  up  hud
lime  to  brcaîhe  a  little,  and  lo  rest  his  horse.
When  the  knights  drew  nigh,  he  perceived
that  the  damsel  being  weary  of  weeping,
vva»  cursing  the  day  when  she  was  born,  nm\
one  of  them  was  threatening  her  with  foul
words.  This  one  had  his  aventayle  open,
and  as  his  countenance  was  fierce,  and  he
was  of  great  stature,  and  large  liînbed,  he
seemed  as  though  he  were  a  doughty  one,
for  a  stern  counieiiance  h  the  natural  index
of  a  stout  heart.  But  he  of  the  Savage,  not
being  a  man  to  be  aft'eeted  by  sujeh  stni-
'" lancei,  sate  ready  for  the  joust,  and  said


lOS

lo  him  with  a  loud  voice,  Since  tliou  hast
offered  force  to  one  who  cannot  defeiíd  her-
self, you  must  oiFer  it  to  me  also  hefore  you
can  pass  farther.  It  seems,  cried  one  of
them,  that  you  are  out  of  love  with  life,
since  you  venture  it  where  you  are  so  sure
of  losing  it.  These  words  having  past,  he
ran  at  him,  hut  with  such  fortune,  his4iour
being  now  come,  that  at  the  first  encounter,
lie  was  thrown  dead  to  the  earth,  with  a
piece  of  the  lance  in  his  breast.

He  who  had  threatened  the  damsel  and  who
was  chief  of  the  three,  said  to  the  other,
mind  her  that  she  docs  not  escape,  while  I
take  vengeance  upon  this  wretch.  But  the
rage  with  which  he  ran  against  him,  made
him  miss  his  attaint,  and  as  he  past,  he  of
the  Savage  had  time  to  lay  hold  on  the  straps
of  his  helmet,  which  he  did  with  such  force
that  he  plucked  him  to  the  ground,  and  lhe
helmet  remained  in  his  hand,  and  before
the  other  could  recover  himself,  he  dealt
him  a  blow  upon  his  bare  head  which  cleft
it  to  the  brain.  Tlic  third  leaving  the  dam-
sel, couched  his  lance  and  spurred  against


109

him,  but  with  no  other  effect  than  that  of
breaking  his  lance.  He  of  the  Savage  de-
livered him  a  blow  upon  tiie  hehnet  in  pass-
ing, which  brought  him  to  the  ground,  and
leaping  down  before  lie  had  recovered  from
the  stunning  force  thereof,  unlaced  the  hel-
met, and  struck  off  his  head,  remaining  well
pleased  with  this  cheap  victory,  not  merely
for  being  out  of  danger  himself,  but  also  for
the  sake  of  appearing  well  before  the  damsel,
who  by  the  little  he  had  seen  of  her,  seemed
to  him  a  fair  one.  Then  returning  his  sword
into  the  scabbard  he  went  to  her,  saying,
Lady,  since  the  fortune  of  these  men  hath
.given  them  their  deserts,  lay  aside  all  fear,
and  recover  yourself  under  yon  ash  tree,  till
your  page  shall  come  up,  and  then  we  will
go  whither  it  shall  please  you  :  but  the  child
was  now  far  away,  for  not  thinking  the  knight
could  conquer  three,  and  finding  himself  at
liberty,  he  set  off  tp  carry  the  n^iws  to  a  castle
about  three  leagues  distant,  which  belonged
to  the  damsel's  utkcle.  The  damsel  being
confused  with  fear,  was  some  while  before
she  answered  him;  but  having  soineuliat  re-
covered breath,  she  sui.l,  1  owe -to  yoa  so
VOJL.  ;\ .  L


110

much,  sir  knight,  for  having  thus  preserved
my  iitc,  that  1  do  not  think  you  will  have
less  care  of  my  honour ,  let  us  go  where  you
please,  for  I  know  not  at  present  what  to
determine.

He  took  her  hiidle  and  led  her  to  the  place
of  which  he  had  spoken,  which  was^i  full
pleasant  one.  They  found  a  spring  of  water,
in  which  he  of  the  .Savage,  after  taking  her
palfrey  and  unbridling  his  horse,  washed  the
sweat  and  dust  from  his  face.  Then  placing
his  eyes  on  her,  who  as  her  fear  abated  had
now  recovered  her  colour,  he  became  more
enamoured  that. he  had  ever  before  been,
for  sfie  was  marvellous  fair  ;  autl  not  wasting
time  in  enquiridg  of  her  t^cause  of  the
wrong  which  had  been  offered  her,  he  set
about  employing  it  on  what  he  cared  more
about.  Lady,  said  he,  your  beauty  hath
power  enough  to  subdue  the  world  ;  1  knov^
not  who  could  have  the  freedom  to  resist  it.
Those  knights  who. were  loading  you  away,
either  had  not  seen  you,  or  if  they  had,  their
fortune  prevented  them  from  regarding  you,
for  my  happiness;    hut  what  avails  my  di-


Ill

ligence  or  the  succour  which  I  have  effected,
or  the  good  will  with  which  I  undertook  it,
if  finally  i  am  to  see  you  at  liberty,  and  my-
self a  captive  !  you  free,  myself  a  yielded
prisoner  !  and  to  take  away  all  hope,  1
know  that  the  remedy  of  my  life  is  in  my
conqueror's  hands,  lor  my  prison  is  not  such
that  it  can  by  force  of  arms  be  broken.  Do
not  remember  what  my  deeds  have  been,
nor  what  they  may  deserve  from  you  ;  but
remember  the  love  which  makes  me  speak
thus  ;  judge  me  by  that,  and  favour  me  ac-
cording to  that,  for  it  would  not  be  right
that  one  upon  whom  nature  hath  bestowed
so  many  bounties,  should  have  ingratitude
to  set  against  them,  a  spot  which  sullieth
and  destroyeih  all  virtues.

Sir  knight,  replied  the  damsel,  I  know  that
nothing  among  mortals  is  perfect,  and  this
1  perceive  by  you,  who  being  so  excellent  in
arms,  that  thereby  you  are  worthy  of  every
thing,  would  now  by  other  vain  passions  dis-
honour your  own  wurih.  What  glory  can
remain  to  you  from  the  great  feat  which  you
have  just  alchieved,  if  you  would  f)reseutly
l2


112

destroy  the  merit  of  such  an  exploit  by  of-
fering violence  to  a  weak  damsel,  destroy-
ing her  honour,  and  robbing  herof  her  tame,
which  in  a  short  moment  you  can  destroy,
and  never  afterwards  can  restore  ?  I  warn
you  who  defend  damsels  from  others,  to  de-
fend them  from  yourself,  that  your  actions
may  be  of  more  praise  before  men,  aad  of
more  merit  before  God.  Lady,  answered
he  of  the  Savage,  if  you  saw  yourself,  you
would  see  my  excuse  !  it  is  because  you  do
not  see  yourself  that  you  conceive  me  to
blame,  for  those  eyes  of  yours  can  be  placed
nowhere  without  robbing  life  and  soul.  You
are  passing  fair,  and  besides  that,  I  behold
other  graces  in  you,  with  the  which  you
have  robbed  me  of  my  liberty,  and  would
you  not  have  me  complain  ?  You  call  it
force  that  I  beseech  you  to  take  compassion
on  me,  and  you  do  not  perceive  the  force
you  do  me,  in  holding  my  will  captive,  so  that
I  can  only  use  it  as  your's  pleases.  If  these
reasons  do  not  avail  me,  and  have  no  effect
upon  you  to  remedy  my  misfortune,  use
your  condition  ;  kill  me,  and  I  shall  think
that  a  favour,  now  that  all  others  fail  me;


113

I  pray  you  knight,  quoth  the  damsel,  let
me  believe  that  1  have  escape<l  one  danger,
without  lulling  into  another;  tor  while  I
think  of  that  J  cannot  be  at  rest.  Your
speeches  I  know  are  lavished,  because  you
can  lose  nothing  by  them  ;  and  weak  were
the  virtue  which  could  be  so  overcome.  Do
not  persist  in  this,  you  weary  yourself  and  you
distress  me,  and  you  will  after  ail  tind  your-
self every  lime  less  pleased  with  my  answer
than  you  expect.  W  ell  tlien,  lady,  said  lie,
since  my  ill  fortune  makes  you  more  ob-
duiate  than. others,  let  us  lose  no  more  time,
but  mount  again  and  be  gone,  for  my  heart
cannot  endure  to  remain  where  it  is  so  dis-
dained. If  you  were  ugiy  1  might  have
borue  it  better,  for  Í  should  have  told  you
a  thousand  lies  and  have  cared  nothing  v-hcn
you  rejected  them  ;  but  that  you  should  be  an
angel  in  your  appearance,  and  in  your  ac-
tions the  contraiy,  think  what  a  life  I  shall
have  while  I  remember  ihi»  !

The  damsel  got  upon  her  palfrey,  tired   oï

this;  lor  as  she  was  virtuous,  and  virtuels  in

itself  linn,  she  held   his   words'-at    nought.

1.  a


114

And  though  she  had  thought  his  appearance
was  such  that  there  should  be  truth  in  his
words,  yet  she  did  not  think  she  owed  him
any  thing  for  that,  for  if  the  love  with  -which
he  spake  had  merited  a  different  requital,
the  dishonourable  end  at  which  it  aimed,
took  away  all  its  merit.  So  they  took  the
road  towards  the  place  where  he  had  "left
Arlanza;  he  of  the  Savage  went  courting
her  by  all  imaginable  ways  which  desire
could  teach  him  ;  sometimes  with  words  of
transport,  like  a  man  so  passionately  ena-
moured that  he  knew  not  whnt  he  said;
sometimes  praising  her,  believing  that  the
vanity  of  women  is  more  easily  caught  thus
than  in  any  other  way  ;  sometimes  adjusting
himself  in  his  seat,  and  curbing  his  horse  to
make  him  curvet  and  display  himself  in  that
manner,  thinking  that  even  these  things  with
Momen,  serve  as  a  postern  door  whicli  may
sometimes  be  made  use  of.  Finally,  he  en-
deavoured to  set  off  his  armour  and  apparel,
putting  on  a  chearful  countenance,  with
looks  as  amorous  as  he  could  dispose  them  ;
byt  all  availed  nothing  ;  for  her  discretion
was  so  consorted  with  virtue,  that  she  des-


115

pised  all  this  ;  this  made  him  desperate,  for
never  had  he  been  so  captivated  by  desire
before,  and  he  thought  her  a  woman  made
of  stone  ;  for  not  only  were  her  words  to  the
same  elfect,  but  her  actions  also  were  con-
formable to  them.  M  hen  they  drew  near
to  Arlanza,  seeing  that  time  cm  short  his  far-
ther talk,  he  said  to  her,  Since,  lady,  my
ill  fortune  is  such,  that  you  will  refuse  me
what  I  so  greatly  desire,  tell  me  what  you
would  have  done  with  yourself.  I  neither
desire  to  know  your  name,  nor  where  you
come  from,  nor  whither  you  go  ;  that  1  may
not  know  who  hath  w'on  so  great  a  victory
over  me.  I  will  place  you  in  safet}',  and
then  God  send  you  happiness  ;  I  expect  none
for  myself  so  long  as  this  remembrance  lasts.
Sir,  she  replied,  I  shall  remember  while  I
live  what  I  owe  you,  and  be  ready  at  all
times  to  requite  it,  and  serve  you,  in  all
things  other  than  what  you  ask.  For  this
cause  I  would  fain  know  your  name,  though
you  will  not  ask  mine;  place  me  then  in
yonder  town,  where  I  think  I  shall  be  safe.

By    this    time  thoy  reached  Arlanza,    who


met  them  with  çreat  joy.  The  knight  made
her  mount,  and  they  advanced  on  their
way,  without  telHng  ihe  damsel  his  name;
for  being  discontented  with  her,  he  was  de-
termined to  refuse  her  what  she  wished.
Having  reached  the  town,  the  damsel  re-
mained there  in  the  house  of  an  aunt  of
hers  ;  and  he  and  Arlauza  proceeded  on  ;
that  night  they  past  in  the  fields,  where  he
of  the  Savage  could  not  sleep*.


This  chapter  is  omitted  by  Anthony  Mur^day.


117


en  AFTER   149.


Before  it  was  fairlv  dav-liííht  the  knight  of
the  Savage  made  Arlanza  and  her  compa-
nions mount,  for  the  displeasure  whicli  lie
resented  lor  what  had  pa;t  with  the  damsel
had  not  let  him  sleep  a  wink.  As  lliey  jour-
neyed on,  he  talked  less  than  he  was  wont
to  do,  for  vexation  to  think  how  he  had
hcen  baffled  and  with  what  contempt  he  had
been  treated,  made  him  so  saturnine  that  he
did  not  appear  like  tiie  same  man  ;  and  as
by  nature  he  uas  gay  and  debonairc,  it  was
plain  that  something  which  he  resented  great-
Iv  luid  new  prevailed  above  his  natural  oon-
dilion.  Thus  he  went  on,  till  when  it  was
the  hour  of  vespers,  he  came  into  a  forest
near  the  city,  where  he  espied  a  number  of
knights,  ladies,  and  damsels  hawtiing,  which


118

made  him  judge  the  emperor  to  be  in  their,
company,  as  lie  was  indeed  :  for  that  day,  to
give  some  amusement  to  liis  oid  age,  he  had
chosen  to  divert  it  with  things  for  which  it
was  no  longer  fit;  and  full  of  sorrowful
thought  for  what  time  had  taken  from  him,
would  go  into  the  fields  and  see  the  sports  hi
which  he  could  no  longer  bear  a  part.  He
therefore,  with  the  empress  and  the  princesses
who  were  then  of  his  house,  went  in  litters  ;
and  greal  was  the  joy  of  the  lords  and  knights
of  his  court,  for  as  some  of  them  wished  to
appear  well  in  the  eyes  of  their  own  ladies,
and  some  in  those  of  others;  all  and  each  of
them  did  his  best  endeavour  accordingly.
When  thev  saw  the  knijihi  cominar  with
five  damsels  in  his  company,  they  presently
knew  him,  as  well  by  the  device  upon  his
shield,  as  by  the  greatness  of  Arlnnza,  for
it  was  known  that  she  was  wiih  liini  ;  and
whereas  some  among  them  had  been  making
ready  to  joust  and  win  the  daujsels,  huving
lost  that  confidence,  they  all  went  in  a  troop
to  welcome  and  embrace  him.  He  of  the
Savage,  when  he  beheld  this  noble  chivalry,
and  so  many  friends,  and  among  them  his


Í19

brother  Palmeriíi  of  England,  laying  aside
all  the  sullen  thoughts  which  had  betbre  ac-
companied him,  alighted,  and  leading  Ar-
lanza's  bridle,  went  up  to  the  emperor's  lit-
ter. There  he  kissed  his  hand,  anil  besought
him  to  show  honour  and  bounty  to  Arlanza,
as  to  the  person  to  whom  he  was  beholden
lor  the  preservation  of  liis  life.  Arlanza
dismounted  from  her  pallVey,  and  being  ac-
companietl  by  her  damsels,  went  up  to  the
ladies,  and  lier  stature  was  such  that  her
head  was  on  a  level  with  theirs.  The  em-
peror embraced  her  with  right  courteous
and  loving  welcome,  and  with  words  which
greatly  contented  her,  and  which  were  after-
wards fulfilled  by  deeds,  to  the  increase  of
her  state  and  honour.  The  empress  and
G'lidonia  gave  her  the  like  welcome,  think-
ing that  thus  they  should  please  the  knight
of  the  Savage  Man.  Tlie  princess  Polinarda
intreated  her  with  even  more  courtesy  than
all,  prolTerin:»-  her  fiiendshii),  not  w iih  feign-
ed words  but  such  as  were  full  true,  and  had
their  cause  in  the  desire  she  liad  to  gratify
him  of  the  Savage.  Lionarda  had  less  to
say,  as  being  a  stranger  in  that  house,  not


120


for  want  of  good  will,  knowing  that  by  her

means

livinff.


means  the  knight  of  the   Savage   was  still


To  the  knight  himself  all  welcoming  of  love
and  honour  was  given,  which  his  great  prow-
ess could  deserve,  and  their  great  affection
devise  ;  but  as  amid  this  welcoming  they
told  him  of  the  death  of  king  Fadrique  his
lord  and  grandfather,  this  sorrow  drove
away  from  him  all  thoughts  of  joy  ;  the  re-
membrance how  he  had  been  bred  up  by
him,  doubling  that  sorrow  which  for  near-
ness of  blood  and  true  love  lie  reasonably
felt.  Incontinently,  taking  leave  of  the  em-
peror, he  retired  into  the  city,  where  he
was  for  some  days  visited  by  his  friends,
till  time  had  abated  his  grief,  and  allowed
him  to  return  to  the  conversation  of  those
whom  he  loved.  One  thinsr  he  found  in
which  this  aftliclion  proved  his  friend,  which
was,  that  the  lady  Lionarda  sent  to  visit  him
with  words  which  manifested  that  she  par-
took of  his  sorrow.

The  emperor  made  Arlanzu  and  her  damsels


121

remount  ;  all  eyes  were  upon  her  by  reason
oFhcr  appearance,  for  though  she  was  not
fair,  yet  had  she  a  cheerful  countenance,  and
one  so  brightened  up  by  natural  goodness,
that  it  easily  drew  unto  itself  any  freewill  ov
heart  which  was  not  before  captivated.  He
w  ho  most  felt  this  was  Dramuziando,  who
had  arrived  at  court  three  days  before  her.
lie,  for  natirre  will  ahvay  seek  its  like,
no  sooner  beheld  Arlauza,  than  he  became
.^o  devoted  to  her,  that  from  that  hour  till
the  last  of  his  life,  no  wandering  thought  of
love  ever  strayed  from  her  ;  and  this  sudden
passion  was  so  manifest  in  his  deportment,
that  all  those  knights  and  queens  and
princesses  perceived  the  change.

As  the  emperor  was  about  to  return  into
the  city,  he  espied  come  riding  along  the
forest  a  company  of  ladies  and  damsels,
escorted  by  certain  armed  knights.  Before
it  could  be  known  v.ho  they  were,  some  of
the  emperor's  knights,  being  ambitious  of  ap-
pearing well  before  those  whom  they  served,
prepared  themselves  for  thejoust,^  The  chief
among  the  others,  albeit  that  his  intention
VOL  XV.  .".r


had  been  to  come  in  peace,  yet  being  de-
sirous to  try  his  valour  before  such  an  as-
sembly, took  a  strong  lance,  and  clapping
down  the  beaver  of  his  helmet,  went,  before
he  made  his  encounter,  and  presented  him-
self to  the  lady  who  was  the  mistress  of  iill
that  company.  And  having  taken  his  leave
of  her,  he  gave  his  horse  the  spurs,  and  was
so  fortunate  in  the  encounter,  as  he  sent
Belisarte  out  of  his  saddle,  a  knight  of  great
estimation  in  that  court,  he  himself  not
being  any  way  shaken  in  his  seat.

Then  taking  a  lance  from  one  of  the  three
armed  knights  in  his  company,  he  overthrew
Austriano  ;  and  employing  with  like  manner
the  other  two  lances  of  his  companions,  in
four  encounters  he  overthrew  four  knights;

and  thoughneitherofthem  were  of  the  famous
ones  of  that  court,  yet  was  it  judged  that  he
was  one  greatly  to  be  feared  for  his  prowess.
The  emperor  well  pleased  to  see  how  bravely
he  had  broken  these  spears,  sent  for  others
for  him,  but  before  they  could  be  received
a  damsel  came  and  saluted  the  emperor  from
the  knight,  in  this  manner.    Sir,  Dragonalte


123

king  of  Navarre,  who  hath  jousted  witli
voiir  knights,  saith,  that  inasmuch  as  he
knew  not  that  your  highness  and  the  empress
were  in  this  company,  he  hath  unawares
fallen  into  this  iault  and  disrespect,  as  also
being  des'rous  to  content  Arnalta  his  queen
and  wife  ;  he  will  now  joust  no  more,  that
he  may  not  lose  what  he  hath  gained,  and
he  beseechuth  your  majesty  to  receive  this
his  excuse,  that  he  may  the  more  freely
kiss  your  hand,  since  he  hath  come  from  far
with  this  intent.

Great  was  tlie  contentment  which  tlie  em-
peror   and   empress   received,    hearing  the
damsel's  words  ;  for  Dragonalte  deserved  to
be  received  with  as  much   honour   and  love
as  could   be  devised,    being  the  son  of  such
a  lather,  and  grandson  to  king   Frisol  :  and
being  now  a  king  and  married  to  Arnalta,  it
was  necessary  to  welcome  them   with  feasts
and  rejoicings,  for  Arnalta  had    not  lost   a
jot  of  her  vanity;  so  without  any   further
stay,  they  went   to  welcome  them.     A\'hich
when   JJragonalie  beheld,   he  alighted,   tak-
ing his  queen    by  the  hand,    ih   token    of
M  2


124

lEîreater  reverence  to  the  emperor  unci  em-
iMCss.  The  ciniM'ess/equiicd  this  courtesy  ;
ior  forgetfui  oï  lier  dignity  and  her  age,  she
got  of}"  her  paifVey,  and  with  her,  Gridonia,
PoHnardn,  Lioiiarda,  and  all  her  ladies,  and
thus  they  all  welcomed  her  with  great  plea-
sure, telling  her  how  the  emperor's  court
was  highly  honoured  by  her  presence.  The
emperor  spake  to  them  from  his  litter,
Ly  reason  of"  his  ill  heath,  but  all  the  time
that  Arnalta  remained  on  foot,  he  held  his
barret-cap  in  his  hand,  nor  could  her  en-
treaties, nor  all  the  remonstrances  of  Dra-
gonalte,  prevail  upon  him  to  be  covered.
These  embracings  and  compliments  being
over,  they  remounted,  and  that  no  ceremony
might  be  wanting,  at  the  entrance  of  the
city,  Palmerin  alighted,  and  taking  the  bridle
of  Arnalta's  horse,  led  it  till  he  came  to  the
palace,  whereat  the  princess  Polinarda  shew-
ed herself  somewhat  discontented;  for  love,
whatever  pledges  it  may  have  received,
never  lives  in  such  security,  nor  so  fiee  from
suspicion,  but  that  any  apprehension  gives  it
pain.  Arnalta  seeing  the  respect  with  which
they  treated  her,  was  so  elated  that  even  they


125

who  knew  little  of  her,  perceived  her  pride  ;
but  with  all  this  outward  show  of  joy,  she
found  something  to  alloy  her  pleasure  ;  for
seeing  Polinarda  and  the  queen  of  Thrace
beside  her,  their  beauty  secretly  humbled
her,  and  she  then  began  to  think  how  un-
just a  qucurcl  they  had  enterprized  for  her
sake,  who  had  maintained  in  Spain  that  she
■was  the  fairest  woman  in  the  world  and  the
most  worthy  to  be  served.  Nevertheless,
though  these  two  had  the  advantage  over
her,  she  herself  was  the  third  for  beauty  in
the  emperor's  court,  and  when  Miraguarda
came  thither,  she  remained  then  the  fourth.
They  were  lodged  in  the  palace  near  to  the
empress's  apartments.  Arlanza  and  her  dam-
sels were  assigned  as  guests  to  thedutchess
of  Tiibaya,  the  chief  lady  about  the  em-
press.

The  emperor  caused  feasts  and  tournaments
and  dances  in  the  palace,  in  honour  of  .Ar-
naka's  coming,  at  all  which  Dramuziando
^\as  present,  being  now  so  wholly  devoted  to
his  new  love,  as  he  could  rest  in  no  place,
neither  enjoy  any  quietness,  l^ilmerin,  who
M  3


126

jvved  now  ia  more  content  then    he   had  of
long  time  belbro,  did  not  yet  think  all  things
sound    and  sure,    for  that  love   presenteth
daily  some  occasions  of  fear  to  amorous  per-
sons, until  such  time  as  their  desires  are  per-
fectly contented.     He,  that  he  might  devise
means  of  seeing  his  lady,  and  enjoying  that
contentment,  took  his  place  at  all  these  balls
next   the  queen  of  Thrace,  who   expected
him  alway  as  being  the  friend  of  his  loves.
While  this  great  joy  continued,  Pompides
king  of  Scots,  with  his  queen,  arrived  at  the
emperor's  court  :  they  came  by  sea,  and  there
was  less  preparation  of  sumptuous  reception,
for  he  being  one  of  the  house,  was  welcomed
with  more  love  and  less  ceremony  than  Ar-
nalta.     Primaleon,  to   pay  to  Don  Duardos
something  of  the  debt  oï  their  old  friendship,
would  lead  the  queen  of  Scots,  his  daughter-
in-law's  palfrey  by  tlie  bridle,  till  she  came  to
the  palace  gate,  notwithstanding  the  entreaty
of  Pompides  and  herself  to   the  contrary.
She  was  lodged  with  the  princess  Polinarda,
who  held  herself  greatly  contented,  because
she  was  so  near  in   alliance   to  her  most  fa-
voured friend.     This  reception  was  the  first


127

occasion  on  which  the  knight  of  the  Savage
Man  vent  abroad  after  the  death  of  Jdng
Fadrique  his  grandfather.  Thus  the  court
of  Constantinople  continued  to  fill  with
Jvings,  queens,  and  princes^  at  which  the  em-
peror was  full  well  contented,  for  he  delight-
ed in  such  things,  not  regarding  the  cost  of
his  treasury,  a  thing  which  kings  ought  ne-
ver to  regard  when  it  is  expended  on  such
occasion:?.


128


CHAPTER  150.


Now  the  emperor  being  full  of  days,  as  ye
have  heard,  and  expecting  his  latter  end
to  be  close  at  iiand,  lie  wished  to  have  the
comfort  of  leaving  his  grandsons  married,
and  also  the  princes  and  chief  ladies  who  had
been  brought  up  in  his  court,  and  to  be
present  at  tlie  festivals  upon  this  occasion,
believing  this  would  lie  the  consumma-
tion of  all  tlie  things  that  were  to  happen
in  his  lime.  The  better  to  put  this  in  ex-
ecution, he  consulted  with  the  empress  and
Primaleon,    bv  v.'hoîe  advice*    he    writ   to


*  Tlic   author    bad  forgotten  that    all  the    princes  had
ahealy  been  sent  for  and  were  alrcsdv  arrived.     C.  133.


129

Arncdos  king  of  France,  his  son-in-law,  be-
seeching him  to  come  with  the  queen  his
wife  to  his  court  ;  for  as  his  extreme  age  now
every  clay  threatened  him,  he  wished  to  take
his  leave  of  them.  In  hke  manner  he  dispatch-
ed letters  to  Don  Duardos,  king  of  England,
and  Flerida  his  daughter;  and  to  Recindos
king  of  Spain,  desiring  him  and  his  queen
to  bring  Miraguarda  in  their  company.  The
emperor  Vcrnao,  his  son-in-law^  was  sent  for
likewise,  and  Tarnaes  king  of  Lacedemonia,
with  his  daughter  Sidela,  who  in  beauty
and  appearance  was  nothing  inferior  to
many  of  those  times  ;  and  the  same  com-
pliment he  paid  to  the  soldan  Belagriz,  and
to  Mayortes  the  Great  Khan.  And  as  the
emperor  was  generally  honoured  by  them
all  as  their  lord,  and  loved  as  their  father,
as  soon  as  they  received  his  letters  there
was  not  one  who  did  not  make  himself
ready  with  the  greatest  haste  in  the  world;
the  first  that  came  to  Constantinople,  were
the  emperor  Vernao,  and  Don  Duurdos,  who
were  received  with  great  love  and  little
pageantry  ;  for  as  Don  Diiardos  and  Flerida
.still  were    mourning  for  the  ^death  of  the


130

king  their  father,  ihey  would  suffer  no
public  rejoicings,  nor  was  any  made  at  Ba-
feilia  ;>  reception,  because  ibey  came  together.
Flerida  and  lier  husband  were  lodged  in  her
own  apartment,  which  still  was  called  after
her  name,  another  adjoining  unto  it  being
given  to  the  princess  Poiinarda  and  her
guests.  To  tell  the  joy  which  the  arrival'^-
of  these  princesses  occasioned  in  that  house
may  well  be  excused  ;  they  may  conceive  it
who  have  children  whom  they  greatly  love,
and  whom  at  the  close  of  their  lives,  they
see  in  the  great  enjoyment  of  great  estates
and  honours  :  soon  after  came  the  soldan
Belagriz  and  Mayortes,  their  entertainment
being  as  their  noble  estates  deserved.  Then
came  kingTarnaes  with  his  queen,  Sidelahis
daughter,  and  the  infarita  Paudricia,  whom,
being  one  little  iiiclincd  to  the  mirtbfulness
and  joy  of  the  others,  the  empress,  at  the
emperor's  desire,  took  for  her  own  guest,
in  this  manner  they  came  one  after  another,
so  that  the  court  and  the  city  were  so
ennobled,  and  so  full,  that  they  had.  never
been  so  before.  It  was  not  long  ere  the
two  kings  Arnedos   and  Recindos  arrived.


131

By  reason  of  their  nearness  of  kin,  and  the
great  friendship  which  had  ever  subsisted  be-
tween them,  Kecindos  had  travelled  by  land
to  France,  and  there  embarked  in  the  fleet
•which  Arnedoshad  prepared  for  both,  which
was  a  right  noble  one,  and  equipped  as  became
their  royal  person.  They  reached  the  port  on
a  bright  and  sun-shiiiing  day,  which  made  the
licet  appear  more  glorious-,  and  they  astonish-
ed the  people  with  the  sound  of  artillery  and
drums  and  trumpets  wiiicli  shook  the  very
earth.  The  chief  ships  of  the  fleet  were
covered  with  rich  canopies  of  silk  and  cloth
of  gold,  and  the  others  with  embroidered
awnings,  set  off  with  such  gallant  adorn-
ments that  they  seemed  to  vie  with  the  bro-
cade and  purple  of  the  others.  Arnedos
came  in  one  ship  with  his  queen  and  Flo-
renda  and  Gratiamar  his  daughters,  with
kni'j-hts  for  their  «luard.  In  another  was
king  Uccindos  and  the  queen,  with  their
guard,  and  in  agallion  which  went  iuremost
of  the  Heet,  in  greater  bravery  than  all  tiie
rest,  came  the  fair  iMiraguarda,  with  the
giant  Almourol,  i'lorendos,  and  many  other
ivuigh'is  ;  for   king    Ueclndds  holding  it  for


132

certain  that  the  emperor  Intendccl  to  marry
her  to  Florendos,  his  graiulson,  and  heir   t(;
his  empire,  with  king  Arnedos's  consent,  to
do  them  the  honour,  caused  their  gallion  to
sail  foremost,  as  the  captain  over  all  the  other
vessels;  wiih  banner  upon  the  main  top  and
li^lit  in  the  [loop,  and  tlius  they  followed  her
into  the  port  of  Constantinople.  Those  errant
knigiits   who  were  not  ri'cli  enow   to  dress
tlie  ships  in  which  they  were  embarked  with
costly  canopies,  sent  boats  on  shore  for  green
boughs    wherewith  they   bowered  thera,  so
that  ia  the  whole  fleet  there  was  nothing  but
what  wore  the  appearance  of  gaiety  and  joy.
The  emperor  was  so  rejoiced  at  their  coming,
that  it  seemed  as  if  vouth  were  as^ain  revivinît
in  him  ;  and  reiusing  to  go  in  his  litter,  he
\K)uld    be   carried   in  a  chair   to   tlie   place
where  they  landed.     The  empress  also  went
there,  with    all  the   queens,  princesses,  ,and
ladies  of  her  house  ;  Faudricia  alone  would
not  be  present   at  the  general  joy.     They
rode  on  palfreys  caparisoned  with  marvellous
costliness,  yet  those  which  were  led   for  the
newly  arrived  personages  to  mount,  surpass-
ed them  in  bravery  of  equipment.     The  em-


133

peror  sate  in  his  chair  at  the  water's  edge,
and  by  him  stood  Primaleon,  Don  Duardos,
the  emperor  Vernao,  the  soldan  Belagriz,
Mayortes  the  Great  Khan,  Tarnaes  king  of
Lucedemonia,  Polendos,  Estrelante,  Pom-
pides,  and  Dragonalte,  all  kings,  with  a  full
noble  chivalry  besides  of  princes,  infantes,
and  famous  knights,  who  by  that  mode  of
reverence  and  courtesy,  gave  more  show  of
authority  to  his  royal  person  ;  and  no  little
joy  it  was  to  him  in  his  aged  years,  to  see
himself  so  beloved  of  the  most  puissant
princes  that  were  in  the  whole  world  ;  ysa,
he  deemed  the  honour  of  this  day  to  be  the
most  triumphant  that  he  had  ever  enjoyed,
seeing  that  they  displayed  towards  him  the
same  ceremonious  respect  as  though  he  had
been  their  natural  liege  lord  ;  but  this  joy
was  disturbed  by  the  reflection,  how  short
a  time  he  could  enjoy  such  honour,  by
reason  of  old  age.

Arnedos,  Recindos,  and  Florendos,  being
landed,  would  have  kissed  the  emperor's
hand,  but  he  embracing  them  in  his  arms,
Would  not  surt'cr  them,  giviTig  it  to  none  but
VOL.  IV.  N


134

Florendoi  ;  the  same  he  did  to  the  queens  of
Spain  and  oi"  Fiance,  his  daughters,  after
whom  he  received  Miraguarda  and  all  liis
grand-daughters  with  equal  welcome,  say-
ing to  Miraguarda,  llight  glad  am  Í,  lady,
that  you  are  now  in  a  land,  where  I  may  re-
quite the  great  courtesy  I  have  found  at  your
hands,  in  providing  to  detain  Alhayzar  in  so
good  security  for  my  knights.  Miraguardii
made  no  other  answer,  hut  with  a  mild  and
princely  courtesy,  made  show  iiow  well  she
understood  the  honour  vouclisafed  her  hy
these  words.  Great  labour  would  it  be  to
attempt  to  recountminutcly  the  compliments,
ceremonies,  and  courtesies,  which  past  at  this
reception  :  1  will  not  make  the  attempt,  both
to  excuse  myself  from  this  labour,  and  for
fear  also  lest  my  words  should  debase  that
to  which  no  words  could  do  justice.  It  must
jiot,  however,  be  forgotten  to  say  how  the
presence  of  Miraguarda  among  so  many  and
so  beautiful,  astonished  all  wiih  her  beauty.
Almourol  came  by  her,  and  by  his  ugliness
served  to  set  off  her  charms.  After  Poli-
Jiarda  had  welcomed  and  embraced  her,
she    turned   to  her   brother  Florendos  and


135

said,  Now^  Sir,  I  deem  indeed  that  all  the
torment  which  your  affection  hath  given
you  was  worthily  caused.  Would,  lady,  he
repHed,  that  .[  had  the  due  recompence  it
hath  deserved,  so  might  I  be  in  the  better
assurance.  We  are  now  in  a  place,  she  an-
swered, where  we  understand  each  other,
nor  is  this  the  castle  of  Almourol,  though  the
lord  himself  is  here,  that  the  gates  should
be  shut  against  you.  Thus  she  sported,  of-
fering to  him  at  the  same  time  her  help  and
that  of  her  friend  the  queen  of  Thrace,  ta
assist  him  in  his  loves.

These  ceremonies  being  over,  which  endured
long  time,  thf  emperor  would  return  to  the
palace,  Priirialcon  leading  the  queen  of
Spain's  JKjrsc  by  the  bridle,  albeit  king  Re-
cjndos  was  lodi  to  suffer  him.  Polcndos
did  the  same  honour  to  the  queen  of  France,
his  sister,  and  Don  Duardos  to  Miraguarda,
a^  well  to  content  the  aged  cm])eror,  as  to
honour  his  kinsman  Florendos  :  Palmerin
of  I'lngianfl  did  the  like  to  the  infanta  Flo-
rcnda,  and  Florian  of  the  Desert  to  Gra-
tiamar  ;  in  brief,  the  princes  and  knight»
N  ii!


136

all  went   on  foot,    save  only    the  emperor,
who   was  carried   in  his  chair  upon  men's
shoulders,  communing  with  Miraguarda  all
the  way,  and  being  well  pleased  to  see  how
well  Florendos  had  bestowed  his  time.     In
this  manner,  each  accompanying  his  lady,  or
her  whom  he  most  desired  to  honour,  they
reached  the  palace,    where  all  these  ladies
were  lodged,  as  had  for  some  time  been  ap-
pointed.    The  giant  Dramuziando  had  Al-
mourol  for  his   guest,  by  which  means  he
was  held  in  the  more  account  ;  for  as  Dra-
muziando was  so  greatly  honoured  in  that
house   and    court,  when  they  beheld  what
honour  he  paid  to  Almourol,  all  demeaned
themselves  towards  him  accordingly.    That
night  there  was    no  ball,    that  they  might
rest  from  the  fatigue  of  the  sea  and  of  the
road;  but   the  city    blazed    all  night    with
bonfires,  and  rung  with  the    rejoicings    of
the  people,  which  seemed  continually  to  in-
crease; for  they  who  do  things  with  good
will  are  never  weary  of  doing  them.


137


CHAPTER  151,


A'Vluni  lho  princes  that  were  thus  arrived  at
Constantinople  had  rested  themselves  for
certain  days,  the  emperor,  desirous  to  con-
tent every  one  before  he  died,  wh.o  had  be-
stowed I  heir  service  in  honouring  him,  re-
vealed his  intent  to  Arncdos,  Recindos,  Pri-
)nalcoM,the  soldan  Belagriz,  and  others  with
wlioin  it  was  meet  to  communicate  upon
such  an  occasion,  telling  them  what  a  satis-
faction  and  comfort  it  would  be  to  his  old
age  to  see  his  grandsons  married,  and  the
other  princes  that  iiad  been  nourished  in  his
court.  And  then  he  said  what  he  thought
concerning  each,  and  how  it  was  right  and
reasonalile  that  each  should  be  matched  ac-
cording as  his  all'ection  pcrvc>(!  him,  h;'.viiig
N   3


138

regard  to  that  rather  than  to  any  inequality
of  persons,  if  such  there  was,  provided  al-
ways that  the  advantage  was  on  the  damsel's
side,  as  otherwise  it  would  be  to  do  her
w  rong.  So  it  being  determined  among  them
what  should  be  done,  the  emperor  gave
order  that  on  the  Sunday  following,  a  sump-
tuous banquet  should  be  provided  in  tire
Garden  of  Flerida,  that  being  the  place
which  was  regarded  with  most  affection  of
any  in  the  palace,  and  where  all  great  acts
and  ceremonies  were  wont  to  be  performed.

The  magnificence  of  the  tables  which  were
spread  that  day  was  worthy  to  be  seen,  espe-
cially the  princesses'  table,  for  there  the
flower  of  the  world  was  assembled,  and
whoso  placed  his  eyes  upon  them,  might
well  have  dispensed  with  all  other  delicacies.
None  could  distinguish  which  had  the  ad-
vantage in  beauty,  save  such  its  were  ena-
moured, for  Palmerin  would  not  confess  that
any  one  equalled  his  lady  ;  Florendos  held
the  same  opinion  of  Miraguarda  ;  the  knight
of  the  Savage  would  have  waged  battle  with
all  of  them  to  maintain  this  for  the  queen  oi


139

Thrace  ;  and  Platir  was  not  behind  him  in
conceit  towards  his  lady  Sidela,  daughter  to
king  Tarnaes;  each  supposing  that  he  had
reason  on  his  side.  Among  the  elder
beauties,  Gridonia,  Flerida,  Francelina^  and
Basilia,  Flerida  bare  the  prize.  After  the
tables  were  withdrawn^  all  being  seated  in
due  order,  and  in  silence,  the  emperor  would
have  addressed  them  in  a  speech,  but  as  his
voice  was  now  weak,  and  it  was  necessary
to  speak  loud  that  so  large  a  circle  might
hear,  he  desired  Don  Duardos  to  say  in  his
name  what  he  meant  to  express.  Don  Du-
ardos  rose,  and  taking  off  his  barret-cap,
v.'ould  have  kissed  his  hand  for  this  honour.
Then  turning  towards  the  assembly,  he  placed
his  back  against  the  trunk  of  a  cypres>,  tliat
he  might  tUe  more  conveniently  be  heard,
and  began  thus  :

High  and  migbiy  empress,  whom  most  of  us
v.ho  are  here  present  love  and  truly  regard
as  our  natural  lady,  some  by  ihe  breeding
wliicb  they  liave  here  received,  others  by
relatitmsliip,  owing  unto  you  the  ()l)ctilenie
of  that  name,  our  lord  the  emperor,  «ecing


140

all  these  princes  and  lords  collected  in  lira
house,  and  consulting  whereby  the  renown
of  Christendom  may  most  worthily  be  main-
tained, and  all  things  continued  in  their
flourishing  estate,  hath  with  the  advice  and
counsel  of  all,  come  to  that  determination
which  I  am  now  to  declare.  For  as  it  re-
mains to  know  whether  your  highness  and
these  lady  queens  and  princesses  whom  it
concern?,  are  contented  therewith,  it  hath
pleased  him  that  I  should  in  the  presence  of
all  declare  that,  which  would  occasion  long
dela}'  if  related  to  each  in  particular,  it  is
so  that  his  majesty  hath  decreed,  that  these
young  knights  shall  join  in  marriage,  in  re-
compence  of  all  their  noble  travails,  with
those  to  whom  they  are  aftectionate.  And
for  them  who  have  not  to  his  knowledge
made  choice  for  themselves,  he  will  look  out
according  to  their  deserts^  so  that  no  offence
shall  grow  on  any  side,  but  every  one  shall
be  contented  to  their  own  desires.  Here  he
paused  a  while,  either  to  take  breath,  or  to
T!)ink  with  what  words  he  should  continue
his  r,pecch  :  there  was  not  one  in  all  that
assembl}'  whc.;?e  heart  was  so  free  from  fcar_,


141

or  countenance  so  calm,  but  that  something
of  the  movements  of  affection  might  be  dis-
covered. For  inasmuch  as  it  is  the  nature
of  love  to  be  full  of  suspicions  and  fears,
every  one  thought  that  th«e  marriages
would  not  be  so  justly  and  equally  deter-
mined, but  that  peradventure  he  should  fail
in  receiving  his  right  and  desired  guerdon.
it  was  in  the  ladies  that  this  was  most  ma-
nifest, any  change  being  more  easily  dis-
cerned in  their  more  delicate  complexions.
Polinarda,  with  her  eyes  on  Palmerin,  was
sad,  and  full  of  fear  and  shame,  for  she  knew
not  but  that  her  grandfather  might  offer  her
to  another,  and  so  it  would  be  necessary  for
her  to  avow  what  she  had  done.  As  for
Palmerin,  though  he  had  passed  through  so
many  dangers,  certes  this  was  that  which  he
most  resented  ;  and  so  greatly  was  he  trou-
bled, that  if  he  had  not  leaned  against  a  tree
he  would  have  fallen  to  the  ground.  Pre-
sently Don  Duardos  continued  :  For  you,
brave  and  excellent  prince  Sir  Florendos,
his  majesty,  with  the  consent  of  king  Re-
cindos,  appointeth  the  lady  Miraguarda  for


142

wife,  believing,  that  free  as  her  heart  is,  she
will  not  be  discontented  with  this,  and  that
you  will  haveyour  heart's  desire  accomplish-
ed. Whosoever  had  beheld  them  both  when
this  was  said,  they  might  well  perceive  that
these  words  had  given  him  more  joy  than  if
the  richest  realm  in  the  world  were  in  his
own  possession  ;  but  in  Miraguarda  nothing
could  be  discovered,  her  countenance  re-
mained so  calm  that  none  could  tell  wlic^i
ther  she  felt  joy  or  displeasure.

And  for  thee,  my  son  Palmerin,  said  Doii
Duardos,  the  emperor  and  prince  PrLma^
]eon,  in  proof  of  the  love  they  bear  thee  in
this  house,  and  in  favour  to  me,  do  give  thee
tp  wife  the  lady  Polinarda,  not  doubting
but  thou  shalt  imagine  all  thy  passed  travails
to  be  fully  recompensed  in  so  sweet  a  re-
ward. Certes  Polinarda  heard  these  words
with  other  emotions  than  Miraguarda  had
done;  it  seemed  as  if  her  love  w  as  greater,
and  she  could  not  conceal  it  ;  and  Palmerin
likewise  now  abandoned  all  his  former  fear,
seeing  he  should  enjoy  the  felicity  he  had  so
Ions  desired.


143

You,  Sir  Graciano,  prince  of  France,  con-
tinued Don  Duardos,  the  emperor  believing
that  he  thus  confirms  \'our  own  wishes,  will
marry  with  the  lady  Clarisia,  his  grandchild,
daughter  to  liing  Polendos.  And  you,  brave
Sir  Bcroldo,  ]»rince  of  Spain,  with  Onistalda,
(huighicr  to  duke  Drapos  of  Normand}^,  and
grantlchild  to  the  renowned  king  Frisol,
whereat  your  father,  Í  am  sure,  will  be  well
■  contented,  thinking  that  you  are  so.  You,
prince  Francian,  shall  match  with  Bernarda,
flaughter  to  Belcar.  You-,  noble  Piutir,  with
the  princess  Sidela,  daughter  to  king  Tar-
naes  of  Lacfdemonia.  You,  Dca  liosuel,
the  true  inheritor  of  ])rinee  Belcar  your  fa-
ther, with  the  lady  Dramaeiana,  daughter  to
dukeTirendos.  .Belisarte,  your  brother,witu
tlie  lady  Dionisia,  daughter  to  the  king  of
Esperte.  You,  Dramianie,  with  the  lady
Clariuna,  daughter  to  Diireo,  prince  of
Hungary.  And  3'ou,  Frisol,  who  are  heir  to
the  duke  your  father,  with  Leonida,  daugh-
ter to  the  duke  of  Pcra.  And  that  thii
allotment  inay  be  duly  made,  his  majesiy
Jcavcs  the  rest  to  be  concJuded  upon  with
ihc  advice  and   to  the  satisfaction  of  xiU.


144

But  that  it  may  not  appear  that  you.  Sir
Dramuziando,  are    not  remembered    upon
such  an  occasionj  it  is  agreed  that  you  shall
marry  the  lady  Arlanza,  both  to  satisfy  your
afiections,  as  is  believed,  and  to  repay  her
for  her  bewraying  the  treason  of  Alfernao  ;
and  your  friend  the  knight  of  the  Savage
Man  hath  concluded  to  bestow  the  Profound
Isle  on  you,  which  sometime  belonged  to
her  father  Biavorante,  as  her  dowry.     Dra-
muziando did  not  wait  to  hear  these  words
finished,  but  threw  himself  at  the  feet  of  the
emperor  and  would  have  kissed  them,  for  the
love    of   Arlanza    greatly    tormented  him.
Don  Duardos  took  him  up,  desiring  him  to
have  patience  a  little  while  ;  and  turning  to
the  queen  of  Thrace  he  said,  To  you,  most
excellent   princess,   whom   nature    hath    so
plentifully  endowed  with  beauty  and  worldly
blessings,  the  emperor,  with  these  kings  and
noble  lords  in  his  company,  not  knowing
how  your  inclinations  lead  you,  do  earnestly
desire  to  give  in  marriage  my  son  Florian,  if
this   might  content  you    and   Palmerin,  to
whom  it  is  said  you  are  tied  in   sbme  point
of  obedience,  according  as  king  Sardamante


145

vour  grandfather  appointed  it  in  his  vill*
l*almerin,  who  all  this  while  had  kept  him-
self silent,  humbly  desired  the  king  his  lather
to  vouchsafe  him  a  word  or  twain  ;  which
being    granted   him,    he    came    before  the
queen   of  Thrace,   and  setting  one  of  his
k  nees   to  the  ground,  he  said,   I  durst  not,
■because  of  the  close  relationship  between  us,
present  you  ray  brother  Florian  the  first  time
you  saw  him,  fearing  lest  you  should  think,
that  I  was  inclined  more  to  regard  his  profit
than   your  honour;  and    willing    that    you
might  have  some  knowledge  of  his  knightly
deeds,  wherein  if  I  perceived  you  to  take
any  delight,  1  might  be   the  bolder  in  pre-
senting him  for  your  husband,  and  you  the
<'iisier  to  entertain  him.     Let  it  then,  I  pray
you,  seem  acceptable  in  your  judgment,  what
ihe  em|)eror  and  his  council  h;ith  flctermincd
on,   in    that  I   am    persuaded   the   heavenly
])owers  do  think  well  it  should    be  so.     Sir
i'almerin,  said    the  princess,    I  am  at  your
tiisposal,  nor  have  I    any  choice  or  likiriLT,
but  as  you  shall  please;   and  if   I   sliould  do
otherwise  1    were  unworthy   to  km-cívc  the
blessing  of  the  king  my  grandfather  ;  and  I
VOL.  1  V.  o


146

know  not  if  my  subjects  would  be  satisfied
with  any  ihin;^  conlrarv  to  your  will.  I  am
content  with  any  llinig  which  you  imagine
for  the  i'uliilling  of  your  promise  and  mine
honour.

Palmerin  arose  glad  of  this  answer,  and  Don
Duardos,  still  more  so,  continued  his  dis-
course :  Now,  Sirs,  that  ye  have  all  heard
what  has  been  proposed,  it  is  the  emperor's
will  you  should  reveal  to  him  how  you  ac-
cept of  iiis  opinion;  and  the  princesses  and
ladies  shall  bewray  their  intents  to  the  em-
press, because  his  excellency  would  not  en-
lerprize  any  thing,  but  he  will  liave  all  par-
ties well  contented  therewith.  But  as  these
marriages  seeujcd  all  to  be  ordained  by-
Heaven,  there  was  none  but  who  was  well
pleased,  and  wiihout  delay  it  was  known  that;
all  were  well  contented.  Then  each  in  turn
advanced  and  kis!^ed  ttie  hands  of  the  em-
])eror  and  empress,  doing  the  like  to  Gri-
donia  ;  and  the  like  thy  did  to  the  emperor
\  ernao,  Basilia,  and  the  other  kings  and
queens  tiiere  present;  and  the  emperor  cm-
braced  them  every  one,  but  when  Palmerin


147

came  to  him,  lie  held  him  in  his  arms  and
said.  Son  of  my  love,  I  have  continually  ima-
gined with  myself,  how  1  might  woiihily  re-
compence  your  deeds,  of  so  liigh  estimation  :
but  now  I  persuade  myself,  that  both  my
desire  and  yonrs  shall  be  sufficienily  content-
ed, in  giving  you  the  thing  which  1  love  best
in  this  world,  whicli  is  my  grandchild  the
princess  Polinarda.  May  it  please  God  that
the  same  comfort  which  1  have  hud  wiih  that
name  in  the  empress  your  grandmother,  may
attend  on  ye  also,  that  you  and  I  bearing  one
name,  may  be  alike  in  happiness  and  good
fortune.  I  never  thought,  said  Palmcrin,
that  my  deeds  should  purchase  such  a  high
and  happy  felicity,  as  this  v\hich  your  ni;>.-
jesty  hath  bestowed  on  me  ;  but  1  see  it  is
your  goodness  and  not  my  deserts.  Prima-
leon  and  Gridonia  embraced  him  with  the
same  love,  they  having  long  since  determin-
ed in  their  own  minds  upon  this  marriage.

These  things  being  past,  the  emjieror,  that
nolliing  might  be  left  undone,  returned  to
counsel  again,  with  the  emperor  Vernao,
i)on  Duardos,  Primaleon,  -and  the  other
o  2


148

kings,  concerning  >vhat  should  be  done  with
the  infanta  Paudricia;  whereupon  the  soldan
Belagriz  was  called,  and  in  the  presence  ol'
Don  Duardos  was  reminded  of  what  had
passed,  ajid  told  that  the  fruit  of  his  deceit
was  Blandidon,  so  good  a  knight,  and  so
Avorihy  of  estimation.  ISow  as  the  soldan
•was  already  troubled  in  mind  about  the
error  of  his  faith,  for  by  reason  of  his  long
intercourse  with  Christians  he  was  certified
of  the  truth  of  theirs,  what  with  love  for  his
son  Blandidon,  and  compassion  for  the  sor-
rowful life  which  Paudricia  had  led,  and
above  all_,  being  desirous  not  to  lose  the
friendship  of  these  princes,  he  renounced  his
law,  and  concluded  to  espouse  Paudricia  ;
and  he  had  not  much  to  do  in  converting
some  of  his  princes  who  came  with  him  also,
the  love  they  bore  him,  and  the  sense  of  the
eiTor  in  which  they  lived  prevailing  ;  v.  here-
at  the  emperor  greatly  rejoiced,  as  indeed
the  business  merited.  Having  left  the
council,  the  emperor,  that  there  might  be
no  time  for  Belagrizj  by  the  per&uasion  of
the  people,  to  change  this  good  mind,  went
to  the  house  of  the  empress,  taking  Don  Du*


149

ardos  with  him, where,  they  three  only  being
present,  Don  Duardos  discoursed  to  the  in-
fanta Paudricia  the  whole  truth,  undeceiv-
ing her  of  the  opinion  in  which  she  and, her
son  likuuhdon  hud  lived  till  now  ;  and  telling
her  how  much  he  had  endeavoured  Ibrmerly
to  make  the  soldan  renounce  his  false  belief
and  accept  her  for  his  wife,  to  which,  it
being  God's  good  pleasure,  he  had  now  con-
sented. And  praying  her,  since  it  had
pleased  God  after  so  long  time  and  so  great
sorrow,  to  bring  him  to  a  sense  of  his  error,
and  give  this  good  remedy  to  her  affliction,
that  she  would  be  content,  as  well  consider-
ing the  valour  and  riches  of  the  soldan,  who
was  a  might}'  and  renowned  prince,  as  also
that  her  son  might  know  his  noble  father.
Paudricia  heavily  looking  about  her,  was  so
sore  troubled  as  it  was  a  great  while  ere  she
spake  a  word  ;  but  after  she  had  belter  rc-
meiTibcred  herself,  she  earnestly  beheld  Don
Duardos,  saying,  My  hard  destiny  concealed
this  so  long,  that  I  might  endure  tu  live  ;  fi)r
be  sure,  if  1  had  known  this,  1  had  given  due
chastisement  to  my  ignorant  uiisfortiuie.
Ihit  since  it  is  come  to  li'>ht  at  this  time,
o  3


both  lhe  love  of  my  son,  and  the  salvation
of  the  soldan  and  his  subjects,  compelleth
me  to  forget  all  matters  past,  considered
also,-  as  you  assure  me,  that  the  force  of  love
%vhich  he  bare  towards  me  excuses  him  for
this  deceit.

The  emperor  liked  n  ell  of  that  she  had  said,
and  the  empress  embraced  her  many  times,
being  so  glad  as  could  be  possible,  that  all
things  came  to  such  a  happy  end,  and  so
little  looked  for.  Blandidon  was  then  called
and  made  acquainted  with  the  truth,  and
though  it  grieved  him  to  lose  the  opinion
that  Don  Duardos  was  his  father,  yet  the
hope  of  the  estate  to  \vhich  he  should  now
attain,  made  him  forget  this  grief,  and  en-
tertain the  change  with  joy  ;  for  this  is  the
nature  of  rank,  that  it  maketh  those  who
aspire  to  it  forget  all  other  things.


151


CHAPTER  152.


After  these  marriages  were  tlius  agreed  iiponi
the  emperor,  who  would  give  no  occasion  for
delay  to  bring  with  it  any  obstacle,  as  often
lime  happeneth  to  those  who  are  remiss  in
things  of  moment,  commanded  the  day  fol-
lowing, that  all  things  for  the  solemnizing
these  honourable  rites  should  he  prepared,
and  that  the  ceremony  should  be  performed
in  the  palace,  which  was  fitted  up  full  royally
for  the  nonce.  The  archbishop  of  Constan-
tinople said  mass  ;  he  was  the  patriarch  of
the  whole  empire,  a  person  of  great  autho-
rity, and  adorned  with  much  learning  and
virtue;  afterward  he  made  a  learned  sermon,
■which  was  all  in  praise  of  the  soldan  Bcla-
griz,  whereby  his  holy  and  good  intention
was  publicly  made  knoun,  and  the  rightful


152

marriage  between  him  and  the  infanta  Pau-
dricia,  a  thing  whereof  no  one  before  had
entertained  a  thought.

When  the  archbishop  had  concluded  he
baptised  the  soldan.  The  emperor  and  Don
Duardos  were  his  godfathers,  and  the  two
empresses  of  Greece  and  Allemaigne  his
godmothers.  And  to  honour  him  the  more,
the  emperor  would  have  him  be  the  first  to
receive  the  order  of  matrimony.  This  cere-
mony being  performed,  Blandidon  humbled
himself  before  him  ifl  sign  of  love  and  obe-
dience, but  the  soldan  giving  him  his  hand
and  his  blessing,  took  liim  up,  rejoicing
greatly  in  the  fruit  of  his  stolen  embraces,
that  he  had  so  good  a  knight  to  his  son,  a!id
especially  that  he  should  leave  to  his  sub-
jects such  a  worthy  governor.  The  infanta
I'audricia  came  to  their  espousals  between
l])e  two  empresses,  as  her  husband  had  done
to  his  bnptism.  7\fter  them  the  emperor
v;ouid  have  Florendos  next  in  the  espousals,
to  do  more  honour  to  Miragiuuda,  who  ad-
vanced so  proudly,  and  with  so  haughty  and
ronfident  an  ;iir,  as  if  in  that  ceremonv  she


133

had  been  the  one  who   gained  least.     The
yesterday,  when  all  the  other  prineesscs  had
expressed   their  tliani<s  to  the  emperor  and
empress  for  what  had   been  settled  eonccrn-
ing  them,  Miraguarda  was  the  only  one  who
oflered  no  sueh  aeknowkdginent,  whereby
she  once   more   deprived    I'iorendos  of  his
due  night's  rest,  making  him   coneeit  that
she  was  not  contented  to  have  him  for  her
husband,  either  by  reason  of  some   fault  in
him,  or  because  she  had  another  in  her  heart
"whom  she  afieetcd  more^  and  tiiis  was  wlîat
he  most  feared.     But  now  that  tlie  espousals
were  past,  he  was  secure  from    all  fear,  and
taking    her    by    the    iiaud,     which   was    he
thought  the  liighcst  honour  he  could  ever
attain,   Flerif!a  and  the  queen,  who  before
had  had  her  between  them,  retired  to   their
seals,  leaving  them  boih  uow  contented  aiul
enamoured.     Cert«'s,  that  day  where  there
were  so  many  of  such   beauty  present,  Tle-
vida  was  not  less  gazed  at  than  all  the  others,
though  time  aud  her  long  sorrow  had  im-
paired much  of  her  beauty  and  appearance-
'i'hcn  came  the  fair  j)rincess  Polinarda,  led
between    her   aunts   tin;   empress    of    Allc-


154

muigne  and  the  queen  of  France,  and  Pal-
nicrin,  accompanied  with  the  emperor  Vcr-
nao,  and  king  Tarnaes  of  Lacedemonia.
And  after  them  the  queen  of  Thrace,  be-
tween the  queen  Francehna  of  Thessaly,  and
Flerida,  who  that  day  accompanied  so  many,
having  been  requested  by  all.  She  was  given
in  marriage  to  the  knight  of  the  .Savage,'
who  if  hitherto  he  had  lived  with  so  free
affections,  remained  from  that  time  so  ena-
moured and  wholly  devoted  to  her,  that  it
seemed  as  if  he  were  another  man.  Let
none  marvel  at  this  ;  it  is  the  nature  of  time
and  matrimony  to  alter  the  condition  of
men,  and  they  in  whom  it  is  not  altered  by
either  of  these,  will  remain  the  same  till
death.  Beroldo,  Graciano,  Platir,  and  all
the  other  princes  and  knights,  were  then
espoused  unto  their  ladies,  each  being  ac-
companied by  those  whom  he  loved  best.
Last  of  all,  the  queen  of  Thrace  and  princess
Polinarda,  to  do  pleasure  to  the  knight  of
the  Savage,  took  Arlanza  between  them, — a
strange  i«ight,  for  in  staiure  she  was  so  great
that  from  the  breast  upward  she  overtopped
tliem,  and  her  limbs  were  of  answerable  big-


155

ness,  and  the  features  of  her  face  alike  pro-
portionable ;    they  being   fair  and    delicate
withal,  so  that  greater  contrast  coidd  not
have  been  devised.     Dramuziando  came  ac-
companied by  Primaleon  and  Don  Duardos,
and  they  were  wedded  to  the  equal  content-
ment of  both,  he   beinu;  enamoured  of  her,
and  she  won  by  his  worth  and  fame.     Tliis
being    over,  which  seemed   to    be   the  last,
Miriiguarda  besought  the  emperor  that  he
would  be  pleased   to  give  to   the  giant  Al-
mourol  Cardiga,  for  his  wife,  the  daughter  of
the  giant  Bataru,  who  dwelt  in   her  house-
hold ;  for  she  knew  that  both  desired  it,  and
as  that  day  was  appointed  to  unite  aíTections,
it  was  not  well  that  they  should  he  forgotten  ;
the  empress  declared  that  she  had  Cardiga's
consent,  and  so  the  marringc  was  performed
with  the  same  solemnity  as  tlie  rest.

Of  this  Cardiga  it  is  related  in  the  second
book  of  this  history,  called  Don  Duardos  of
]îritannia,  that  the  giant  Almourol,  besides
the  castle  wherein  he  alway  dwelt  and  which
he  called  after  his  own  name,  had  another
about   a   Icngiie    distant,   down  the  I'aOjUS,


\:6

wliich  his  fallier  luid  built,  and  wliicl)  was
called  Tone  BelUi.  But  after  his  marriage
Almourol  gave  it  to  Cardiga  for  her  dower,
and  called  it  by  her  name,  and  there  she
past  her  widowhoocj,  breeding  up  their  son,
who  bore  the  same  name  as  his  father.  So
that  the  old  tradition  is  no  fable,  that  in
former  tiiaes  Almourol  and  Cardiga  were
husband  and  wife,  and  that  the  castles  where-
in they  dwelt  were  called  after  them,  and
are  so  called  to  this  day.  Some  chronicles
say  that  their  son  was  named  Tranconio,
and  that  he  was  drowned  one  day  crossing
the  Tagus  below  the  castle  of  Almourol,  from
whence  that  place  was  called  the  Deeps  of
Tranconio,  and  in  process  of  time,  by  cor-
ruption, the  Deeps  of  Trancos,  from  which
the  village,  which  in  our  days  has  been  built
upon  the  shore  there,  is  so  called.  Others
affirm  that  he  was  named  Almourol  like  his
father,  and  thus  he  is  called  in  the  chroni-
cle of  Bon  Uuardos,  wherein  many  notable
actions  are  related  of  him  during  his  long
life.  But  as  this  appertaineth  not  to  our  his-
tory, we  will  let  pass  the  differences  of  wri-
ters, and  return  to  our  own  matter.


157

These  marriages  over,  and  the  arclibishop
having  given  them  all  his  blessing-,  they  all
repaired  to  the  Garden  of  Tlerida,  where
the  feast  had  been  made  ready.  He  who
should  essay  to  describe  the  adornments
and  fashions  wherein  those  princesses  and
ladies  appeared  that  day,  would  have  enough
wherewith  to  fill  paper;  and  though  sonic
may  object  that  they  could  not  be  many,  be-
cause of  the  shortness  of  the  time,  we  an-
swer, that  they  came  provided,  in  hope  of
this  occasion.  One  only  cause  of  discon-
tent was  found  amid  all  this  joy, — that  the
infantas  Florenda  and  Gratiamar  should  not
share  the  same  fortune  as  the  rest  ;  the  rea-
son was,  that  the  knights  who  were  their
peers  had  fixed  their  ail'ections  elsewhere  .
and  Germam  of  Orleans,  who  was  known  to
be  the  servant  of  Florenda,  was  judged  un-
tqual  in  state,  besides  being  vassal  to  her
father  king  Arnedos.  JSevertheless  the  em-
oeror  communed  with  Arnedos,  and  found
him  so  well  satisticd  with  the  knightly  prowess
of  Germain  of  Orlcan»,  that  it  would  not
offend  hini  to  see  his  daughter  matched  with
so  vaulorous  a  vassal,  the  heir  of  so  great  a
VOL.   IV.  ''     r


138

liousc,  and  of  his  own  also,  if  other  should
fail;  and  being  assured  also  that  it  would
not  displease  the  infanta  Florenda,  he  gave
order  that  they  should  that  same  day  bie
married.  Gratiamar  being  more  haughty-
hearted,  and  less  easy  to  content,  remained
without  a  husband.

The}'  who  had  beheld  the  tables  yesterday,
would  have  thought  then)  worthy  to  be  seen,
but  to-day  they  were  far  more  worthy  of  ad-
miration, beino;  arranged  after  a  diHerent
fashion.  For  in  the  former  banquet  the
ladies  and  princesses  were  in  one  part,  and
the  knights  in  another,  but  now  they  were
all  together.  Who  could  have  told  Floren-
dos  tv.o  days  before  that  he  should  so  soon
eat  of  the  same  dish  with  the  fair  Miraguarda,.
Palmerin  with  Polinarda,  Platirv.ith  Sideía,
and  each  one  with  her  whom  he  loved  best?
Great  changes  do  time  and  chance  effect;
and  seeing  that  they  thus  teach  us  to  be  con-
fident, let  every  one  learn,  that  even  in  the
very  strength  of  misfortunes  we  ought  to
hope  for  some  good,  lest  we  fall  into  such
despair,  as  thereby  to  destroy  not  only  our


IÒ9

body,  but  our  soul  also,  whicii  God  created
for  a  (liilercnt  end.  I'lirougliout  the  eity
there  were  leasts  and  pageants  of  many  in-
ventions, devised  by  a  happ}'  people  who
loved  their  king;  and  when  a  people  are  so
affected,  they  arc  indefatigable  in  whatever
may  delight  him.  At  this  banquet,  such  were
the  sweets  of  joy  and  contentment  that  the
junkets  were  little  thought  on  ;  and  in  this
general  delight  it  was'  not  observed  that
prince  Fiorainan  was  wanting.  The  em-
peror was  the  first  who  perceived  this,  and
seeing  that  he  was  not  at  any  of  the  tables,
he  enquired  for  him:  one  of  the  serving-:
men  replied,  that  he  was  at  the  end  of  the
garden,  lying  under  a  tree.  Florendos  his
fricuil  v»ent  lor  him,  for  all  v.ell  understood
why  he  had  retired  from  this  scene  of  joy,
in  which  he  could  bear  no  part.  After  he
had  endeavoured  to  persuade  him  to  return,
j'luranian  replied, Why,  Sir  Tlorendos,  would
you  have  him  be  a  witness  of  others  happi-
ness who  hath  for  ever  lost  his  own  ?  My
iricndship  deserves  not  that  you  should  give
it  this  torment.  Leave  me  with  my  own  re-
flections ;  my  sorrpw  satisfies  mc  ;  do  not
'p  2


iGû

wish  me  to  bclu/id  what  would   double  k,
briii^ing  to  meiiiory  wliui  I  have  lost  by  the
sight   of  whiit  others   iiave  gained,     l^njoy
you   the  hap|)incs>s   whieh  is  your   portion,
leave  mc  my  misery,  and  the  contentnient
which  I  find  therein,  my  companions  while
I  live,  and  till  they  shall  put  an  end  to  mc.
íàome  reasons  Florendos  ofi'ered  to  dissuade
him  from  this  inteiir,  and  then  leaving  him,
he  besought  the  emperor,  who  would  have
gone  himself  for  him,  not  to  do  so,  for  it
would   be    to   give    him  pain,    and  also    to
make  all  who   beheld  him  partake  in  some
degree  of  his  -sorrow.     This  advice  seemed
good  to  many,  and  to  the  emperor  liimself,
who  therefore  let  him  be,  with  great  com-
passion both  in  himself  and  in  many  other  of
liis    friends;  for   as    Floraman  was  a   great
princ/C,  of  good  discourse,  discreet,  valiant,
«nd  well  beloved,  there  was  not  one  who  did
not  resent  great  part  of  his  grief,  and  hold
liis  absenee  to  be  a  great  loss.     The  worst
was  to  know  certainly  that  no  counsel  or  ad-
monition which  they  could  give  would  be  ot
any  avail,  his  sorrow  being  so  rooted  in  him,
and  so  inveterate,  thr^t  he  v.ould  not  bear  to


161

■  see  any  thing  which  called  to  his  remem-
brance what  he  had  lost.

The  banquet  being  ended,  which  lasted  the
greater  part  of  the  day,  what  remained  was
spent  in  dances  after  the  Grecian  tiishion,
after  which  they  all  retired.  On  the  follow-
ing day  the  brides  and  bridegrooms  came
again  to  give  thanks  to  the  emperor  and  em-
press, according  as  was  the  custom  for  all
who  were  wedded  in  that  house.  The
knights  who  w^re  not  in  this  happy  number,
either  to  dissemble  their  pain,  or  to  give
pleasure  to  their  friends,  appointed  tilts  and
tourneys,  which  lasted  many  days,  till  thcj
were  set  aside  by  news  of  sorrow.  Thus  is
the  world  composed,  never  so  constant  in  its
good  things  but  that  some  evil  I'ullows,  and
then  again,  some  recompenee  of  good,  with-
out which  hope  1  know  not  whether  it  could
he  endured.


p  n


102


CHAPTER  153.


Each  of  these  pruices  delighting  himself
with  his  sweet  lady,  for  whojc  sake  he  had
endured  so  many  sharp  travails^  and  of  whom
at  times  he  had  lost  all  hope,  the  others  who
still  remained  hatchelors,  either  to  give  con-
tentment to  their  friends,  or  to  disseinhle  the
sorrow  and  envy  which  tormented  them-
kclves,  appointed  feasts,  tilts,  tourneys,  and
other  inventions,  wherein  much  time  was
spent  and  whereto  came  man3'strange  knights,
w  ho  laboured  as  much  as  in  them  lay,  to  .shew
iheir  hardy  valour.  In  the  last  days  there
arrived  a  knight  armed  all  in  black,  bearing
in  his  shield  sable  a  figure  of  Hope  lying-
dead  ;  his  surcoat,  w  liicii  all  the  otners  wore
of  ga\'  coloursj  was  black    also,  for  sign  of


\65

greater  sadness,  and  his  horse  and  lance
and  lance-head  of  the  same  colour  :  by  which
s.ad  habit,  and  by  ali  his  demeanour,  he  de-
noted, that  the  sight  of  happiness  in  others
nothing  abated  of  his  own  unhappiness,  but
rather  freshened  in  him  regret  for  what  he
had  lost.  For  three  days  together,  he  was
so  great  in  arms  and  of  such  signal  prowess,
he  remained  victor  against  all  that  dealt  with
him.  At  length,  because  he  would  not  dis-
cover his  name  to  the  judges  of  the  field,
Florian  and  Florendos  went  to  arm  them-
selves, being  very  desirous  to  try  the  com-
bat with  him.  But  Dramuziando  prevented
this,  for  he  knew  that  it  w^as  Floraman.  Don
Duardos  and  Primaleon  then  went  and
brought  him  to  the  emperor,  who  essayed  to
comfort  him,  saying,  that  it  was  against  rea-
son he  should  afflict  himself  in  such  sort
for  the  thing  he  could  not  remedy,  seeing
that  by  so  doing  he  destroyed  himself  and
<iist;essed  his  friends,  not  one  of  whom,  but
for  ihe  love  and  affection  which  they  all  bore
him,  partook  in  great  part  of  his  affliction.
And  he  besouirht  him  that  if  either  in  his
house  or  out  of  it,  there  was  iii  any  kingdom


-   1G4

©r  provincq^of  Christendom  that  thing  whicji
could  induce  him  to  fore^et  his  loss  or  com-
pensate  for  it,  that  he  would  tell  him  so  now,
when  all  tiie  greatest  christian  princes  were
there  present,  who  would  so  willingly  grant
him  whatever  he  desired.  Sirs,  rcpliexl
Floraman,  1  well  know,  that  neither  words
nor  deeds  of  mine  can  sullicieutl}'  thank  you
for  this  favour  and  for  the  kindness  which
occasions  it  ;  hut  the  true  loyalty  with  which
I  from  the  first  began  to  serve  m}'  lady  Altea,
hath  not  so  little  force  as  to  let  me  change
this  mind.  I  know,  indeed,  that  she  is  dead,
that  my  evil  fortune  hath  occasioned  this,
and  that- nothing  which  Í  can  do,  and  no  ex-
cess of  passion  in  me,  can  bring  her  to  life
fîgain  ; — if  it  could  siie  would  then  he  less
beholden  to  me,  for  then  any  sorrow  would
be  for  i:!y  own  interest,  and  not  for  her
worth.  Í  rejoice  in  my  wretchedness,  since
it  is  for  her  that  I  endure  it.  And  if  there
where  she  now  is,  she  hath  any  perception
of  what  passeth  here,  she  knows,  that  if  at
any  time  my  ftmcy  represents  to  me  that  I
grieve  in  vain,  that  thought  do  I  cast  from  me
as  disloval,   and  uttcrlv  renounce  it,  admit-


í65

linç  none  but  such  as  teach  me  to  be  content
uitli  the  evil.5  which  I  endure.  For  the  love  of
those  who  love  truly  must  be  without  reserve  ;
>vhcre  it  began  there  true  love  ought  to  re-
main to  lhe  end,  and  in  the  end,  otherwise
it  is  to  be  judged  but  light  and  inconstant.
1  am  contented  with  my  sufiVrrngs  :  so  long
have  they  now  been  my  companions  that  1
could  not  live  without  them,  and  whoever
thinks  that  by  withdrawing  me  from  these
tlioughts  he  bhoidd  befriend  me  or  do  me
pleasure,  oflendeth  against  me  in  a  way  that
1  have  not  deserved.  If  your  highness  de-
sireth  to  manifest  your  goodness  towards  me,
leave  me  with  my  thoughts; — there  are  none
iu  this  world  wdiich  can  turn  me  from  them.

They  saw  he  was  so  ihm  in  this  resolution»
that  they  judged  it  would  be  losing  words  to
strive  with  him  in  longer  persuasions  ;  so  he
look  leave  of  the  emperor,  and  accompanied
uiih  Don  Duardos  and  Primaleon,  went  to
liis  chamber.  The  life  of  this  prince,  and  the
manner  of  his  love,  gave  great  pain  to  his
fricnris,  for  he  was  well  beloved,  and  among
lhe  ladies  he  was  greatly  esteemed,  for  they


166

saw  ill  him  more  truth  and  love  than  iu  other
men.  Some  who  knew  hun  little,  judged  at
times  that  his  shew  of  sorrow  was  but  coun-
terfeit, and  tliat  inwardly  it  was  not  what  he
made  it  appear;  but  they  wronged  him,  for
lie  was  truly  as  enamoured,  and  as  wholly
devoted  to  his  passion,  as  he  could  have  been
when  Altea  was  living.  In  the  company  of
men,  though  at  times  he  appeared  cheerful,
or  less  sad,  it  might  presently  he  seen  when
the  recollection  of  what  he  had  lost  came
across  him,  how  he  lost  all  thought  of  what
he  was  sa^'ing,  an-d  his  words  wandered,  and
it  was  apparent  that  his  mind,  was  not  in
them,  but  lixcd  upon  the  thing  which  most
grieved  him.  if  in  tlie  field  or  in  the  house
he  was  for  a  moment  unemployed,  it  was  past
in  thoughts  of  his  love,  and  forgetful  that
pcradventure  some  one  might  overhear  him,
he  would  talk  to  his  lady,  as  though  she  were
present,  till  he  was  weary.  At  other  times,
he  would  compose  virelays  to  her,  and  vvvire
love-letters,  as  though  she  were  one  to  whom
he  could  send  tlum;  then  recollecting  him-
self he  would  tear  them,  fearing  that  this
mark  of  his  wandering  imagination  should


1:67

be  seen.     But  leave  we  now  to  speak  of  Flo-
ra m  un.

The  rejoicings  in  the  city  beginning  to  abate,
the  emperor    v,  as  sonielimes    wont,  accom-
panied with  all  the  nobles  of  his  court,  to  go
in  his  litter  a-field,  with  falcons,  merlins,  and
other  birds  of  the  like  nature.     One  Sunday
it  came  to  pass  in   the  Forest  of  the  Clear
Fountain  wliitlier  the  emperor  went  to  dine,
the  day  being  bright  and  clear,  the  knights
j)ursuing  their  sports  iu  divers  parts  of  the
wood,  the  emperor  and  empress,   with   the
otlier  ladies  and  princesses  remaining  in  the
con:!pany  of  some  few  ;  as  the  princess  Po-
bnarda,  the  queen   of  Thrace,  Miraguarda,
îSidela,  and  queen    Arnalta,  were  disporting
xmder  tlic  shade  of  the  trees,  suddeidy   the
day  was  overcast,  and  a   cloud   came  down
and  covered   them  ;  it  presently   rose   again
and  thspersed,  and  then  they  saw  in  tl)e  air
two  griHinsof  marvellous  bigness,  who  were
carrying  away  the  queen   ot    '1  brace   u[)on
their  wings,   leaving    all   the   others.     iSlie,
tearing  ber  tire  and  her  beautiful  hair,  filled
the  air  with  lier  cries,  and  in  this  uuauier  past


168

over  the  lieads  of  those  who  were  liawkiriG,»
being  seen  and  known  by  them.     Great  was
the  dismay  whieli  this  sight  occasioned  in
the  emperor,  and  in  all  who  beheld  it.     The
princes    and    knights   forsaking  their  sport
rode  to  the  forest,  where  tliey  foinid  sorrow
and  lamentations,  and  seeing  that  they  could
neither  s^ive  counsel  nor  remedv  in  so  sirange
a  case,  they  made  the  emperor  return,  pur-
posing the  next  day  to  go  in  quest  of  the
queen,  and  return  to  their  old  laborious  way
of  life.     But  the  sage  Daliarte  prevented  this,
saying  that  this    adventure   appertained   lo
none  but  the  knight  of  the  Savage;  and  that
the  others  should  remain,  for  a  greater  dan-
ger awaited  them.     Soon  did  the    truth  of
tiiese  words  appear,  for  in  two  days  tidings
came  that  the  fleet  of    Albayzar   and    the
Turks  was   departed  to  come  against  Con-
stantinople.    This  news  detained  all  the  other
kings  and  princes,  who  were  else   about  to
return  into  their  own  dominions  ;  for  they
would  not  leave  the   emperor  in  this  danger.
He  of  the  Savage,  full  of  love  for  the  queen
his  wife,  and  thinking  nothing  of  this  news,
as  if  it  concerned  not  him,  clad  in  his  wont-


169

r.à  arms,  and  bearing  his  wonted  device,  set
off  immediately,  full  sorrowful  for  this  ad-
venture, and  not  knowing  how  it  could
end.


VOL.    IV.


170


CHAPTER  154.


Tlie  history  relaies  that  the  knight  of  the
Savage  Man,  weary  of  searching  the  whole
empire  over  from  one  end  to  the  other,  in
which  he  expended  much  time,  and  being
almost  desperate  of  succeeding  in  his  quest,
had  now  his  spirits  so  dead,  and  his  heart  so
sorrowful,  that  it  seemed  any  little  danger
would  now  have  been  too  much  for  him  ;
and  in  this  state  of  despair,  wandering  about
witliout  hope,  he  uttered  such  amorous  com-
plaints as  were  unlike  his  former  condition,
and  one  whose  will  had  for  so  great  a  part
of  ills  life  been  so  unrestrained.  BiU  as
Fortune  was  now  weary  of  tormenting  him,
she  let  him  at  last  discover  the  place  where
his  lady  was,  that  this  might   certainly   the


171

betler  enable  him  to  endure  \vl)ut  he  hud  yet
to  undergo.

One  evening,  as  he  was  travellin2:  in  that
part  oi  the  empire  where  it  bordered  upon
the  kingdom  of  Maeedoniu,  at  the  loot  of  a
loftv  and  craiiny  Sierra,  the  sun  was  over-
clouded  and  the  heavens  overcast  with  such
darkness  as  if  it  were  night;  and  so  heavy  a
rain  began  to  pour  down,  that  lie  expected
to  be  lost  :  for  he  was  far  from  any  inhabit-
ed place,  and  neither  he  nor  ids  squire  knew
the  country,  so  that  they  were  witliout  any
remedy.  Tresenily  tliey  heard  the  cries  of
a  woman,  whose  voice  seemed  to  come
through  the  thickness  of  the  air,  and  groans
with  them,  as  oi"  one  who  was  suiieringsome
wrong  ;  or  which  the  desperate  weather  and
the  place,  far  from  all  shelter,  occasioned  her
to  utter.  iSow  though  he  had  need  of  all
his  strength  to  save  himself,  yet  was  he  so
accustomed  never  to  be  near  danger  without
hastening  towards  it,  especially  when  a  wo-
n)an  cried  for  succour,  that,  iorgeiful  of
every  thing  else,  he  turned  his  horse  towards
tiic  place  from  whence  the  cries  seemed  to
'*  o  '2


172

proceed,  which  was  nearer  the  top  of  the
Sierra,  where  there  was  a  rock  of  immeasur-
able height,  and  as  steep  as  possible.  As
he  drew  nearer,  he  thought  the  voice  came
from  the  rock  ;  and  in  this  he  was  confirmed
v/hen  he  saw  an  opening  in  it,  like  a  gate-
way, hewn  in  the  rock,  through  which  a
man  on  horseback  might  enter.  Let  not
the  reader  marvel  at  this,  whereof  it  will  be
needful  to  make  farther  mention,  because  of
what  was  within  ;  for  this  place  had  for  long
time  been  the  abode  of  famous  enchanters,
who  succeeded  each  other  ;  that  great  en-
chantress the  infanta  Melia*,  was  the  foun-
der, and  at  this  time  Drusia  Velona  dwelt
there,  of  whom  the  next  chapter  will  speak,
and  they  who  inhabited  it  knew  how  to  con-
ceal it  so  that  it  should  be  visible  to  none
hut  those  whom  they  wished  to  see  it.
Neither  should  any  one  think  it  strange  to
hear  that  Melia  founded  it,  because  it  is
said  in  anotiier  part  oftbis  book,  that  she
had  another  similar  place  in  England,  where-


Thc  rival  enchantress  of  Urganda  in  Esplandian.


173

in  she  dwelt  also  ;  for  tins  infanta  being  die
most  excellent  in  her  art  of  her  own  times,
and  indeed  more  so  than  all  before  or  after
her,  as  in  those  days  her  brother  king  Ar-
mato  of  l^ersia  had  E>plandian  the  emperor
of  Constantinople,  and  Aniadis  king  of  Great
Britain,  for  his  eapital  enemies,  she  sought
in  all  these  parts  for  tiie  most  convenient
places  which  her  cunning  could  discover,  to
make  her  dwellinij  in  secret,  that  sliemis^ht
come  there  whenever  it  was  necessary  for
lier  to  practice  her  enchantments.  For  this
reason  she  had  one  in  England,  of  which
she  made  less  use,  and  on  which  tlierefore
Jess  work  had  been  bestowed.  She  had
another  in  Circecc,  far  more  excellent  in  its
fabric  and  fashion,  because  she  spent  great
part  of  hei  life  there.  Another,  to  which
she  was  most  afiecled,  and  wiiich  she  made
lier  principal  dwelling  j)lace,  was  in  Persia,
which  was  her  native  eountr}',  and  this  in  its
fabric,  greatness,  and  artifice,  exceeded  all
the  rest.  If  this  infanta  had  been  enamour-
ed as  Lirganda  was,  it  might  have  been  th:it
this  her  chief  abode  wouKI  in  gailant  devices
to  delight  the  eye^  have  sur^jassed  that  which
'  o  S


174

t 'rganda  made  in  her  island,  now  Daliarte's  ;
but  a^  Melia's  inclinations  were  far  averse
from  love,  her  works  were  of  other  charac-
ter.


To  return  then  to  the  subject,  from  which  I
have  wandered  a  httle,  he  of  the  Savage,  in
whose  heart  fear  never  harboured  to  prevent
him  from  using  his  good  courage,  determin-
ed to  enter  this  cavern,  and  turning  round
Mith  intent  to  leave  his  liorse  w  ith  his  squire,
and  bid  him  await  him  in  that  place,  he
could  not  see  him,  and  not  finding  him,  he
thought  the  darkness  and  tlie  storm  had  se-
parated them .  This  was  not  the  cause,  but
Daharte  had  done  it,  who  did  not  chuse
that  this  place  should  be  visible  to  him.
The  knight  was  grieved  at  this  loss,  not
knowing  what  might  have  become  of  hrm  ;
»evc)ri^èy^s  he  entered  the  cave,  and  the
farther  heC'xv^t  in,  the  nearer  the  cries
sounded.  So''as  the  horse,  frightened  at
the  place,  or  by  the  darkness,  would  go  no
farther,  he  leaped  off,  and  went  on,  sword
in  hand,  afoot.  He  had  not  gone  far  be-
fore the  cries  which  he  had  betiare  heard.


175

ceased  altogether,  whereat  he  was  greatly
grieved,  believing  that  either  the  person  who
littered  them  was  dead,  or  had  suffered  the
injury,  the  fear  of  which  occasioned  iliese
shrieks.  The.i  quickening  his  pace,  it  was
not  long  before  he  found  himself  on  the
other  side  of  the  Sierra,  in  a  great  square
held,  surrounded  on  all  sides  by  otlier  such
rocks  as  that  throuç-h  the  which  he  had  en-
tcred,  which  were  on  the  ouiaide  so  steep
and  rugged,  and  composed  of  such  crags  and
precipices,  that  even  if  they  had  not  by
art  magic  been  concealed,  they  were  so
constructed  by  nature,  that  it  would  have
been  impossible  for  any  human  being  to
have  ascended  them  in  any  part  to  discover
wliat  lay  beyond.  Tlie  Held  witliin  was
covered  with  goodly  plants  of  divers  colours,
and  there  were  trees  there,  and  tountanis
of  clear  water.  And  the  rocks  oil  ad
sides  were  hollow,  witli  portals  liewn  in
them,  excellently  wrouglit,  through  which
was  the  entrance  into  the  a[)aruncnts  ot
I'vielia.  iSow  though  llii-.  habiraiion  was
not  bedecked  with  j^old   nor  v.  iiii  oliicr  ac-


176

customef]  gallantries,  its  composition,  for  one
who  coulti    iiiuk-rstand  it,  was  full  ^X'onder-
ful.     Tor  having    halls   and   chambers   and
corredores   ot"  all  &izci-,  all  ^\ere  cut  in  the
solid  rock  ;  and    \\hat  \\as  most  to  be  ad-
mired,   was  the  wonderful  lofiiness  of  the
apartments,  for  none  could  by  any  subtilty
ot  imagination  devise  how  so  great  and  sin-
gular a  work  could  have  been  compassed  by
the  wit  and  power  of  man.     To  the  knight
of  the  Savage  this  place  appeared  the  most
notable  thing  that  ever  nature  or  time  could
bring  to  light,  and  he  marvelled  that  a  thing
so  wonderful  should  not  be  more  known  and
more  lalked  of  in  the  world.     And  entering
in  lie  went  through  all  the  sides  of  tlieedificc,
for  in  every   chamber    there    was    much  to
behold  ;  the   light  came   from   windows  in
the  summit,  cut  in  the  top  of  the  rock.    All
these  chamuers  communicated  one  with  the
other  ;  aiiJ  in  none    of  the  portals   did    he
find  an  v  gate  or  door  to  impede  the  entrance,
exce|  ling  only  one,  which   in  tiiis  respect
diiiered  irom  lhe  otiiers.     This  was  fastened
with  two   great  and    strong  lockc,  and  the
door  also  was  of  solid  iron,  and  wrouiiht  all


177

over  with  ancient  histories  which  he  of  the
Savage  did  not  understand,  neither  did  he
tarry  long  in  endeavouring  to  enter,  seeing
the  strength  of  the  door.  Proceeding  far-
ther, at  the  end  of  the  last  side  he  came  into
a  hall,  which  seemed  to  him  in  greatness
and  loftiness  and  workmanship  to  exceed  all
the  others;  there  he  saw  opposite  the  en-
trance the  statue  of  an  ancient  woman,  whom
he  judged  to  have  heen  the  founder  of  this
palace.  Round  about  her  were  other  statues
in  marble,  the  history  of  which  he  did  not
know,  neither  did  he  stand  long  to  beliold
them,  there  being  something  else  which  more
astonished  him.  For  in  the  middle  of  that
room  was  a  serpent  of  metal,  of  singular
workmanship,  and  so  huge  that  it  well  nigh
lilled  the  whole  length  of  the  hall.  It  was
standing  upon  its  feet,  its  neck  stretched  out,
the  fashions  of  its  head  so  like  the  life, and  the
look  so  fierce  and  terrible  that  though  it  was
manifestly  a  thing  artificial,  yet  might  it
have  excited  fear  in  any  one  who  beheld  it.

The  knight  went  up  to  it,  and  viewed  it  all
lound;    when  he  came  in   front  he   stopt


178

longer,  for   tlicrc    ^vas  more   to    see  there.
He  perceived  a  golden  key  hanging  from
its  neck   by  a  fine  thread  of  gold,  the  key
being  so  small  that  it  was  scarcely  visible.
He   took   it  off,  well  judging  that  it  must
needs  be  of  some  use,   but  neither  in  that
apartuient,  nor  in  all  the  others  which  he  had
traversed,  had  he  seen  any  place  to  v^hich  it
could    be  applied.     Then   returning    to  in-
spect the  serpent  inore  narrowly,  to  see  if  he
could   find  any  thing  there  which   the  key
'would  fit,  at  last,  on  the  one  side,  under  the
scales    wherewith    it    was   covered,   he   dis-
covered  a  little   opening,  which  gave  him
hope  that    hi  key  would  fit  it.     i\nd  trying
it  he  found  tliat  this  was  the  place  for  which
it  was  made  ;  so  turning  it  round,  and  draw-
ing it  towards  him,  he  opened  a  little  door
about  the  L/i|^iicss  of  a  liand,  through  which
he  could  see  all  that  there  was  in  the  inside
of  the    serpent.     Certes,    all   other    things
which  he  had  till  now  seen  seemed  little  to
him  compared  with  what  he  now  beheld,  for
witliin  the  serpent  did  he  behold  four  tapers
of  green  wax,  which  stood  on   four  candle-
sticks of  gold,  two  of  them  placed  towards


179

uie  east,  aud  ihe  other  two  to  the  west,  and
burning  with  a  marvellous  splendant  bright-
ness>  yet  the  wax  did  not  diminish  any  thing
at  all.  Between  tliese  four  lights  was  eouch-
cd  upon  rieh  cushions,  and  with  a  pillow  of
green  silk  under  her  head,  the  fair  Lionarda
cjueen  of  Thrace,  his  wife,  in  all  her  beauty
and  perfection,  save  only  that  the  brightness
of  tlic  light  did  something  pale  her.  At  this
bÍ2,ht  the  kniiiht  of  tlie  Savaa;e  Man  stood
awhile  like  one  whose  reason  v.as  disturbed,
not  knowinii  whether  he  miirht  ffive  credit
lo  what  was  before  his  eyes  or  no.

But  looking  again  and  again,  and  satisfying
himself  that  what  he  saw  was  no  phantasy,
he  knew  that  it  was  ceriaiidy  she,  and  of  il)is
he  was  the  more  assured  by  her  apparel,  know-
ing it  to  be  the  very  same  she  had  on  when
she  was  carried  away  in  the  forest.  And
being  thus  fully  persuaded  that  it  was  she,
lie  called  aloutl  to  her,  but  his  voice  liad  no
such  power  that  it  could  break  the  «rder  of
that  sleeji.  At  this  being  seized  with  de-
spair, and  fidl  of  love  which  lie  bore  her,  he
/exclaimed.  What  jjlorv  or  contcntiue[i.L  can


180

my  victories  yield  me,  and  the  manifold  peril-
ous adventures  which  I  have  happily  finish-
ed what  do  they  avail,  if  Fortune  now  for-
sake me  in  this,  whereon  my  life  depend-
elh.  O  lady!  since  my  unhappy  fortune  de-
prived me  of  you,  Í  have  travelled  over  many
countries  to  Hnd  you  out,  and  now  even  at
the  very  time  when  I  was  out  of  all  hope,
here  I  am  come,  where  for  my  worse  sor-
row I  see  you,  and  know  not  how  to  reach
yon.  You  do  not  hear  me  !  My  words  are
wasted  upon  the  wind!  and  I  am  desperate.
This  love  being  converted  into  anger,  at
seeing  himself  so  near  his  lady,  and  yet  un-
able to  come  nearer,  he  took  his  sword,  and
with  the  hilt  thereof  began  to  batter  the
se;-pent,  thinking  to  demolish  it,  but  all  was
in  vain,  for  the  composition  of  it  was  not  of
a  quality  to  be  so  destroyed.  Instead,  it  be-
came covered  with  bright  flames,  which
made  him  lose  sight  of  it.  He,  fearing  lest
his  lady  should  abide  any  cruel  torment  be-
cause the  serpent  was  so  wrapt  in  fire,  ceased
from  his  bootless  attempt,  and  then  the  fire
disappeared;  and  being  now  hopeless  of  any
remedy,  and  weary  with  the  exertions  whicli


ISl

lie  had  made,  and  still  more  so  with  trouble
of  mind,  he  threw  himself  upon  the  ground
with  his  face  to  the  earth,  cursing  his  for-
tune, because  in  all  other  adventures  it  had
ahvay  shown  him  some  means  to  extricate
himself,  either  by  fine  force,  or  cunning,  or  the
help  of  another;  but  in  this  which  concerned
him  more  than  all,  all  remedy  was  cut  off,
and  he  was  left  in  utter  despair,  without  any
liopc,  or  shadow  of  liope,  to  comfort  and  sup-
port him.  And  as  men  whose  hearts  have
been  long  free,  when  they  devote  them  at
last  are  more  devoted  than  such  as  have  been
used  to  such  dévotement,  so  it  was  with  this
knight,  he  being  now  so  piissiunately  afiiict-
cd,  that  his  judgnicnt  and  reason  clearly
abandoned  him,  and  he  determined  to  re-
nuiiii  there  in  that  slratige  d\^e'litig  pl;:ce
beside  his  lady,  not  remembering  that  he
had  no  other  food  there  than  his  own  ima-
ginations, which  would  sooner  destroy  than
support  him.

Tint  at  this  time  his  true  friend  Daliarte,  who
would  not  forsake  him  in  so  griat  necessity,
entered   the  halJ,  attired  afucr  the  LuglisU

VOL.    IV.  '       K


182

manner,  as  a  gentleman  uiihoiit  arms,  not
having  had  leisure  to  arm  himself  in  the  haste
with  which  he  came.  Ile  came  in,  saying.
It  is  plain.  Sir  Knight,  that  you  do  not  re-
member me,  since  in  time  ot"  such  difficulty
you  distrusted  my  services,  which  are  more
iieedtul  here  than  at  any  other  time.  He  of
the  Savage  rose  and  took  him  in  his  arms,
holding  his  appearance  to  be  as  a  divine  suc-
cour. Sir  brother,  said  he,  one  occasion  of
grief  thorouglily  settled  in  the  mind,  causelh
the  party  so  vexed  to  commit  all  things  else
to  forgerfulness  ;  blame  n)C  not,  therefore,
though  you  were  not  in  my  remembrance,  I
being  in  such  a  sharp  extremity.  But  now
that  I  have  you  here  with  me,  Fortune  can
do  me  no  farther  hurt.  I  beseech  you,  as
you  see  my  trouble,  help  me  in  it.

Sir,  quoth  .Daliarte,  the  ])erson  Avho  hath
made  this  enchantment  of  the  lady  Lionarda,
hath  not  chosen  that  it  should  so  easily  be
broken.  But-  Fortune  reserving  you  to  em-
ploy your  valour  in  adventures  worthy  most
high  renown,  will  not  suffer  that  intent  to  he
i'ully  executed,  .having  ordained  that  by  my


183

art  I  should  discover  the  eiul  ;  nevertheless,
as  my  art  is  not  suliicient  wholly  to  effect
the  disenchantment,  your  courage  as  well  as
my  skill  will  be  needed.

)\^hcn  he  had  thus  said,  he  bade  him  shut
ihe  door,  and  liang  the  key  again  round  the
neck  of  the  serpent;  but  they  stood  fir-^
awhile  looking  at  the  manner  in  which  Lio-
narda  was  laid  there.  He  of  the  Savage
w  ould  fain  have  devised  some  means  to  ex-
tinguish the  candles,  because  they  made  his
lady  lose  some  part  of  her  colour  and  natural
beauty.  It  is  plain,  said  Daliarte,  that  you
un'derstand  less  of  these  things  ihan  the  one
who  made  them  ;  for  by  the  virtue  of  their
light  is  the  life  of  Lionarda  sustained;  and
therefore  it  is  that  they  burn  without  con-
suming, for  so  soon  as  the  substance  of  which
they  are  composed  should  be  consumed,
her  life  would  be  expended  also.

Forllnviiji  they  went  out  of  the  hall  ;  and  so
soon  as  they  were  come  into  the  open  field,
the  air  began  to  be  exceedingly  iroubled,
and    a   marvcliows    darkness    overshadowed


184

them;  it  soon  cleared  again,  and  the  knight
of  lhe  Savage    Man  found  himself  alone,
\vithout  the  sage  Daliaite  to  direct  and  help
him,  and  close  hy  him  a  bull  of  marvellous
bigness  and  fierceness,  who  ran  at  him,  and
as  he  thought  tost  him  with  such  force  as  to
send  him  as  high  as  the  top  of  the  rocks;
but  in  his  fall  he  lighted  upon   the  neck   of
the  bull,  and  was  carried  by  him  into  a  dark
and  dismal  cave,  at  the  end  of  which  was  a
great  court  of  goodly  workmanship,  where
be  left  him  and  vanished  awav.     The  knisjht
of  the  Savage,  though  something  astonished
at  all  this,  feared  little  any  such   adventure
that  might  bel'al  him,  for  he  plainly  per-
ceived that  they  were  phantastic  and  vain.
And  looking  round  about  the  court,  he  saw
that  it  was  full  of  the  statues  of  famous  men,
who,  in  the  days  of  Amadis  and  Esplandian,
bad  flourished  among  the  Moorr,  ;  and  it  re-
joiced him  to  behold  so  notable  an  antiquit}',
and  things  so  worthy  of  remembrance.     In
the  most  honourable  place  of  all  stood  Ar-
mato  the   king    of  the    Persians,  having  a
crown  upon  his  head,  and  letters  of  gold  on
his  left  thigh,  which  declared  his  name.


185

^\n)ile  the  kniijht  of  the  Savage  Man  ear-
nestly  beheld  these  images,  there  came  in
an  olfl  woman,  so  wrinkled  and  feeble  with
extremity    of  age,  as   she  seemed   scarcely
able  to  stand  upon  her  feet;  she,   feigning
that  she  was  astonished  at  seeing  him  there,
filled  the  place  with  lond  and  mighty  cries,
calling  ii[)on  the  statues  to  defend  her  against
this  intruder   that  was  come  to  violate  lier
palace.      At  this  cry   the  images   began  to
stir  themselves,  and    to  lay  hold    on    their
swords;  but  when  the  knight  of  the  xSavage
j\ian  made   olTer  to  defend    himself,   they
stood  silent  in  their  former  estate,  and  the
old   Woman  vanished  out  of  sight.     He  of
the  Savage  went  then  to  return  to  the  hal*
where  the  serpent  stood  ;  but   on    his  way
through   the  apartn)ent3    he   saw   the  same
old  woman  standing  against   the  iron  door,
as  if  with  her  strength  she  would  have  de-
fended  it    against  him,   whereby    he    knew
how  in  that  place  was  inclosed  tiie  remedy
of  his  travails;  and  thinking  it  not  (it  to  at.
tack  her,  be(.'ausc  he  would  not  lay  hands  on
a  woman,  he  stood  awhile  not  knowing  what
lo   do.     J  he  o'^d   woman,,  as  if  her  fear   oi'
a  3


186

him  was  such  that  she  did  not  dare  await  his
determination,  put  her  shoulders  against  the
iron  door,  and  thrust  so  mightily  that  the
strong  locks  gave  way  as  if  they  had  been  of
wax,  and  she  went  in  and  closed  it  after  her.
And  tiiC  knight  stood  laughing,  seeing  that
the  weakness  of  this  old  woman,  which  seem-
ed as  if  it  needed  one  to  support  her,  had
thus   discovered    the  greatest  force  in    the
world.     Then   coming  up  to  the   door,   he
laid  hands  on  it,  but  it  seemed  as  if  one  with-
in held  it  to  against  him.     He  persisted  in
forcing  it  open,  and  then  she  drew  back  and
received  him  within,  having  with  her  four
knii^hts  clad  in  costly  armour,  to  whom  she
complained  of  him,  how  he  sought   to  de-
stroy her  ancient  palace.    These  four  knights
lifted  up  the  maces  which  they  held  in  their
hands,  as  if  all  meant  to  strike  him  at  once  ;
but  when  the  knight  of  the  Savage  Man  pre-
pared to  defend  himself,  both  they  and  the
old  woman  vanished  away  incontinent.

And  then  seeing  himself  rid  of  these  ob-
stdile-,  l)e  stood  looking  round  the  apart-
ment, which  seemed  to  him  well  worthy  to


187

be  seen.  In  the  midst  of  the  hall  there  was
a  candlestick  of  gold,  set  on  a  brazen  pillar,
and  in  the  candlesticlv  burned  a  white  wax
taper,  so  slender  and  fine  thai  hut  lor  the
light  which  it  yielded  it  would  not  have
been  visihle  :  he  well  judged  that  this  was
not  witliout  some  mvsurv,  but  he  knew  not
what  to  do,  seeing  no  way  to  deliver  his
lady.  The  apartment  had  cupboards  all
round  it  of  carved  wood,  each  having  its
lock  and  the  key  thereof  therein  ;  in  some
he  found  part  of  the  library  of  the  ini'anta
Melia,  in  others  garments  and  coifs,  adorn-
ed with  Jewelry  which  was  beyond  all  price,
all  being  woman's  apparel.  They  say  that
tiic  infanta  Mclia  made  tliem  for  her  niece,
the  daughter  of  king  Arniato,  who  died  just
when  her  marriage  had  been  concluded  on  ;
and  the  apparel  was  of  the  fashion  of  those
limes.  This  was  known,  for  it  was  found
written  in  a  book  in  that  same  library,  whi-jli
treated  of  her  life;  and  Melia  in  her  grief
for  this  niece's  death,  would  not  that  any
other,  as  long  as  the  world  lasted,  should  en-
joy what  had  been  made  for  her;  and  with
this  intent  had» deposited  in   the  palace  so


188

great  a  treasure  of  jewels  as  liad  been  there
bestowed,  and  all  tliis  wardrobe  of  ancient
times.  \A  eli  might  these  riches  have  con-
tented any  one,  how  covetous  soever  ;  but
they  gave  no  joy  to  the  knight  of  the  Savage
Man,  for  the  treasure  which  he  desired  to
recover  was  still  as  it  was  bciore,  and  he
knew  not  how  to  recover  it.

While  he  was  in  this  state  of  trouble,  the
great  sage  Daliarte  came  to  him  again,  say-
ing with  a  cheerful  countenance.  Now,  Sir
Knight,  since  you  have  done  that  which
was  ordained  for  you,  reler  the  rest  to  me,
for  in  despight  of  the  person  that  would  pre-
vent if,  I  will  recover  her  whom  you  love  so
dearly.  I  know  well,  answered  the  knight
of  the  Savage  j\Ian,  that  you  alone  can  re-
medy my  distress  ;  and  if  I  should  think
otherwise,  I  were  unworthy  to  have  your
furtherance  in  this  my  extreme  trouble.


38Q


CHAPTER  155.


Before  the  sage  Daliarte  would  deliver  the
queen  of  Thrace  out  of  the  enchantment,  he
Avould  see  the  palace,  and  though  the  trea-
sures therein  were  weh  worthy  to  be  esteem-
ed, the  hbrary  appeared  to  him  of  far  greater
estimation,  and  witli  the  consent  of  the
knight  of  the  Savage,  he  made  convcvancc
of  all  the  books,  by  his  art,  into  the  Perilous
Isle,  where  he  placed  tlicm  with  the  books
of  the  sage  IJrganda,  of  which  somewhat
hath  been  discoursed  to  you  already  ;  the
other  things  remaining  for  him  of  the  Savage,
as  liim  who  by  his  labours  had  won  and  de-
served ihem.  This  jub.t  and  reasonable  par-
titiun  being  made  between  them  as  brotliers,
Daliarte  took  from  the  pillar  the  taper
which   vvas  burning   in  the   candlestick    of


190

gold,  and  when   he   liad  it  in   his  hand  said
to  the  knight  of  the  Savage,   Tlic  hie  of  the
lady   Lionarda  consisteth  only  in  the  virUic
of  this   light,    and  till  we   had  acquired   it
you  might  well  be  unhappy  ;  but  now  nei-
ther the  power  of  Targiana,  by  whose  desire
this  enchantment  was  done,  nor  the  art  of
the  great   Drusia  Velona,  who  did   it,  shall
prevent   us  from  effecting  our   desire,  and
you  shall  rest  from   the  sorrow   and  labour
which  you  have  undergone.     Then  leaving
that  chamber,  they  returned  to  that  wherein
the  serpent  stood  ;  Daliarte  holding   in  one
liand  the  fatal   candle,  and   in    the  other  a
little  book,  with  black  leather  covers,  which
he  had   found   upon    the   pillar,    under  the
candlestick  wherein  the  candle  was  burning.
Then  he  bade  the  knight  of  the  Savage  open
again  the  little  door  in  the  side  of  the   ser-
pent, with  the  golden  key  which  was  round
its  neck  :  anrl    reading  a  little   in   the  book
of  the  words  written  tlicrein,  the  tapers  of
green    wax   that   were   within    llie  serpent,
began  to  lose  their  light  and  be  extinguished,
but  not  all  at  once,  for  if  they  had  been  put


out  all  at  one  instant,  the  life  of  the  queen
of  Thrace  had  been  destroyed  ;  for  they  were
framed  by  such  art,  as  she  sweetly  slumbered
in  life  by  the  virtue  of  their  liyht,  and  was
thereby  sustained  in  the  same  state  as  when
she  entered  there,  sufîering  no  natural  de-
cay. So  soon  as  one  of  these  tapers  had
lost  its  light,  Daliarte  lighted  it  again  with
the  candle  iu  his  own  hand,  in  which  con-
sisted a  contrary  mean  to  help  their  purpose  ;
for  that  not  only  preserved  her  life,  but
broke  the  spell  of  sleep,  so  that  after  all  the
tapers  had  been  extinct  and  lighted  again,
the  queen  awoke,  as  if  from  an  ordinary
repose.  But  seeing  herself  in  such  a  place,
and  with  such  things  about  her,  and  her
own  knight  of  the  Savage  hjoking  at  her
through  that  little  door,  and  with  tears  of
joy  addressing  her  as  one  whom  he  had  not
for  long  time  seen,  she  had  then  more  to
think  of  and  to  wonder  at,  doubting  whether
what  she  saw  were  not  a  dream,  and  having
no  remembrance  how  she  had  been  rapt
away  in  the  forest  of  the  Clear  Fountain  ;
lor  in  that  same   instant  her  Judgmout  was


Í92

taken  from  her,  so  liuit  she  could  not  re-
member uny  thin;;-.  Daliartc  seeing  her  in
this  amazement,  told  her  all  her  adventure,
and  of  the  time  which  had  elapsed  since  she
was  carried  away  iVom  amidst  her  friends
and  brought  thiiher,  which  was  now  more
than  half  a  year,  and  of  the  great  sorrow
Avhich  there  was  in  the  court  of  Constantin-
ople for  her  loss,  and  for  iliat  of  the  knight
ofthe  Savage  JM  an  also,  oiwhom  nothing  was
known  then,  he  having  departed  the  same
day  in  search  of  her.  The  more  the  queen
heard  the  greater  was  her  wonder  and  her
fear  ;  for  she  w  ecned  that  w  hoc  ver  had  placed
her  in  that  state  of  enchantment,  did  not
mean  tliat  slie  should  bo  soon  be  delivered
out  of  it.  He  of  the  Savage,  who  could  not
endure  to  see  his  lady  shut  up  so  long  in  the
serpent,  besought  Daliarte  to  fitiish  the  dis-
enchantment, and  relieve  him  from  his  sor-
row, and  her  from  her  fears.  I  know,  re-
plied Daliarte,  your  heart  cannot  brook  thi»
delay,  but  before  we  make  an  end  of  all,
I  wished  to  encourage  the  lady  queen,
that  she  mav  better  endure  the  fear  which


19S

is  yet  to  come,  for  to  you  1  know  it  v.iil  be
]iulc.       Without  farther  delay  he   put    the
candle  which  he  held  in  his  hand  into  oiie  of
the  nostrils  of  the   serpent.     Such   eíTcct   it
wrought,  that  darting  flames  IVoni  its  mouth
and  eyes,  it  rose  upright  upon  its  feet,  giving
two  or  three  such  bounds,  that  at  every  one
it  seemed  as  if  the  whole  hall  would  have
been  shaken  to    pieces.     The    queen,  over-
powered with  terror,  became  a  second    limo
isenseless  :  and  he  of  the  Savage  in  like  man-
ner, unable  to  endure  his  fears  for  her,  em-
braced Daliarte,  beseeching  him  to  save  her.
JJaliarte   approached    to    the    serpent,    and
putting  his   liaiid   in  at   the  little   door,  ho
quenched  the  tapers,  which  being  done,  the
serpent    burst  open    on  one    side,    for    the
strcugth  of  its  composition  consisted  in  the
strength  of  the  fire.    When  he  of  the  Savage
saw  all  their  fears  at  an  end,  and   his    lady
still  senseless,  he  began  afresh  to  intreat  his
brother,  that  he  would  restore  liis  queen  a  ;d
wife:    it  is  not  to  be  suid  how    well  pleased
the  sage  Daliarie  was,  sceifrg  him  so  earnest-
ly alîtctcd   to   her,    and    remembering   the
small  estimation    ht  was,  wont   to   make   of

VOL.  IV.  ^  S


'      194

women;  aiul  how  he  was  wont  mock  .it  those
who  yielded  to  them  ;  then  he  despised  love,
now  as  a  vassal  he  served  him  in  all  things,
confessing  that  none  hut  the  ignorant  would
hve  free  from  his  yoke.  Daliarte  having  pity
upon  him,  opened  the  hook  again  in  which
lie  had  read  hefore,  and  presently  the  queen
recovered,  and  seeing  herself  now  where  she
could  reach  the  knight  of  the  Savage,  she
threw  her  arms  around  his  neck,  and  clung
to  him,  as  it'  there  to  secure  herself  from  the
fears  and  dangers  which  she  had  endured  ;
and  lie,  when  he  held  her  there,  thought  that
he  could  defend  her  against  the  whole  w^orld,
and  that  neither  force  of  man,  nor  art  of
man,  could  ever  again  hereave  him  of  her:
and  in  this  joy  the}'  regarded  all  their  sorrows
as  things  which  were  pabt.

He  and  Daliarte  then  proceeded  to  shew  her
the  wonders  of  the  place,  the  sight  whereof
she  could  willingly  have  excused,  not  hav-
ing courage  to  remrvin  there.  A\  hen  they
came  into  the  chamber  where  the  pillar  was,
and  the  library  of  Melia,  seeing  the  apparel
there   of  such  rare   fashions,    and  so  great


\95

costliness^  she  thought  that  this  would  re-
componic  her  i'ur  her  j)ast  injuries,  and
wished  to  atlorn  herself  with  them,  to  show
herself  to  her  friends  ;  and  this  thought
HKide  her  long  more  to  he  among  them,llian
the  regret  wiili  whieh  she  remembered  them,
though  that  was  great.  Tliis  was  nothing
strange  ;  the  nature  of  women  is  that  they
should  be  composed  of  so  much  vanit}',
that  they  would  give  their  lives  and  souls
to  obtain  any  thing  by  whieh  they  could
provoke  others  to  envy  ;  and  so  strong  is
this  passion  in  them  that  nothing  can  equal
it.  Even  this  queen,  all  excellent  and
quiet-hearted  "as  she  was,  seeing  those
things  before  her,  which  were  the  richest
she  had  ever  beheld,  longed  to  be  at-
tired in  them,  more  for  the  sake  of  ap-
pearing belter  than  the  other  princesses,
than  of  appearing  well.  Dnliarte  told  her,
she  might  put  on  whatever  she  chose,
but  that  she  could  make  use  of  nothing
more,  the  time  not  permitting  it  ;  one  was
to  be  born  of  her,  who  in  beauty  would
exceed  all  of  her  times,  and  she  would  pos-
sess them  witli.  sovereign  delight,  and  in
s2


196

greater  doininion  than  ever  any  one  had  yel
enjoyed.

Then  Daliaite  took  his  leave,  saying  that  as
they  must  needs  travel  more  leisurely  than
he,  lie  would  forthwith  go  to  Constaniitiople,
\vhere  he  knew  that  his  presence  was  greatly
needed  to  remedy  some  things  which  could
not  be  remedied  by  force  of  arms  ;  and  he
exhorted  him  of  the  Savage  to  make  as  little
tarriance  as  might  be,  as  well  to  relieve  the
emperor  from  the  careful  thoughts  which
he  would  needs  endure  till  his  return,  as  also
to  succour  his  friends  in  the  present  danger.
Before  Daliarte  departed,  by  his  art  he
transported  all  the  treasures  of  that  palace  to
his  own  island,  where  thev  were  afterwards
made  use  of  in  the  days  whereof  he  pro-
phesied ;  and  inasmuch  as  that  which  the
cjueen  put  on  will  be  described  hereafter,  ic
is  not  spoken  of  here.

But  to  let  you  understand  by  w  hat  occasion
the  queen  of  Thrace  was  thus  enchanted,  it
is  written  in  the  chronicles  of  the  Great
Turk,  that  the  princess  Targiana,  though  she


197

was  married  at  this  time  to  Alba3'zar,  soldan
of  Babylon,  and  she  herself  lady  of  all  his
dominions,  and  to  crown  all,  lady  of  him
himself  (women  being  the  mistresses  when
they  are  passionately  loved  by  their  husbands,
some  of  whom  therefore  ought  to  keep  a  tight
rein,  seeing  the  unreasonable  liberty  which
they  assume  where  this  is  the  case  ;)  all  this
dominion,  and  the  prospect  she  had  of  every
day  coming  to  the  inheritance  of  her  father's
kingdom,  was  not  sufficient  to  make  her
Ibrget  her  anger  and  heavy  displeasure  to-
wards the  knight  of  the  Savage  Man.  This
liatred  allowed  her  no  rest,  and  it  was  dou-
bled in  her,  when  she  heard  how  he  was  king
of  Thrace,  and  married  with  Lionarda,  who
i[i  rank  and  beauty  was  nothing  inferior  to
any  princess  of  her  times.  Now  as  in  women
the  desire  of  vengeance  is  always  more  keen
than  in  any  other  persons,  and  she  despaired
to  find  any  one  who  could  satisfy  it  by  force
of  arms,  she  bethought  herself  how  to  take
revenge  by  some  other  way  ;  and  being  in-
formed that  at  the  farther  end  of  the  domi-
nions of  the  soldan  of  Persia,  there  was  u
great  enchantress  of  the  same  race  as  the
s  3


198

soldans  themselves^  by  name  Drusia  Velona,
she  wisiicd  to  see  her.  But  she  knew  not
how  to  compasá  this,  itiid  whiie  she  was  in
this  perplexity,  and  still  daily  thirsting  and
desiring  lor  revengcment,  tiie  cnehantress
herseli',  who  by  her  art  knew  every  thing,
relieved  her  by  coming  to  her  :  for  one  day
when  Targiana  was  bathing  at  noon,  she
came  down  through  the  top  ol'a  high  tower.
Terrified  at  this  sudden  appearance  she  was
about  to  cry  out,  and  cail  her  women,  but
Drusia  \  elona  made  herself  known.  So  great
was  her  joy  then,  seeing  this  wish  accom-
plished, that  she  manifested  it  with  words
and  courtesies  little  needed  by  the  enchan-
tress, and  kept  her  with  her  for  some  days,
entertaining  her  with  all  things  which  she
thought  might  yield  her  contentment  ;  and
told  her  the  desire  of  her  heart,  and  how
greatly  it  tormented  her,  beseeching  her  to
give  her  some  revengement  by  her  skill.
\'elûna  told  her  she  knew  all,  for  nothing
was  hidden  from  her,  and  she  would  satisfy
her.  I  have  well  pondered  the  matter,  she
said,  and  hr.ve  devised  the  means  to  relieve
your    over-charged  and  troubled  ihoughts  :


199

easily  might  we  be  revenged  on  the  knight
of  the  Savage  Man,  if  it  were  not  for   the
sage  Daliartc,  who  would  protect  h. m  against
me;  nevertheless,  I  have  found  out  a  practice,
which  Daliarte   little  thinks    of,  and   which
will  afflict  him  of  the  Savage  more  than  any
thing  which  could   he  done  to   his  ov,n  per-
son.    In  whatever  manner  he  can  be  injured,
said  Targiana,   I  shall  be  contented  ;  it  is  the
only  thing  I.  desire,  to  be  revenged  on  him
by  any  way   whatsoever.     \ou    know,  said
Driisia  Velona,  that  lie  is   but  slenderly  af-
fected  to  them',  who   notwithstanding  love
him  with  most  esfjecial  good  will  ;  yet  is  he
so  amorous  of  the  queen  of  Thrace  his  wife,
as  it  is  not  possible  for  any  man  to  be  more.
I  will  convey  her  intosuch  a  secret  place,  that
long  time  shall  be  necessary  to  find  out  where
she  is  ;  and  though  Daliarte  should  find  her,
let  not  that  trouble  you,  for  before  she  can
be  released,  the  empire,  which  the  knight  of
the  Savage  should  have  succoured,  shall  be
all  spoiled   and    brought   to   confusion,  and
thus  shall  you  be   satisfied.     Great   was  the
joy  which  Targiana  received  at  these  words,
liolding  their  accomplishment  to  be  certain.


200

VclouaweiU  to  work,  and  having  enchanted
the  queen  afler  the  manner  which  you  have
heard,  she  returned  to  Targiana,  whom  she
conducted  hy    her  art   to    the  j)Iace  where
Lionarda  was  enchanted,  and  let  her  see  her.
Targiana  heing  now  accustomed  to  the  works
of  Drusia  \  el(jna,  was  able  without  fear  to
survey  all   the  wonders  of"   that  palace,  and
when    she   heheld    tlie  beauty  oi"  the  queen
of  Thrace,    well   understood   that  one  who
loved  her  would  never  rest  without  her  :  and
the  pain  which  she  resented  at  the  manifest
vantage  of  Lionarda's  beauty,  abated  some-
thing of  the  pleasure  she  felt  at  seeing  her
in  this   state  ;  so    she   besought  Velona    to
close  the  enchantment,  and  fasten  the  little
door  through  which  they  beheld  her.    Dru-
sia difl  so,  and  hung  the  key  round  the  ser-
pent's neck;  then  convc^'ing  I'argiana  back,
she  herself  returned  to  Persia,  not  being  so
confident  that  Lionarda  could  not  be  releas-
ed as  she  had  expressed  herself;  and  yet  cer-
tain that   Daliarte  would   have   much  to  do
before  he  could  discover  the  manner   of  the
enchantment.     There  the  queen  of  Thrace
remained  enchanted  till  the   kniiiht  of  the


201

Savage  by  his  valour,  and  Daliartc  b}'  bis
art,  released  ber,  as  ye  have  heard.  Here
leave  we  to  speak  of  them  till  fitter  occasion^
and  relate  the  state  of  the  court,  and  how  the
great  ibrce  of  the  enemies  came  up  against
Constantinople,  whither  he  or  the  Savage
was  repairing,  his  presence  being  full  needful
there,


ÍOQ.


CHAPTER   156.


It  is  rehearsed  in  the  cVironicle  of  the  em-
peror Palincrin,  how  aiter  the  triumphs  and
sports  for  the  marriages  were  somewhat  over-
blown and  past,  some  of  the  elder  princes  were
minded  to  return  to  their  own  homes;  for
after  youth  is  past,  manhood  is  contented
with  nothiníí  but  those  thin2;s  to  which  it
liath  habituated  itself.  For  this  reason,
though  Don  Duardos,  and  Rccindos,  and
Arnedos,  and  Tarnaes,  and  Polendos,  and
Belcar,  had  been  marvellously  fond  of  ce-
remonies, and  had  past  in  them  good  part  of
their  lives,  as  is  written  in  the  book  of  Prima-
leon,  yet  now,  when  age  began  to  weigh  up-
on them,  and  they  were  occupied  with  the
cares   of  governing  their  kingdoms,    they


^03

witnessed  these  things  with  K^ss  pleasure  than
(lid  the  young  men  whom  the  novelty  of  such
things  delighted,  and  their  time  of  life  en-
abled tobedeliglited.    Tor  this  reason  there-
fore having  determined  to  depart,  they  weic
about  to  put  their  determination  in  eíTcet,  it'
Fortune,  which  had  reserved   them  ior  dif-
ferent end,  had  not  prevented.     For  at   this
time  Targiana  gave  intelligence  to  the  court,,
by  a  damsel   whom  she  sent  thither,  of  the
innumerable  fleet  of  ships,  the  great  [)owcr
of  men,  and  the  terrible  giants  and    famous
kniirhts  who  were  now  collected  together  in
ilie  port  of"  Armintia,  for  the  destruction  of
Constantinople  and  its   defenders.     The  ar-
mada was  fully  equipped,  and   waited   only
for  a  wind.     And  though  many  great  princes
came  therein,    Alba\'zar   was  by   consent  of
all  appointed  captain  general,  wiih  .sovereign
powers,  as  he  who  in  arms  and  in  dominion
had  the  vantage   over  all,  and  in  his  hatred
more  cause  for  the  war  than  all  the  others.

As  soon  as  this  news  spreail  through  the
city,  great  was  ihe  stir  and  tumult  in  all
persiHis.     The  young,  who  were  desirous  of


204

glory,  received  it  wltl»  great  jov  and  with
acclamations  ;  the  old,  who  thought  the  fame
which  they  had  acquired  in  youth  might
have  excused  them  nou-  from  new  labours,
n-ere  lotii  that  their  repose  .hould  be  dis-
turbed ;  and  they  had  to  consider  also  the
weight  of  this  great  business,  and  with  what
loss  and  how  ujany  deaths  could  so  mi-dity
an  armament  be  resisted.  Among  the  peo-
ple there  was  fear  and  alarm  ;  for  if  Fortune
should  prove  against  them,  they  looked  to
tlie  waste  of  their  substance,  and  the  de-
solation of  their  houses.  The  emperor,  in
whose  good,  fortune  his  subjects  had  alway
trusted,  was  at  this  time  so  worn  out  bv
course  of  nature,  that  he  had  now  lost  the
use  of  all  his  limbs,  and  could  not  rise
irom  his  bed,  only  his  judgment  was  some-
times clear,  with  the  which  to  give  them
counsel.

Primaleon  was  by  nature  warlike  and  ricrht
valiant,  and  he  was  not  sorry  that  this  dan-
ger had  happened  when  he  had  so  noble  a
company  assembled  together,  whom  other-
wise it  would  not  have  been  easy  to  have  col-


205

Icctcd  in  time.  And  with  great  prudence  lie
began  to  look  to  the  fortifications  of  the  citv,
and  called  upon  all  his  vassals.  The  stir  was
so  general  that  no  person  remained  still;
some  provided  arois,  other  surcoals  and  gal-
lantries, each  according  to  what  his  age  and
condition  required.  The  kings  and  princes
who  were  in  the  court  dispatched  couriers
to  their  own  dominions,  ordering  those  whom
they  had  left  governors,  to  collect  the  best
and  greatest  force  they  could  for  succour  in
ihis  great  urgency.  Certes,  there  was  not
any  province  in  all  Christendom  so  remote
as  not  to  be  engaged  in  this  business,  for
every  one  had  at  that  time  either  its  king  or
princely  inheritor  in  the  very  seat  and  cen-
tre of  the  danger,  all  being  in  Constantin-
ople, and  he  who  was  not  there  thought
himself  ignoble  and  unvvorth}'  of  a  name.
So  that  the  whole  world  was  thus  called  to
arms.  How  much  the  greater  the  fame  ran
of  the  mighty  power  of  the  enemies,  so
much  the  more  diligence  was  exerted  in  all
parts  for  the  succour;  but  as  we  shall  speak
hereafter  of  what  the  succours  were  which
arrived  from  all  parts,  let  us  now  return  to

VOL.  IV.        *  T


€06

lhe  cinpcror.  IIc^  when  he  hearrl  tlie  iic\v.<»
aiiíl  lhe  uproar  among  the  people,  still  usirjg
his  wonted  presence  of  mind  and  singular
benevolence,  would  be  carried  oui  ot"  the
palace  in  an  oj)en  liitc;r  upon  men's  shoul-
ders, and  going  in  this  manner  through  all
the  streets  and  public  places,  accompanied
by  the  kings  and  jirinccs  who  were  at  that
time  in  his  court,  he  inspected  every  thing,
and  provided  all  things  that  were  needtui.
And  as  now  his  beard  and  head  were  white
by  reason  of  his  great  age,  and  the  majesty
of  his  appearance  carried  with  it  great  show
of  authority  and  benignity  as  well  ;  the
sight  of  him  served  to  make  those  dispel
fear  who  before  had  entertained  it.  Above
all,  as  he  was  generally  beloved,  and  it  was
now  many  days  since  the  people  had  seen
him,  there  was  not  one  now  who  did  not
come  to  meet  him,  pouring  blessings  upon
his  head,  mingled  with  tears  at  beholding
the  extreme  weakness  of  his  age;  nor  was
there  any  one  so  fond  of  himself,  or  so  ava-
ricious of  life,  that  he  would  not  at  that  hour
have  willingly  given  a  great  part  of  his  own
allotted    tiuie  to   have  lengthened   out  his;


207

thus  it  is  that  benevolent  and  merciful
princes  are  beloved.  Princes,  and  kings,
and  laiight^;,  surrounded  th(,'  litter  and  ac-
companied it  on  ioot.  And  in  ibis  manner
they  went  through  the  city,  inspecting  the
walls  and  towers,  and  providing  whatever
was  necessary.  Certes,  this  was  so  honour-
able a  day  for  him,  that  it  seemed  all  his  ho-
nours and  victories  of  former  times  had  then
received  their  consummation  and  crown.

On  the  morrow  ho  called  for  his  son  Piinia-
leon,  aiul  in  the  presence  of  all  made  this
speech  unto  him  :  Amid  all  the  prosperity
wherewith  Fortune  hath  favoured  me  in  my
time,  my  heart  was  never  fully  at  rest,  being
aluay  uncertain  what  would  be  the  end
thcreot",  for  in  (he  end  only  is  the  true  con-
tentment of  all  things  wound  up  and  sealed,
when  it  is  goofl  and  conformable  to  what
hatii  gone  before:  and  now  do  I  perceive
what  1  owe  lor  this  to  our  Jjord,  seeing  that
in  the  extiemily  of  old  age,  when  my
strength  hath  failed  me  altogether,  and
Constantino[)le  is  about  to  be  besieged,  and
my  empire  in  danger,  I  behold  for  its  de-
T  2


208
t
fence  and  succour  my  house  filled  with  such

great  princes  and  renou  lied  kiiii^his,  in  wlioni
"all  courage  is  cum  prized,  approved  hy  their
feats  ot"  prowess,  and  known  and  feared  be-
cause of  them,  uhose  names  must  perforce
excite  fear  and  dismay  in  the  minds  ot  their
enemies  ;  and  for  tlieir  captain,  thee,  my  son
Primaleon,  to  wliom  the  care  of  this  great
enterprise  rightly  appertaineth,  touching
thee  so  nearly  by  reason  of  the  authority
thou  boldest  in  this  empire,  and  thy  hope
of  succeeding  to  il;  tliis  danger  comes  upon
thee  in  the  best  time  ol  life,  when  tnou  canst
jointly  avail  thyself  boih  ot  strem^ih  and  pru-
dence.  IMy  aid  can  be  in  notliing  but  in
giving  thee  counsel.  1  exlioit  thee,  that  if
at  times  that  haughty  a;id  courageous  heart
which  nature  hath  given  thee,  shouki,  led
by  its  courage,  seek  to  go  beycMid  the  bininds
that  reason  in  hese  cases  prescribes,  thou
wouldst  restrain  it  vvitii  the  acivice  of  these
princes  tliy  friends  and  kinsiien,  and  v. ilh
mine,  who  as  a  father  sluill  still  have  an  eye
on  thee,  andas  one  of  greater  experience"
will  still  tell  thee  what  is  certain.  More  fre-
quently is  an  enemy  defeated   by  prudence


209

tlian  by  force  of  arms  ;  and  to  wish  to  trust
every  thins:  to  them  is  sometimes  hurtful.
For  as  brave  spirits  are  needful  to  abidu  dan-
ger, so  at  times  is  it  hurtful  to  seek  it  one
of  season  :  and  tilings  of  great  import  should
be  done  with  such  order,  that  no  disorder
can  impede  tlicir  suci-css  :  these  arc  not
things  in  which  the  impidse  of  inclination
is  to  be  followed  ;  for  then  would  the  hjss  be
certain,  and  lhe  remccly  full  doubtful.  \o\.\,
Sirs,  whom  your  approved  prowess  luitli
taught  -to  lose  all  fear  in  all  things  of  vvliat-
ever  quality,  1  beseech  ye,  regard  this  dan-
ger as  it  recjuires  ;  for  1  fear  mc,  that  by
reason  of  vour  i^reat  courage  ve  hold  it  too
lightly,  whereof  some  ill  may  ensue.  And
tiiis  is  all  I  lear;  as  to  the  rcsl,  so  confident
am  I,  lliat  I  do  not  care  to  bid  ye  to  be  of
good  heart — !  hat  ye  are  by  nature;  and  it  were
wasting  words  to  e.\hort  your  courage.

So  well  content  were  these  princes  with  this
exhortation,  delivered  by  so  rare  and  excel-
knt  a  prince,  and  at  such  an  age,  that  even
if  nature  had  made  them  weak,  Ifis  presence
ixnd  authority-,  and  the  weight  of  hi»i
T  3


210

speeches,  would  have  given  them  courage.
Piimaleoa  kissed  his  hand,  wliich  he  gave
afteivvards  lo  Arnedos  and  Don  Duardos,
his  sons-in-iaw,  and  to  his  son  Polcndos,
giving  them  his  blessing  with  many  tears.
All  the  rest  he  embraced  ;  and  there  was
not  one  among  them  who  could  refrain
from  weeping,  resenting  his  extreme  feeble-
ness at  a  season  when  his  strength  woald
have  been  so  greatly  needed.  Each  then
returned  to  his  lodging,  to  make  ready  arms
and  caparisons,  all  being  eager  lor  the  hour
of  proof.


211


CHAPTER  157.


After  some  day^,  which  were  past  in  such
consultations  and  determinations  as  such  ii
time  required,  the  damsel  of  the  princess
Targiana,  by  whom  the  intelligence  had  been
brought,  took  her  leave  and  departed.  The
empress,  Gridonia,  and  Polinarda,  showed  her
great  favour,  and  guerdoned  her  with  many
jewels  and  things  of  great  value,  thinking
thereby  in  part  to  requite  her  for  the  good-
will which  had  brought  her  there.  To  the
princess  Targiana  they  sent  the  thanks  which
so  great  a  thing  deserved  ;  and  certes,  the
emperor  was  so  allcctionate  to  the  virtue
and  nobleness  of  Targiana,  ior  the  sens(>
which  he  retained  of  the  service  slie  ha:'
done  him  in  his  own  family,  that  one  of  the


312

things  vliich  he  gave  inosl  in  charge  to  his
son  and  to  the  other  princes  was,  that  if  at
any  time  occasion  should  offer  in  which  they
could  requite  her,  they  would  shew  themr
selves  not  ungrateful.

Many  days  had  not  past  after  the  damsel'^
departure,  before  some  of  the  dwellers  on
the  sea  coast  gave  news  of  the  fleet  which
appeared  in  the  distance;  it  was  in  truth  a
mighty  power,  and  fear  made  it  appear  more
so,  for  they  affirmed  that  the  whole  sea  was
so  covered  with  ships  and  gallies,  that  no-
thing else  could  be  seen.  Presently  the
coasting  vessels  and  fishermen's  barks  began
to  enter  the  port,  who  being  terrified  at  the
sight  of  this  great  armada,  hastened  thither,
thinking  that  their  safety  lay  there  rather
than  in  any  other  part.  These,  as  nearer
eye-witnesses,  could  better  declare  the  cer-
tain truth,  and  they  afinrmed  among  other
things,  that  only  the  diversity  of  musical
instruments  was  such  and  so  various,  as  if  the
imiversal  world  were  there  gathered  toge-
ther ;  and  as  the  mode  of  exercising  them,
and  also  the  fashion  thereof  were  so  divers^


íilS

it  appeared  thereby  that  there  were  many
(livers  princes  and  captains.  Moreover,  the
gailies,  which  were  separate  from  the  other
fleet,  made  such  a  show  and  muster  as  excited
still  greater  wonder,  for  the  sea  being  calm
and  quiet,  they  came  with  tlieir  oars  stretched
out  in  order,  and  the  masters  and  captains
thereof  clad  in  glittering  arms,  and  with
adornments  of  silk  and  gold,  which  glittered
afar  oft'.  Drums  were  beating  and  trumpets
sounding,  and  at  times,  when  it  was  needed,
the  whistles  of  the  masters  rung  around,  all
things  combining  to  render  it  a  grand  spec-
tacle. They  who  brought  the  tidings  to  the
port  were  so  overcome  with  fear,  that  none
of  them  could  give  any  regular  relation,  and
no  two  gave  the  same  account;  but  there
were  none  among  them  who  did  not  hold  it
for  a  mighty  power  ;  and  every  one  increased
ihc  wonder  according  to  the  measure  of  his
iears,  and  he  who  had  most  words  at  will,
related  the  most  marvels.

This  news  so  wrought  uj)on  Primaleon  and
all  the  others,  that  they  went  out  through  the
city  to  encourage  the  people,  whom  the  fear


214

of  destruction  now  so  near  a})i")ioaching,  had
bereft  of  all  heart  and  judgment.  That  same
day  an  enemy's  galley  entered  the  harbour
with  a  white  flag  at  the  prow  in  token  of
peace  and  safe  conduct.  Having  come  nigli
the  shore  a  page  landed  in  seemly  apparel,
who  went  to  ask  leave  of  the  empeior  for  an
ambassador  to  come  on  shore,  who  brought
a  message  from  Albayzar  and  the  other
princes  in  the  fleet.  He  being  returned  with
this  permission,  there  landed  from  the  gal-
ley a  man  of  great  stature,  with  a  long  white
beard,  clad  after  the  Turkish  manner,  in
long  robes  oi  silk  wrought  with  gold  in  a
rare  fashion,  and  accompanied  by  four
knights,  who  also  b}'  their  adornments  and
the  authority  of  their  persons,  appeared  to  be
men  of  great  esteem.  As  they  went  their
way  to  the  palace,  the  crowd  followed  after
them,  for  in  these  cases  they  who  have  least
interest  in  the  matter  are  always  the  most
desirous  to  be  able  to  uive*  news.     Some  of


*  As  a  sample  of  the  manner  in  which  tbTs  romance  has
been  debased  in  the  old  translation,  I  will  here  insert  the
wtiole  ot  this  passage  as  conprest  and  flattened  by  some  of
A.  Munday's  journeymen. — "After  the  manner  as  I  have


'21ô

lhe  princes  were  of  opinion  that  it  were  bet-
ter he  should  be  heard  before  l^imaleon,
without  the  emperor's  being  present,  that  he
might  not  be  a  witness  of  his  great  feeble-
ness, as  in  trutli  the  certainty  which  he  could
report  of  that,  would  greatly  encourage  the
enemy.  Others  were  of  a  contrary  advice,
affirming  that  the  state  of  the  emperor  was
notorious  to  all  persons,  and  the  more  they
should  endeavour  to  conceal  it  from  the  ene-
my, the  worse  would  they  suppose  it  to  be;
and  since  his  facidtics  were  yet  so  entire  that
none  could  return  a  hetter  answer,  the  em-
bassy ought  to  be  rendered  to  him  himself,
and  to  no  other.  This  opinion  prevailed, and
being  made  known  to  the  emperor,  he  at
ihcir  desire   gave  order  that  he  should   be


declared  unto  j'ou  alieady,  the  emperor  provided  for  the
entertaining  of  his  enemies,  and  as  his  majesty  was  advisirig
himself  abjut  these  affairs,  he  was  advertised  that  an  am-
bassador was  arrived  at  the  port  of  the  city,  who  demanded
sale  conduct  before  he  would  come  on  shore.  1  lis  majesty,
with  the  counsel  of  the  kings  and  princes,  was  content  tu
grant  his  request  :  whereupon  the  ambassador  look  landing,
and  being  ..ccompaniïd  with  four  knight?,  he  took  hii
n-ay  to  tiitt  tmpcror's  puhicc."


216

canied  into   the  Hull  of  Audience,   \Al)crc
being  accompanied    by  hi^;  captains,  he    re-
ceived the  ambassador.     He  having  entered,
turned  his  eyes  upon  them  all,  and  it  plainly
nppearcd  to  him  by  what  lie  saw,  that  belbrc
ilie   ciiy   could    be   taken,    there  would    be
something  to  do.      Advancing   iarlher,    he
came  before  the  emperor,  and  heing  a  man
who  had  seen   much  and  was  discreet  more-
over, he  demeaned  himself  towards  him  with
much  reverence  and  courtesy,  and  with  less
uride    tlian   the   ambassadors   of  the  enemy
had  heretofore  been  wont  to  display.     The
emperor  received  him  with  his   accustomed
benevolence  ;  and  the  stir  being  hushed,  the
;mibassador  standing  up,  began  to  say  with
a  loud  voice,    High  and  mighty  prince,  I
could  have  wished  that  this  siege  had   come
lipon  thee  when  thou  wert  in  other  condition,
and  in  the   full  strength  of  man,  that  so  in
ihe  struggle   and  the  danger  of  thy  people
îhou  mightest  have  called  thyself  their  com-
panion, as  well  as  their  lord  ;  and  that  when
die  victory  in   so  great  an  enterprize  shall
lie  won    by  thine   enemies,    it  might  have
been   worthy   of  greater    glory.     Albayzar    ,


217

soldan  of  Babylon  and  prince  of  Turkey,
with  the  other  soldans,  kings,  and  mighty
princes,  send  me  to  let  thee  know,  that  they
are  come  unto  this  country  with  all  their
power  and  the  aid  of  their  allies,  with  the
desire  of  taking  vengeance  for  all  tiie  hurt
which  they  have  in  aforetime  sustained  from
it  ;  and  they  are  come  with  greater  prepa-
ration both  of  men  and  of  arms  than  was
needful  on  such  an  occasion.  Nevertheless^
Albayzar  holding  thy  former  nobleness  in
remembrance,  and  that  which  thou  hast
shown  in  old  time  here  in  this  house  to  Alche-
diana  and  dorique  his  parents,  and  since,  to
the  princess  Targiana,  who  is  greatly  averse
to  this  war,  proposeth  to  thee  this  means  of
accommodation  ;  that  thou  consenting  to
deliver  up  the  city,  and  with  it  the  knight
of  the  Savage  Man,  tliy  grandson,  king  of
Tliracc,  who  is  the  cause  of  these  evils,  they
will  leave  thee  the  rest  of  thy  dominions  free
and  secure  ;  and  hold  themselves  so  satislied
with  these  terms,  that  they  will  the  same  day
draw  olf  their  tleet  from  thy  country  and  re-
turn. Certes,  for  the  love  which  I  bear  thy
virtue,  Í  should  advise  thee,  though  rc-
voi.  IV.  V


218

ceiving  great  pain  in  this,  yet  by  cbusing
the  lesser  evil,  to  avoid  the  greater;  for  less
evil  it  is  to  lose  a  city  than  an  empire,  and
to  deliver  up  one  man,  than  to  see  many
die.

Waste  no  more  time,  replied  the  emperor,
in  advising  me,  though  the  good  will  with
which  thou  speakest  be  worthy  of  thanks.
I  should  think  it  litige  to  deliver  up  one  man
for  the  preservation  of  many,  but  if  that  man
be  such  that  he  singly  is  able  to  preserve  all
the  others,  whom  would  you  have  commit
such  an  error  r  And  for  giving  up  the  cit^-,
that  will  God  forbid  ;  for  it  would  not  be
fitting  that  this  place,  wherein  he  is  so  often
celebrated,  should  be  yielded  to  the  enemies
of  his  faith,  that  they  with  their  unholy  sa-
crifices should  pollute  his  temples.  Say  unto
Albayzar,  that  if  he  understood  what  he  owes
unto  this  house,  he  would  come  to  it  after  a
different  manner,  and  far  differently  should
he  be  here  made  welcome  ;  and  that  though
all  others  were  leagued  together  for  the  de-
struction of  my  realm,  he  of  all  men  would  be
bound  singly  to  resist  them.     But  I  trust  in


219

God  that  as  other  fleets  ere  this  have  been  de-
stroyed withhi  sight  0Í' the  walls  of  Constan-
tinople^ and  other  chiefs  and  other  nations
have  found  their  graves  in  its  fields,  that
these  also  shall  have  the  same  unhappy  end.
As  for  mine  old  age,  Í  complain  not  of  it  ;
since  time  hath  spared  me  that  I  might  see
it  conclude  with  the  Joy  of  this  victory  more.
And  for  the  labours  and  dangers  which  I
should  have  partaken,  this  company,  with
whom  1  am  suiroiinded,  may  well  excuse  my
presence  ;  I  have  such  confidence  in  them,
that  I  thhik  little  of  all  dangers  with  which
lhe  time  threatens  me.

It  may  be,  sir  emperor,  said  the  ambassador,
that  fortune  which  till  now  hath  never  of-
fered you  any  displeasure,  prevents  you  from
understanding  the  danger  in  which  your
stale  .-<tiinds,  and  tlience  it  is  (hat  you  reject
that  advice  which  be>t  suits,  you.  Í  return
with  your  answer.  The  Gods  bear  witness
for  me  of  the  good  will  with  wiiich  I  gave
you  my  counsel.  Without  longer  tarriance
he  rcii:rned  to  his  galley,  being  full  nobly
acco\npanied,  for  so  the  emperor  gave  order,
u  'i


Í220

Having  re-embarked  and  taken  leave  of  those
who  accompanied  him,  he  returned  to  the
fleet,  where  the  princes  gladly  welcomed
him.  And  they  rejoiced  in  the  emperor's
answer,  for  the  greater  part  of  them  had
been  discontented,  thinking  that  he  would
accept  the  terms  which  were  proflered  him,
by  vv  hich  means  Albayzar  alone  would  receive
honour  and  satisfaction,  honour  being  that
of  which  they  who  seek  it  should  ever  be
most  envious,


Sfîl


CHAPTER  158.


The  ambassador  being  thus  departed,  the
emperor  i'uhnerin  called  to  council;  und  as
the  time  now  required  more deedsthan  words,
ievv  words  were  there  expended,  only  every
one  had  his  charge  appointed  him.  I'he  city
was  committed  to  the  emperor  \  ernao,  and
the  king  Polendos,  they  twain  being  the
eldest  captains,  with  five  thousandliorsemen,
and  four  hundred  loot,  all  ot"  the  emperor's
pecjple,  who  being  nearer  at  hand,  and  as
the  enemy  had  been  long  expected,  hail  had
time  to  arrive.  Don  Duardos  was  chosea
by  general  consent,  chief  captain  and  go-
vernor of  the  field,  having  un<ler  his  conduct
two  thousand  horsemen  ;  tidl  power  over  the
one  and  the  other  being  reserved  to  Primuleon,
u  3


222

as  well  within  the  city  as  without,  he  being
the  person  to  whom  the  main  care  belonged.
For  the  guard  of  the  person  of  Don  Duardos
there  was  the  giant  JDramuziando,  who  at
this  time  was  not  the  one  that  did  the  fewest
feats  worthy  to  be  held  in  perpetual  remem-
brance ;  Mayortes  the  Great  Khan  ;  Pridos
duke  of  Wales;  Rosiram  de  la  Brunda,  his
son;  Argolante  duke  of  Ortam,  Pompides,
and  fifty  English  knights  who  came  with
them  to  the  feasts  at  the  marriages.  Over  the
other  horsemen,  who  were  about  eight  thou-
sand, four  captaitis  were  appointed.  Arncdos
king  of  France  over  fifteen  hundred  ;  he  had
for  his  body-guard  his  sons  Graciano  and
Goariin,  and  Germam  of  Orleans  with  fifty
French  knights;  king  Recindos  of  Spain
over  fifteen  hundred  also,  with  the  princes
Beroldoand  Onistaklo  hissons,  forhis guard;
and  the  giant  Almourol,  with  an  hundred
Spanish  knights.  The  soldan  Belagriz  was
captain  over  all  his  own  people,  being  four
thousand  horsemen;  for  as  hath  been  said,  he
came  to  this  court  royally  accompanied,  and
as  his  dominions  were  nigh  at  hand,  there  had
heen  time  for  him  to  receive  succour^  since


the  coming  of  tlic  enemy  was  certainly
known  ;  for  the  guard  of"  his  own  person,  he
had  provided  one  hundred  of"  tiie  chief'est
kniglits  of  his  court,  among  whom  was  his  son
Blandidon,  in  whose  prowess  he  had  great
trust.  To  Belcar  duke  of'Pontusand  Durazo,
was  committed  the  like  charge  as  to  the
kings  liecindos  anti  Arnedos,  having  for  the
guard  of  his  own  person  Don  Rosuel  and
BcHsarte  his  sons,  witli  twenty  knights.

To  king  Tarnaes  of  Laeedemonia,  who  was
now  an  old  man,  was  given  the  guard  of  the
palace,  for  tiie  more  security  of  the  empress
and  the  otlier  queens  and  ladies,  they  heing
in  such  i"ear  |hat  nothing  could  give  them
comfort  ;  lie  had  attending  on  him  two  hun-
(.h"ed  knights.  Primaieon  took  imder  his
own  immcdiatechargesevcnluindred  knights,
wherewith  he  had  regard  as  well  to  the  field
as  to  the  city,  and  visited  every  part  and
place.

Palmerin,  Florendos,  Platir,  and  divers  other
knights,  were  at  their  own  disposal,  to  give
succour  whctcvcr   they  perceived  most  ne-


cesslty.  And  though  the  court  was  well
stored  \\\ú\  tioble  chivahy,  yet  was  the  pre-
sence of  him  of  the  Savage  greatly  desired,
and  his  want  no  less  lelt,  being  great  indeed
at  such  a  time.  The  emperor  and  Don  Du-
ardos,  and  all  the  other  chivalry,  greatly  re-
gretted the  absence  of  such  a  man.

The  captainships  and  charges  being  thus  al-
lotted, and  the  knights  informed  what  banner
they  were  to  follow,  and  the  foot  soldiers,  who
were  about  fifteen  thousand,  the  same  ;  on
the  following  morning  at  sunrise  Don  Duar-
dos  gave  order  to  beat  the  alarum,  for  intel-
ligence was  brought  that  the  Turkish  armada
had  arrived,  and  that  thev  were  about  to  land
about  half  a  league  below  the  city  ;  where-
upon, accompanied  with  the  other  princes
and  captains  with  their  banners  all  in  order,
he  issued  out  to  oppose  their  landing.  The
emperor  caused  himself  to  be  carried  up  into
a  high  tower  of  his  palace,  which  command-
ed the  view  in  that  direction,  that  he  might
see  what  past.  The  empress  and  the  prin-
cesses wishing  to  do  the  same,  besought
Primaleon  to  place  them  where  they  could


sec  the  sight.  But  when  tliey  perceived  so
great  a  multitude  of  nations,  and  such  a
sum  OÍ  shipá  as  far  as  the  eye  could  reach,
and  so  many  splendid  arn^is  glittering  Ironi
atar,  and  such  various  and  loud  cries  and
clamours  as  seemed  to  rend  the  very  lirma-
mept,  and  banners  of  many  colours  giving
show  oi  iiovv  uiany  ciiieis  were  there  assem-
bled together,  úíCj.  had  not  heart  long  to
look  upon  such  a  -sight;  but  returniug  to  the
empress's  apartment,  every  one  began  to
bewail  her  misfortune,  tor  most  of  ihcm  had

their    husbands  iind  ciiiklreii  in    this   srreat

o

danger,  so  that  none  v.as  free  from  lear.
Primaleon  encouraged  them  with  chearful
■words,  and  kingTarnaes  did  the  same;  but  it
booted  not  to  give  them  good  hope,  for  great
lear  so  troubles  the  judgment,  that  it  is  un-
able to  perceive  the  remedy  even  when  it  is
pointed  out.

Don  Duardoi?  having  rcacl'ed  the  place
where  the  enemy  meant  to  disembark,  dis-
tributed his  caplaiiis  along  the  beach,  least
while  they  were  busied  in  one  part  the  Turks
might  land  at  another.     But  this  was  of  no


226

avail,  for  the  defenders  were  so  few  and  the
enemies  so  many,  that  it  was  impossible  to
protect  all  points.  Don  Duardos  with  his
body  repaired  to  that  part  where  he  saw  the
greatest  need,  which  was  where  Albayzar
himse.'i  came,  accompanied  by  the  most
notable  knights  of  the  fleet,  and  by  two
giants,  who  in  bigness  and  fierceness  seemed
to  exceed  all  others  ;  and  here  there  was
much  to  do,  for  the  enemy  seeing  their
leader  there,  prest  on  to  follow  him  ;  and
they  of  the  emperor  did  wonders  to  defend
the  landing,  m?.ny  being  burton  both  sides.
Albayzar  perceiving  that  it  would  be  difficult
to  win  his  landing,  according  to  the  stout
resistance  which  was  made,  ordered  these
giants  to  step  from  the  boat  into  the  water,
where  it  was  so  deep  as  to  be  up  to  their
breasts.  Each  of  them  tarried  in  one  hand
an  iron  mace  of  exceeding  great  weight,  and
in'the  other  a  shield  which  was  rimmed  with
hoops  of  steel  of  exceeding  strength  ;  and
such  was  the  surpassing  strength  with  which
they  were  gifted,  that  never  a  blow  which
they  delivered  but  felled  him  who  received
it.     In  this  manner  they    began  to  secure


227

the  landing,  for  every  one  who  saw  the  lia-
vock  they  made,  made  way  for  them.  The
hrave  Dramuziando  seeing  this  slaughter
made  by  these  two  devils,  leapt  from  his
horse,  and  rushed  into  the  water,  and  cover-
ing himself  with  his  shield  went  against  him
that  was  the  foremost  of  the  twain,  and  they
two  began  a  beautiful  battle.  Don  Duardos
fearing  that  if  the  other  giant  should  come
up  to  help  his  comrade  they  might  slay
Dramuziando,  which  would  be  a  great  loss,
encouraged  by  his  own  good  heart,  dismount-
ed, meaning  to  be  the  one  that  should  pre-
vent them.  Then  began  the  press  to  be  hot,
for  they  of  the  emperor,  seeing  their  leader
on  foot,  every  man  would  accompany  him.
On  the  other  side  Albayzar,  seeing  liis
giants  opposed  by  such  brave  enemies,
would  not  let  his  companions  have  so
much  the  vantage  of  him,  but  threw  him-
self in  like  maimer  into  the  water,  being  in
like  manner  accompanied  by  his  people.
I'hca  waxed  the  battle  so  fierce,  that  blood
began  to  change  the  colour  of  the  sea.

The  brave  ralmcrin,  who  was  doing  wonders


in  a  distant  part  of  the  batllc,  hearing  the
cry  on  that  side,  and  seeing  so  many  loose
horses  in  the  field,  presently  coneluded
that  there  was  the  place  of  danger.  And
spurring  that  way  his  own  horse,  which  now
for  pure  fatigue  could  hardly  carry  him,  he
rode  up,  where  aeeing  his  father  Don  Duar-
dos  in  the  water,  all  covered  with  blood,
and  engaged  in  battle,  with  so  terrible  a
giant,  lie  leapt  ofl",  and  forcing  his  way
through  the  battle,  came  up  to  him,  and
put  himself  before  him,  saying.  Leave  me.
Sir,  to  withstand  this  enemy,  and  accompany
Dramuziando  ;  it  is  not  fitting  that  you  who
are  chosen  out  to  be  the  support  of  the
whole  army,  should  put  yourself  forward  in
every  danger,  for  it  is  to  the  general  hurt.
If  Don  Duardos  had  not  himself  well  per-
ceived that  it  did  not  become  a  comman-
der so  greatly  to  hazard  his  person,  he  was
so  desirous  of  victory  that  he  would  not  have
relinquished  this  to  his  son  :  but  seeing  how
the  matter  stood,  he  drew  back,  and  gave
him  place.  Albayzar  meantime  was  not  idle,
but  laid  the  way  open  before  him  witii  hi*
sword  ;  but  now  the  valiant  Florendos,  who


225)

had  till  now  been  engaged  elsewhere,  met
hiui  ;  and  so  notable  and  terrible  was  the  com-
bat which  ensued  between  these  men,  that
neither  remained  after  it  in  plight  for  another
awhile.  The  giant  Dramuziando  behaved
himself  so  well,  that  by  fair  force  he  slew  his
enemy,  being  himself  so  punished  by  his
hands,  that  he  was  carried  into  the  city  on
men's  shoulders,  by  order  of  Don  Diiardo?.
Palmerin  of  England  had  less  to  do  with  his
giant,  for  he'/ound  him  well  marked  with  his
father's  blows,  .and  being  fresh  himself,  pre-
sently killed  him  ;  yet  not  without  receiving
some  wounds  in  requital,  and  in  such  places,
that  for  fifteen  days  he  could  not  bear  arms.
Albayzar  seeing  himself  wounded  and  hardly
handled  by  Florendos,  and  his  giants  slain,
and  that  lor  this  reason  the  others  were  dis-
mayed, retreated  into  his  boat,  leaving  Flo-
rendos also  well  marked  by  his  isword.  In
tiie  same  manner  all  they  who  could  retreat-
ed, and  they  who  could  not,  perished  either
in  the  water,  or  by  their  enemies'  hands.

Don  Duardos  seeing  that  the  Turks  were  re-
embarking,  went  to  horse,  and  made  signal

VOL.    IV.         »  X


230

that  his  people  should  rc-mount  also.    Then
seeing  that  there  was  still  much  iighting  in
many  places  along  the  beach,  where  Arn^dos
and  his  division  on  one  part,  the  soldan  Bcla-
griz  in  another,  and  Recindos  and  i3e]car  each
at  his  station  were  doing  ^ronders,  he  held
this  good  beginning  for  a  good  sign.     But  it
was  told   him  that  I'lorendos,    Platir,  Blan-
didon,and  the  giant  Almourol^were  all  carried
to  thecitvwellnighsensclessforlosá  of  blood,
and  that  Belcar  and  Recindos  were  sorelv
handled,  and  Palmerin  sore  wounded,  and
Dramuziando  so  that  his   life  was  despai-ed
of;  and  then  he  began  to  think  more  of  what
had  past,  calling  to  mind  that  if  every  victory
were  to  cost  as  much,  few  such  would  suffice
for  then-  utter  ruin.    And  as  it  was  now  noon
he  gave  order  that  all  the  wounded  should  re-
treat to  the  city  ;  and  they  were  so  many  that
they  made  the  sound  lose  hope.     Primaleon
then  came  into  the  field  with  his  seven  hun-
dred  knights,  to  give  some  relief  to  those  who
remamed  there,  and   would   fain  have  per-
suaded Don   Duardos  and   the   other  cap-
tarns  to  take  some  repose;  but  neither  his
persuasions,  nor  the  need  they  felt  could  in.


231

duce  them  to  do  this,  till  night  came  on,
Sorrowful  was  that  night,  and  full  of  dismay
to  those  in  the  cit}-,  for  on  one  hand  they
heard  the  groans  of  the  wounded,  and  on  the
other  lamentations  for  the  dead;  and  with-
out the  cries  of  the  enemy  and  the  sound  of
their  instruments,  ISot  that  the  enemy  them-
selves were  without  loss;  in  truth,  their  loss
had  been  far  greater,  but  the  greatness  of
their  multitudes  made  them  feel  it  less.


X   2


OOn


C  IL  1  PT  ER    159.


When  the  emperor's  captains  were  tlius
come  into  the  city  with  their  people,
they  passed  the  night  in  visiting  them  that
were  wounded,  whom  Primaleon  found  to
be  so  man}',  and  judged  the  want  of  their
help  to  be  such,  as  he  was  out  of  hope  to
defend  the  enemy  from  entering  on  land  the
next  day.  And  most  of  all,  for  that  Palme-
rin  of  England,  Florendos,  king  Recindos,
Belcar,  Arnedos,  Don  Duardos,  with  the
principal  knights  of  the  court,  among  whom
were  prince  Beroldo,  Don  Rosuel,  and  Beli-
sarte,  were  in  such  case,  as  they  could  not
endm-e  to  bear  arms  for  some  days  ;  and  if
they  had  attempted  it,  it  would  have  been
to  their  great  hurt.    Upon  this  he  concluded.


233

with  the  general  advice^  to  let  the  enemies
take  landing,  and  suffer  them  to  pitch  their
tents  without  opposition.  In  the  meanwhile
the  wounded  persons  Vt'ould  be  in  better  dis-
position, and  the  succours  they  looked  for
would  be  likewise  arrived,  wherewith  they
had  good  ho[)e  to  bid  the  enemy  a  brave
battle,  and  with  banners  flying  before  the
walls  of  Constantinople,  to  win  the  victory
with  more  joy  to  themselves,  and  greater  de-
struction of  their  enemies  ;  meantime  they
would  provide  for  all  occasions  in  such  sort,
that  the  besiegers  should  feel  the  difficulties
of  the  siege  as  much  as  the  besieged  them-
selves. This  being  resolved  on,  Don  Duar-
dos  and  Primaleon  looked  to  the  cure  of  the
wounded  ;  but  there  was  little  to  do  with
them  ;  Palmerin  being  accompanied  by  the
fair  Polinarda,  thought  nothing  of  his  hurts,
his  true  remedy  being  to  be  visited  by  her;
for  in  truth,  though  it  be  the  common  oj)i-
nion  that  love  is  alter  marriage  converted
into  friendship,  whereby  its  first  fervour  îs
moderated,  nevertheless,  when  it  is  excessive
and  beyond  the  common  order,  alway  some-
thing of  vvhat.it  has  been  remains,  to  make
X  3


s  34

it  resent  the  pain  or  pleasure  which  time  oc-
casions, more  keenly  than  others  in  whom  it
hath  never  had  such  force.  In  hi<e  manner
Florendos  forgot  the  grief  of  his  wounds,
having  Miraguarda  by  his  bed  side;  and  the
same  consolation  Platir  found  with  Sidela  ;
Polendos  with  Francelina;  Beroldo  witli
Onistalda  ;  Graciano  with  Chirisia  ;  Don
Rosuel  with  Dramaciana  ;  Behsarte  with
Dionisia  ;  Francien  with  Bernarda  ;  Goarim
with  Clariana;and  others  of  the  knights  with
them  to  whom  they  bare  most  afl'ection.

But  Dramuziando  was  not  in  like  case  as
these,  for  his  wounds  were  so  dangerous,  as
could  not  be  healed  by  the  sweet  company
of  his  best  beloved  Arlanza,  towards  whom
he  was  in  the  extreme  aiieciionate  ;  he  fell
so  often  into  such  deadly  swoons,  that  all
thought  him  gone,  whereat  the  emperor  and
all  his  court  resented  as  much  sorrow  as  if
their  whole  salvation  from  the  peril  in  which
they  stood,  hung  upon  his  single  person  ;  the
love  which  they  bore  him,  and  which  he  by
h'xs  deeds  merited,  being  so  groat.  Don
Puardos,  though  he    needed  rest   himself,


Q35

made  no  account  of  re.st,  and  could  take
none,  seeing  Dramuziando  in  such  estate  ;
and  he  and  Flerida  ahvays  attended  him,
for  Arlanza  with  despair  was  well  nigh  dead
herself,  and  could  nothing  help  him.  In  like
wise  Florendos  and  Miraguarda  attended  the
giant  Almourol,  whose  danger  almost  sias  in
the  same  estate  with  Dramuziando.  Certes,
the  loss  of  these  twain  was  thought  so  great,
that  there  was  not  a  person  in  the  court  who
would  not  have  given  a  portion  of  his  own
life  to  have  sustained  theirs,  especially  Dra-
muziando's,  forwhose  recovery  the  ladies  shed
many  tears  and  performed  many  devotions.
This  sorrow  was  somewhat  cheered  by  the
arrival  of  Daliarte  at  this  time,  whose  pre-
sence greatly  rejoiced  them;  and  greater  joy
did  they  all  receive  in  that  he  certified  the
emperor,  how  Florian  would  not  be  long  ab-
sent. The  emperor  lifting  up  his  hands  to
heaven,  exclaimed,  God  grant  that  I  may  sec
him  in  my  days,  and  that  it  nuiy  be  in  time
for  the  besiegers  of  this  city  to  feel  his
prowess;  1  have  such  confidence  in  it,  that
methinks  only  therein  doth  the  remedy  con-
sist of  this  gr^at  destruction  with  which  For-


2S6

tune  threatens  us.  This  he  said  with  tears  ia
his  eyes,  holding  Daliavte  in  his  arms  with
such  entire  love  as  if  he  had  been  one  of  his
grandchildren,  as  in  tiuth  lie  held  him  in  the
same  account.  Then  sent  he  him  to  tlie
empress,  who  received  him  with  the  same
loving  welcome,  as  did  also  the  empress  of
Allemaigne,  Gridonia,  Polinarda,  and  the
other  princesses  and  ladies  ;  Flerida  was  the
one  who  I'elt  this  joy  the  most,  and  was  most
glad  of  his  presence,  as  well  because  she
knew  the  great  love  which  Don  Duardos
her  husband  bare  him,  as  also  because  he
had  sundry  times  preserved  the  life  of  her
children  by  his  knowledge.

The  same  day  came  to  the  emperor's  court
prince  Floraman,  who,  weary  with  having
wandered  far  and  wide  in  quest  of  Florlan,
and  being  advertised  lîow  the  enemies  had
laid  siege  to  Constantinople,  repaired  thither
to  be  present  in  time  of  such  need  ;  and  he
passed  through  his  realm  of  Sardinia,  giving
charge  to  the  governors  he  had  left  ther^,
that  they  should  levy  succours  with  all  ex-
pedition, and  send   them  after  him,  as  you


'-;^/


may  liear  hereafter.  This  occasioned  a  new
stirof  joy  in  the  emperor  and  his  court;  and
as  if  to  make  it  appear  that  Fortune  was  not
unmindful  of  their  danger,  the  same  day  like-
wise arrived  king  Estrelante  of  Hungary*,
accompanied  like  a  powerful  prince,  with
two  thousand  horsemen,  and  ten  thousand
footmen;  for  being  near  at  hand  h.e  could
come  sooner  than  any  other;  with  him  came
Frisol  his  cousin,  and  other  signal  knights,
who  were  held  in  great  account  in  that  court.
This  succour  gave  much  confidence  to  the
besieged,  and  excited  the  other  princes  to
hasten  the  coming  of  their  people.  îseither
were  they  of  the  other  part  idle,  for  Albay-
zar,  seeins;  the  sreat  destruction  which  had
at  the  outset  been  made  among  his  people,
began  with  greater  wariness  to  order  all
lhin:;s  ;  and  having  given  order  to  look  to
the  wounded,  for  as  for  the  slain  the  sea  was


*  It  is  not  remembered  In  this  history  thit  Estrelante  is  the
nephew  of  Albayzar  hi  father  Ditrco  having  marriod  Esqui-
vcla,  daughter  of  Oloritiue  and  Alchidiana.  Pahncndos,
(i.  e.  Polcndos,)  C.  13.  Albayzar  must  have  been  the  son
of  their  old  age.


2J8

their  Iniiial  place,  lie  convened  the  chiefs  of
his  aiinadu  to  council;  what  they  resolved
on  was,  that  they  did  nothing  more  that  da}',
but  took  tlicir  rest,  and  on  the  morrow,  as  soon
as  it  was  day  break,  embarking  all  their  peo-
ple in  gallies,  brigantines,  and  boats,  at  a
certain  signal  from  the  captain's  ship,  they
pushed  to  shore  at  the  same  time,  and  ran
all  their  prows  aground,  being  so  many,  that
they  stretched  alonga  league  of  coast.  Tind-
ing  no  resistance,  they  joyfully  leapt  ashore,
the  boats  returning  for  another  load,  and  in
this  manner  they  disembarked  ;  whereupon
they  sounded  the  drums,  trumpets,  cornets,
clarions,  and  other  instruments,  making  such
a  triumphant  noise  and  outcry  of  rejoicing,
that  the  uproar  resounded  in  the  city,  and
struck  even  the  brave  with  terror.

Daliarte  and  Floraman  desiring  to  see  the
camp  of  the  enemy,  requested  the  emperor»
that  he  would  licence  them  to  go  thither,
which  his  majesty  would  not  grant  to  any  :
yet  had  he  such  assurance  in  the  discretion
and  knowledge  of  Daliarte,  that  he  judged
every  thing  to  be  secure  wherever  he  was.


(139

These  two  departed  the  city  alone  and  un-
armed ;  and  as  the  day  was  fair  and  clear,
so  that  all  things  might  be  seen,  they  be-
took themselves  to  a  little  hill,  where  they
might  at  pleasure  behold  the  sum  and  order
ot"  the  enemy's  army.  Divers  thought  it
good  to  scout  out  and  to  take  them,  because
by  them  they  might  understand  the  strength
of  the  city  ;  but  7\lbayzar,  ol"  whom  they  pe-
titioned leave  to  do  tliis,  would  not  grant  it;
for  he  knew  the  intent  with  which  they  were
come  out  of  the  gates.  Instead  wherefore  he
sent  an  esquire  unto  them,  who  having  at-
tended on  him  when  he  was  in  the  emperor's
court,  and  also  in  Spain,  knew  njost  of  the
knii2,l)ts  of  that  land  ;  and  learning  from  him
that  they  were  Daliartc  and  prince  Flora-
man  of  Sardinia,  he  sent  to  tell  them,  that  if
they  would  come  near  and  see  his  camp  they
might  do  it  without  fear,  for  lie  was  their
servant.  Such  confidence  had  the  two  com-
panions in  these  words,  that  without  dela}'
they  went  down  the  hill  towards  him,  wliich
Albayzar  perceiving,  he  came  forlli,  with  iwo
pages  in  rich  apparel  attending  on  him,  to
receive  them.     One  carried  his   shield,  ano-


240

ihcr  his  helmet;  lie  rode  a  large  dark  ches-
jiut  horse  :  his  arms  were  rieh  and  splendid,
appearing  as  if  ihey  had  been  worked  with
gold,  and  over  them   he  wore    a  eloak  of
M'hjte  taft'eta,  slashed   in  many   places,  and
those  places  so  well  chosen  that  they  became
it   well.      In  his  hand  he   carried    a   lance
which    was  laid    athwart    the    neck    of  the
horse  ;  his  face  was  uncovered,  and  flushed
with  exercise;  withal  he  was  so  comely  and
of  such  brave  appearance,   that  he  seemed
worthy  of  his  own   great  empire,  and  the
great  command  whicii  he  at  this  time  held.
Having  welcomed  them  full  courteously^  and
placed   himself  between  them,  he    brought
them  to  the  camp,  as  one  who  was  right  con-
fident in  what  they  would  see  there,  and  led
them  through  it,  showing  them  his  whole
army,  and  the  princes  thereof,  and  the  name
of  each,  and  the  giants  also,  who  were  seven
in  number,  besides  the  two  whom  Palmeriu
and   Dramuziando  had  slain.     And  as  they
went  from  one  part  of  the  camp  to  another,
he  never  ceased  watching  them  well,  to  see
if  all  this  sight  he  had   shown   them   could
discourage  them  with  fear  or  doubt  of  their


241

welfare:  but  they,  though  in  trutli  the  sight
aid  greatly  dismay  thein,  knew  so  well  how
to  dissemble  what  ihey  resented,  that  they
seemed  rather  to  disregard  what  they  saw,
than  to  think  much  of  it,  giving  the  least
regard  to  those  things  which  were  most  no-
table; by  the  which  demeanour  they  some-
-what  disappointed  the  pride  and  haughtiness
of  Albayzar,

After  they  had  seen  the  whole  army  at  full
leisure,  they  offered  to  return,  and  Albayzar
accompanied  them  near  the  city,  asking  them
of  the  health  of  the  emperor  and  empress,
and  using  such  speeches  as  seemed  to  offer
excuse  for  his  coming  :  then  taking  his  leave
of  them,  he  returned,  and  they  walked  on
the  little  distance  which  remained,  talking
of  the  mightiness  of  that  armada.  Daliarte
having  foreseen  what  would  happen,  could
not  hide  the  sorrow  he  conceived  in  his  mind  ;
for  in  truth  great  sorrow  conceived  upon
great  occasion  will,  maugre  all  effort  to  the
contrary,  manifest  itself.  Nevertheless,  at
their  entrance  into  the  city,  Ijccause  they
would  not  discourage  the  minds  of  the  peo-
voj,.  IV.        *  y


242

pic,  they  put  on  countenances  of  good  cheer
and  great  confidence,  such  as  might  give
hope  of  victory.  But  when  tlicy  were  come
to  the  palace,  and  the  emperor  was  retired
with  them  to  hold  secret  counsel,  then  prince
rioraman,  by  his  commandment,  began  to
give  report  of  what  they  had  seen.

Sir,   said   he,  I   make  no  account  of  coat-
armour,  of  gold  and  jewelry  beyond  all  price,
of  glittering  arms  covered  with  purple,  of
magnificent  and  splendid  adornments,  nor  of
tents  and  pavilions  of  great  show,  and  such
things  as  these  ;  for  if  I  should  take  upon  me
to  make  rehearsal  thereof,  there  w^ould  be  so
much  to  say,  that  I  should  have  no  time  to
discourse  of  what  is  more  needful.     But  I
must  afiirm  to  your  majesty,  and  to  these
chiefs  for  whom  the  brunt  of  this  danger  is
reserved,  that  among  these   things  of  the
which   I  make  no  account,  I  saw  so  many
so  greatly  to  be  accounted  of,  that  I  cannot
speak  of  them  without  some  sorrow.     The
enemies,   according    to   ray  judgment,  and
that  of  Sir  Daliarte  here,  can  be  no  less  in
number  than  two  hundred  thousand  fighting


243

men,  among  all  whom  I  did  not  see  one,
either  so  advanced  in  years,  or  in  such  weak
disposition  of  budy,  as  not  to  be  a  lull  able
man  in  the  field.  The  very  simplest  of  tlicm
carrieth  such  a  bravery  of  mind,  that  they
seem  men  picked  out  to  the  contentment  of
their  leaders.

The  king  of  JEtolia,  being  a  young  man  of
some  thirty  years  of  age,  hath  the  guard  to-
day, with  ten  thousand  horsemen,  and  forty
thousand  foot,  bravely  armed,  and  ready  at
all  points,  as  if  they  liad  the  battle  in  hand.
What  appears  to  me  most  worthy  of  fear  or
of  doubt  is,  that  all  were  employed  in  pitch-
ing their  caujp,  and  the  great  laboured  as
well  as  the  little,  none  excusing  himself  by
reason  of  the  quality  of  his  person,  or  the
greatness  ol"  his  rank;  a  thing  this  which
gives  greater  courage  to  the  men,  and  in-
creases their  love  towards  their  princes  and
leaders.  Neither  did  I  see  any  one  who  was
not  in  order,  or  any  way  disobedient  to  those
who  commanded  him  ;  a  sign  this  that  they
were  disciplined  by  prudent  and  warlike  cap-
tains, of  whom  their  enemies  ought  to  stand
Y  '2


244

in  fear.  And  also,  it  nothing  pleaseth  me-
to think  of  the  great  confidence  with  which
Albayzar  showed  us  his  whole  camp,  and  with
the  which  he  will  give  the  like  assurance  to
as  many  of  your  court  as  choose  to  behold
it;  for  he  hath  all  things  in  such  array  and
order,  that  he  has  no  fear  his  enemies  can
profit  by  any  thing  which  they  observe
therein.  This  is  what  I  have  noted.  Sir
Daliarte,  peradventure,  who  haih  a  keener
judgment,  may  have  observed  more  than  I.

Certes,  the  emperor  replied,  you  have  noted
all  things  so  well,  that  it  is  not  possible  for
any  other  to  bring  us  a  more  certain  assur-
ance in  this  matter  ;  and  th;  more  these
things  are  to  be  feared,  the  more  need  have
we  to  take  counsel  how  to  oppose  them-
And  since  Albayzar  lets  us  with  such  confi-
dence see  his  arm}'-,  in  like  manner  it  is  my
pleasure,  that  if  any  one  of  his  people  chuseth
to  see  the  c;ty  and  the  ordermg  thereof,  he
may  do  it.  You,  my  son  Primaleon,  offer
no  hindrance  to  any  from  doing  this:  it
would  not  be  reasonable  that  they  should
discover  in  us,  what  we  do  not  discover  in


245

tliem.  For  lhe  rest,  our  captains  will  so
look  to  their  men  and  their  appointments,
that  they  shall  perceive  we  have  the  vantage
of  them,  or  at  least,  that  they  have  none
over  us.  Witli  this  he  hroke  up  the  council,
and  the  princes  hetook  themselves  to  their
several  charges,  that  nothing  might  fail  for
lack  of  diligence.


Y    S


345


f?-  '


CHAPTER  160.


Albayzar,  providing  for  the  strength  of  his
army,  caused  such  trenches  and  rampiers  of
defence  and  fortification  to  be  made  round
about  his  camp,  that  tlie  strengtli  thereof
might  uiih  little  guard  have  been  defended
against  the  whole  world  ;hosv  much  more  by
so  great  and  rare  an  army,  that  in  the  open
field  it  miafht  have  been  well  secure  a2:ainst
all  fear.  The  dilTerent  stations  and  guaid
thereof  he  allotted  to  the  captains  and  chief
persons  of  his  camp;  for  albeit,  such  great
precautions  appeared  unnecessary  in  an  enter-
prize  so  certain  of  success  as  this  seemed  to
be;  yet  Albayzar,  who  laiew  his  enemies
Letter,  would  not  trust  so  much  to  fortune
as  to  leave  any  thing  at  her  mercy;  but
like  a  good  commander  gave  good  look  to


247

cvevy  thing   which  might  cliance.     "When
he  tiiought  all  the  wants  of  his  army  weie
well  provided  which  the  state    of  the  war
required,  hy  advice  of  hi»  princes,  he   set
Hrc  to   the  whole  Hcet,  leaving  only  a  few
brigantiiies  and  small  vessels  which  woidd  be
of  ui-e  for  atores.     All  the  other  ships,  gal-
leons and  carracl<s,and  all  vessels  whatsoever,
were  burnt,  Co  the  astonishment  of  his  men*
who  thus  saw  themselves  tented  in  their  ene-
mies' country,  and  exposed  to  so  signal  and
terrible  a   war,  in   which    they  must  needs
conquer    or   tlie,  all  other  means    of  safely
being  thus  cut  off  before  their  e^^es,  so  that
the  hoi.e  of  life  lav  onlv  in  the  stren2;th  of
their  own   hands.     They  thought   that  Al-
bayzar  and  the  other  princes  \Vho  had  ven-
tured their  esiivtes  in  this  great  expedition,
and  were  resolved  to  vin  all  or  perish,  iiad
given  order  for  this  coiíflagration,  that  their
})eople,  being  desperate  of  any  other  means
of  escape,  might  perceive  courace  to  be   ihc
onlv  reniodv  of  their  lives;  and   this  made
thcin  braver  than  even  nature  had  done.  Cer-
tes, when  the  tlect  began  to  burn,  thataciion
seemed  tluMi  io"have  spfimg  from  iiearts  full


248

cruel  and  greedy  of  vengeance.  The  flames
spread  along  the  vvater^  as  if  the  water  itself
were  burning,  and  they  rose  up  into  the  air
mingled  with  thick  black  smoke,  so  as  to
hide  the  sight  of  heaven  ;  and  the  pitch  and
tar  sent  out  vapours  so  insupportably  bad,
that  it  stopt  the  very  breath  in  the  body  of
man,  Never -in  any  time  had  a  thing  of
such  signal  cruelty  been  seen  as  this;  the
fleet  was  so  mighty  a  one,  that  it  seemed  to
crowd  the  sea,  and  in  it  were  ships  of  mar-
vellous greatness,  equipped  with  purple  and
silk,  and  adornments  of  great  price,  befitting
the  great  princes  who  came  in  them;  and  all
tins  in  the  sight  of  them  and  their  vassals
was  consumed  to  ashes  by  their  own  proper
■will  and  order  ; — certes,  there  was  not  any
one  who  ibr  sorrow  could  keep  his  eyes
upon  this  great  destruction;  even  the  very
advisers  and  authors  of  this  act,  and  Albay-
zar  among  iliem,  touched  with  compassion
at  so  rigorous  an  action,  withdrew  into  their
tents  not  to  be  spectators  of  it.  The  roaring
oi'  the  flames  was  heard  afar  off,  and  they
seemed  to  attack  the  clouds;  it  was  as  if  the
whole  uproar  of  the  world  were  in  thatgreiit


249

fire.  They  in  the  city,  when  they  first  saw
the  ships  begin  to  burn,  conceived  it  had
been  some  neghgence;  but  when  they  per-
ceived that  the  fire  spread  regularly  on,  and
that  none  bestirred  themselves  to  extinguish
it,  tliey  presently  understood  the  intent  of
their  enemies.  1  he  emperor  ordered  himself
to  be  carried  to  the  top  of  a  tower,  from
whence  he  could  behold  it;  and  seeing  so
notable  and  fearful  a  sight,  he  held  it  for  no
good  sign,  well  weening  now  that  the  ene-
mies could  not  be  driven  out  of  his  empire
without  force,  and  at  the  expence  of  much
blood  of  his  friends  and  vassals.  The  em-
press and  the  other  ladies,  not  bcaiing  to
behold  such  a  speclacle,  retired  to  their
apartments,  being  overcome  with  fear,  and
there  with  tears  and  supplications  betook
themselves  to  the  comforter  who  remedieth
all  things.  Seven  days  the  fire  continued,  at
the  end  of  which  the  smoke  began  to  clear
away,  and  leave  the  sea  visible;  and  then  it
Was  a  new  remembrance  of  regret  for  those
who  had  been  the  lords  of  so  mighty  a  tleet
which  had  so  laiely  burthened  the  ocean,  to
see  now  only  the  open  sea.


250

But  this  was  soon  forgotten,  Íov  lime  puts
all  things  out  of  mind,  and  there  now  began
to  be  frequent  skirmishes,  so  that  both  \vhat
was  present  and  what  was  to  come  gave
them  other  things  to  think  of.  Tlicy  in  the
city  were  not  idle  :  the  captains  were  full  di-
ligent in  providing  all  things  needful,  and  in
seeing  to  the  wounded,  all  of  whom  were  in
less  than  twenty  days  healed  and  sound,  ex-
cept Dramuziando  andAlmourol,  they  twain
not  recovering  so  soon.  By  this  there  had
heen  time  for  succour  to  come  from  all  parts,
"with  such  speed  as  the  urgency  of  the  siege
required;  for  as  most  of  the  kings  of  Chris-
tendom had  embarked  their  persons  in  this
great  danger,  the  governors  of  their  respec-
tive kingdoms  sent  all  the  force  they  could  ;
albeit,  not  such  as  they  could  have  provided
had  there  been  more  leisure  allowed.  That
it  may  be  known  what  was  the  force  which
each  supplied,  they  shall  here  be  stated.  The
emperor  Vernao  of  Allemaign,  had  sent  him
two  thousand  horsemen,  and  ten  thousand
footmen  ;  king  Arnedos  of  France,  had  the
like  number  ;  Recindos  king  of  Spain,  had
two  thousand  horsemen,  and  eight  thousand


251

lootmen  ;  prince  rioraman  of  Sardinia  had
five  hundred  horsemen,  and  four  tliousand
footmen  ;  from  Tliessaly  five  hundred  iiorse,
and  two  thousand  foot  were  sent  to  Polendos  ;
Tarnaes  king  of  Lacedemonia,  had  four
hundred  horsemen  and  four  thousand  foot-
men. To  Florian  of  Thrace  came  four  hun-
dred horse  and  four  thousand  footmen.  Fboitl
England  five  hundred  horse  and  ten  thousand
Ibotmen.  From  Navarre  came  two  hundred
horsemen  to  Dragonahe.  F'rom  Denmark
two  hundred  horsemen  to  king  Albanis.
Drapos  duke  of  Normandy,  came  with  a
hundred  horse  and  five  hundred  foot.  To
Belcar  came  three  hundred  horsemen,  and
one  thousand  footmen.  The  whole  succour
amounting  to  eleven  thousand  live  hundred
horse,  with  Roramonte  king  of  Bohemia,
who  brought  four  hundred,  and  the  two
thousand  which  Estrelante  brought  with  hi^
ten  thousand  foot  ;  and  sixty-one  thousand
five  hundred  foot,  all  good  and  chosen
men  :  and  these  were  besides  those  of  the
city,  of  whom  account  has  before  been  given;
so  ilvat  all  together  were  well  nigh  twenty
thousand  horsemen,  and  seventy  thousand
foot.


252  '

Truly  lhe  burning  of  lhe  enemy's  fleet  was  a
good  occasion  tor  the  safe  arrival  of  these
allies;  the  most  of  whom  came  b}'  sea,  and
finding  the  port  free,  landed  without  resist-
ance. Great  joy  and  great  encouragement
did  the  coming  of  these  succours  afford,  be-
cause of  the  great  need  there  was  of  them
and  also,  for  that  there  came  with  them  many
renowned  knl;2;hts,  who  gave  confidence  to
others.  And  it  was  determined  by  advice  of
all,  that  as  soon  as  they  were  all  well  recovered
from  the  fatigue  of  their  marchjes  and  voyages,
and  the  wounded  were  also  in  perfect  good
condition,  they  should  .  give  the  enemy  bat-
tle, in  order  that  they  might  not  longer
see  them  thu?  laying  the  country  waste;
a  thing  v.hich  could  not  be  prevented.


253


CHAPTER   IGI


Some  (la3'S  past  at'ter  the  arrival  of  these
succours,  in  which  nothing  was  done  iiola-
ble  enough  to  be  recorded  ;  the  men  being
weak  by  reason  of  their  voyage,  and  the
knights  so  out  of  breath  and  fallcii  away  in
flesh,  that  before  they  could  be  fit  for  the
brunt  of  service  it  was  necessary  they  should,
recover  strciigth.  During  this  time  there-
fore there  was  no  other  exercise  of  arms
than  some  slight  skirmishes  between  the
city  and  the  camp,  for  the  recreation  of  the
yoimg  knights,  in  which  for  the  most  part
llàcy  of  tlie  emptror  luid  the  advantage.
"While  things  ^^  ere  in  this  slate  it  came  to
pjiM-.  one  evening  afici-  Nespcr»,  the  eniperor
bemg  at  his  accustomed  place  to  see  the
vol..  IV.  .  7.


2.54

íield  and  the  skirmishing,  how  it  might
succeed  that  day,  and  the  empress,  the
princesses,  and  other  ladies  also  at  the  win-
dows from  whence  they  were  wont  to  sec
the  battles,  they  saw  a  kniglit  come  riding
on  between  the  city  and  the  camp,  with
such  an  air  of  security  that  he  seemed  to  be
lull  haughty  and  confident  of  himself.  He
rode  a  fire-coloured  horse,  iiis  armour  was
enamelled  with  gold  and  silver,  in  the  man-
ner of  truncheons  crossing  each  other,  and
it  was  bloody  in  man}'  places,  which  gave  a
grace  to  it,  and  testified  withal  that  those
arms  had  not  been  idle.  He  bore  for  his
device,  in  a  field  argent.  Love,  bound  by  the
hair  to  a  golden  pillar  ;  his  lance  was  laid
athwart  the  neck  of  his  horse,  and  on  the
point  was  a  little  white  flag  of  taffeta,  in
token  of  peace.  His  squire  bare  another
shield  after  him,  covered  over  with  black
leather,  and  another  lance  in  his  hand  :  by
him  rode  a  lady  on  a  mulbeny-coloured
palfrey,  attired  after  the  Turkish  manner^
in  a  robe  of  white  satin,  which  was  cut  and
pinked  in  many  places,  so  that  the  black
silks  lying  under  the    white,    gave  a  very


il55

brave  grace  unto  lier  apparel;  these  open-
ings were  in  some  places  gathered  up  with
golden  twist,  and  set  round  with  jewelry,
and  the  whole  was  werked  in  tambour  a
full  palm  deep  round  about  :  certain  ancient
histories  were  wrought  at  the  edge,  excel-
lently done  and  to  the  very  lite.  Her  tire
was  Turkish  also,  being  a  high  turban  of
black  silk,  worked  after  the  same  fashion
as  the  robe,  only  that  it  far  exceeded  it  in
richness.  Her  hair  hung  loose  down  her
shoulders,  being  such  and  so  beautiful  that
it  seemed  to  diminish  the  beauty  of  ever}'
thing  else,  and  her  face  was  covered  because
she  should  not  be  known.

So  soon  as  the  knight  came  opposite  to  Al-
bayzar's  tent,  he  stopt.  Greatly  wai  he
eyed  by  all,  for  they  knew  not  of  what  na-
tion this  knight  should  be,  in  that  they
judged  him  by  his  dress  and  armour  to  be
a  christian,  but  the  apparel  of  his  lady  was
Turkish.  While  they  were  waiting  to  see
the  certainty  of  this  made  known,  they  per-
ceived him  to  send  his  squire  to  Albayzar's
tent,  having  his  face  covered  lest  he  should
-.     z  e


256

be  known,  \vho  acldrest  him  thus,  in  the
Greek  language  :  Sirs,  the  knight  whom  you
see  yonder,  by  me  giveth  you  to  understand,
that  he  liath  long  served  the  lady  in  his
company,  yet  have  his  actions  never  proved
of  such  deserving  in  her  eyes  as  to  induce
her  to  grant  him  her  love;  nevertheless,
knowing  the  great  company  of  excellent
knights  wb.o  are  assembled  together  at  this
siege,  she  hath  desired  hiiii  to  bring  her
unto  this  place,  where  he  must  enterprize  to
joust  against  four  knights  on  her  behalf.
And  if  ir  so  fall  out  that  Fortune  favoureih
him  with  the  victory,  she  hath  promised  to
reqnitehis  labour  with  her  love:  but  if  the
knights  of  your  camp  shall  refuse  to  try
their  persons  against  him,  he  must  then  offer
the  same  challenge  to  thu^e  of  the  city,v  here
if  refusal  bemaJe  likewise,it  shall  be  account-
ed to  him  for  the  same  desert  before  her,  and
obtain  from  her  the  same  recompence  as  if
he  nad  vanquished  where  be  macie  the  de-
fiance. ^ow  then.  Sirs,  see  if  for  your  pas-
time any  of  ye  wfil  break  your  spearo  with
him  ;  it  is  to  be  witii  this  condition,  that  con-
quering tlie  four,  he  may  be  permitted  to  de-
part with  his  lady.


Í257

I  would  fain  know,  said  the  soldan  of  Persia,
who  was  a  gallant  young  prince,  and  of  great
renown  among  them,  since  this  knight  is  to
receive  so  i>;reat  a  Q-uerdon  as  the  love  of  the
lad}' whom  lie  brings  with  him,  if  he  should
speed  to  his  wish  in  the  joust,  and  more-
over, to  go  his  way  securely,  what  prize  he
will  appoint  for  one  of  us  who  should  joust
better  than  himself.  This,  replied  the  squire,
you  may  send  and  ask  him,  for  I  have  rc-
])ortcd  to  you  what  was  given  me  in  charge.

So  without  any  more  words  he  returned,  ac-
companied with  an  esquire  from  the  soldaii
of  Persia,  who  was  sent  for  a  reply  to  this
question  ;  to  whom  the  knight  of  the  Lady
made  this  answer:  The  request  of  the  soldau
standeth  with  good  reason  ;  say  unto  him,
that  if  any  of  these   four  knights  chance  to
unhorse  me,  it  not  being  plainly  the  lault  of
niv  horse,   I    will   be   coûtent   to  lose  both
horse  and   armour,  and   shew   obeisance  to
any  thing  he  shall  command  mc,  on  condi-
tion that  this  lady  may  remain  at  her  liberty
to  do  what  she  shall  think  convenient  for  her-
self.    The  Pagan  princes  were  well  content-
z  3


258

eá  with  this  good  oííer  of  the  knight,  affirm-
ing that  it  proceeded  from  uiiich  confidence
in  iiiniself  ;  and  in  Aibavzar'a  tent  four  young
kings  were  selected  by  lot,  out  of  many  wlio
vould  willingly  have  accepted  the  defiance.
They  were  the  king  of  Bytliinia  ;  the  kiijg  of
Trebisond  ;  the  king  of  Caspia  ;  and  the
sohian  f-f  Persia  ;  he  being  chosen  without
the  chance  of  the  lot,  inasmuch  as  he  it  was
who  had  accepted  the  challenge.  These
were  all  such  men  in  arms,  that  if  they  had
been  picked  out  by  choice,  better  could  not
have  been  chosen.

At  thi^  time  Don  Duardos,  Recindos,  Arne-
dos,  Paimerin  of  England,  and  Dramuziando,
came  out  from  the  city  to  the  camp  with  a  safe
conduct,  to  see  these  jousts.  Albayzar  came
out  beyond  the  lines,  unarmed,  on  horse-
back, and  with  a  lance  in  his  hand,  being
accompanied  with  five  other  princes  and  a
giant,  his  favourite,  of  huge  stature;  they
came  to  accompany  the  four  kings  to  the
place  of  the  jousts,  leaving  orders  that  no
person  should  come  out  of  the  trenches  on
pain  of  death.     When  they  were  come  near


'259

those  of  tlic  city,  they  saluted  each  other
with  full  courteous  words,  little  like  ihe  feel-
ings wiiicl)  were  in  their  hearts.  Tlie  knight
of  the  Lady,  being  Ijy  nature  haughty  and  of
little  bulierance,  spake  to  them  in  the  Greek
tongue,  bidding  them  lay  aside  these  idle  and
insincere  compliments,  and  not  hinder  his
time  who  had  much  to  do.  And  with  that
turning  himself  towards  the  lady,  he  pitt
hinjsclf  in  posture  for  the  joust.

Methinks,  quoth  Albayzar,  that  if  the  knight
is  a  goodly  one,  he  is  a  proud  one  as  well;
let  us  therefore  please  hin>  before  he  kills  us
all  !  So  concluding,  he  granted  llie  iirsi  joust
to  the  king  of  Trebisond,  a  young  man  of  less
than  thirty  years,  who  was  mounted  on  a
goodly  ba)  courser,  his  armour  oi  green  co-
lour, and  in  his  shit-Id  was  figured  in  a  field
vert,  a  dead  giant,  in  witiuss  that  he  had  slain
one  in  a  combat,  lielbre  he  j)rickcd  for-
ward, he  bowed  his  head  to  Albayzar,  as  all
were  wont  to  do,  and  then  laying  heels  to
horse,  ran  against  the  knight  of  the  Lad\'.
lie  encountered  him  with  sueh  force,  as  his
lance  flew  in  pieces  up  into  the  air^  doing


'260

him  no  hurt;  but  the  other's  attaint  was  of
other  force,  for  it  sent  the  king  over  the
crupper  with  such  a  iall,  that  ii  was  some
time  before  he  recovered  his  senses.  I'liis
one  being  carried  forth  of  the  field,  the
knight  returned  to  his  post  beside  the  lady,
being  content  that  he  had  sped  so  well.
Presently  tlie  king  of  Caspia  presented  him-
self in  the  field,  a  young  m;in  also  and  a  va-
liant, on  a  mulberry-coloured  horse,  being
in  carnation  armour,  and  a  hart  in  silver
pourtrayed  on  his  shield,  in  a  field  sable.
He  encountered  the  knight,  and  was  sent  to
keep  the  king  of  Trcbisond  company.  jNI  uch
did  they  who  were  looking  on  marvel  at  these
two  encounters;  and  because  the  strange
knight  had  now  broken  his  lance,  he  took
another,  and  returned  to  his  post  beside  the
lady.  Incontinently  the  king  of  Bytliinia
advanced,  with  less  confidence  than  the
other  twain;  lie  was  armed  in  the  same  co-
lours, and  after  the  same  fashion  as  the  king
of  Caspia,  they  being  both  conformable  in
inclination.  lie  brake  his  lance  upon  the
stranger's  shield;  the  knight  in  his  haste
missed   his  attaint,  but  they  met  body  to


2t)l

body  as  lhe  horses  past,  with  sucii  force  tliat
the  king  was  stiiiinccl  and  teil  ;  h.c  ot  the
Lady  lost  his  stirrups  ;  but  righting  himseh*
p|)ee(hly  in  his  seat,  he  returned  again  to  the
lady,  OÍ  w  hoin  he  besought  pardon  lor  hav-
ing Tailed  in  this  third  joust,  and  promised
that  the  fourth  should  make  amends.  At
this  Albayzar  could  hardly  contain  himself,
the  pride  witli  w'nich  tb.e  Unight  treated
this  matter  provoking  him  as  much  as  the
overllirow  of  his  own  warriors.

Then  the  soldan  of  Persia,  who  was  the  last
and  chicfest  of  the  four,  as  well  in  arms  as  in
rank,  being  bravely  mounted  on  a  bustard-
coloured  horse,  in  gallant  and  rich  armour  of
black  and  gold,  and  bearing  in  his  sliield,
Fortmie,  stately  placed  in  her  chariot  of
triumph,  in  a  golden  field,  advanced  himself
into  the  course;  Albayzar,  to  úo  liim  honour,
adjusted  the  heaver  of  his  helmet,  and  gave
him  his  lance.  He  of  the  Lady  plainly  per-
ceived that  this  fourth  antagonist  "was  the
one  in  whom  most  conlidence  was  placed,
and  that  by  the  honour  which  Albayzar  had
done  him  he  must  needs  be  one  of  urcat  ac-


fount;  and  this  gave  him  the  greater  de-
sire to  aim  his  attaint  well,  and  make
amends  for  the  last.  Before  he  advanced
to  the  charge  he  exchanged  some  words
with  his  lady,  which  no  one  heard,  and
being  content  with  the  answer,  he  pricked
forth  to  receive  the  soldan,  who  came
against  him  courageously.  They  met  toge-
ther with  such  force,  as  their  lances  were
broken,  and  their  shields  raced  through  the
midst,  yet  themselves  nothing  hurl  and  no-
thing shaken  in  the  saddle;  as  they  passed
each  other  returning,  the  soldan  said,  Me-
thinks.  Sir  Knight,  in  order  to  see  which  of
us  has  most  reason  to  complain,  we  ought
to  joust  again  ;  and  as  I  see  you  without  a
lance,  I  will  desire  Sir  Albayzar  to  send  us
others.  At  your  pleasure,  replied  the  knight
of  the  Lady;  I  am  little  pleased  at  not  hav-
ing overthrown  you  ;  but  the  fault  is  in  my
horse;  he  is  so  sore  laboured  with  travel,  that
he  can  hardly  perform  his  duty.

That  you  may  not  have  that  excuse,  quoth
the  soldan,  I  give  you  leave  to  take  another,
and  if  you  have  not  one  I  will  send  and  liivo


263

vou  one.  I  am  so  unacquainted  in  tliis  coun-
try, replied  the  other,  that  I  know  not  at
whose  hands  to  ask  one,  and  yours  I  should
not  accept  with  a  good  will.  Not  so,  cried
Draniuziando,  who  was  present,  this  which  I
ride  is  a  right  good  one,  and  I  am  so  well
pleased  with  your  feats,  that  I  should  rejoice
if  you  would  make  use  of  it.  Though  I  do
not  know  you.  Sir  Knight,  replied  he  of  the
Lady,  yet  1  accept  it  as  coming  from  your
hand.  So  he  alighted  from  his  own  horse,
and  mounted  on  that  of  Dramuziando.  Now,
Sir,  said  he  to  the  soldan,  take  no  excuse
from  me  if  I  fail.  Dramuziando  got  on  the
other,  which  could  scarcely  hear  him.  By
this  time  spears  were  brought  ;  each  took
one,  and  they  ran  their  second  career.  It
was  full  diifcrent  from  the  first,  for  they  en-
countered full  butt;  he  of  the  Lady  lost  his
stirrups,  and  the  soldan  went  to  the  ground,
having  all  his  armour  pierced,  and  a  slant
wound  under  the  left  shoulder  ;  and  he  was
so  shaken  with  the  fall,  that  they  were  fain  to
carry  him  out  of  the  field  like  tlic  others.

The  knight  of  lhe   Lady  turning  the  reins,


£64

after  he  IkkI  righted  himself  in  his  seat,
went  back  to  his  post,  and  looking  to  Al-
bayzar,  said  with  a  loud  voice,  Now  that  I
have  aceompli'ihed  tlie  challenge  on  this
lady's  beljali,  and  am  iree  from  the  condi-
tions thereof,  if  yon  will  grant  licence  to  any
more  of  your  knights,  and  give  me  lances,
I  will  joust  here  till  nightj  or  so  long  as  my
horse  is  able  to  hold  out.

I  perceive,  said  Albayzar,  your  confidence  in
your  exploits  makeih  you  proud.  It  doth
not  a  little  grieve  me,  that  the  charge  which
I  hold  here  preventeth  me  from  adventur-
ing my  own  person  ;  some  one,  however,
will  come,  who  will  lower  your  piide,  for  I
licence  all.  Don  Duarrlos  and  his  compa-
nions thouLrht  much  of  the  goodness  of  this
knight,  and  doubted  if  peradventure  it  was
Florian  ;  l)Ut  the  manner  of  hi-^  speech  made
them  assured  that  it  was  not  he.

It  was  not  'onii  before  four  kniihts  preent-
ed  them:,cives  in  the  fitld.  Tiiis  ino  -e  <;f
jouiting,  s:.id  he  of  the  Lady  to  Aibayzar,
do  til   not   seem  goud  unto  me.     Let  them


£55

come  one  by  one  out  of  tlic  lines  ;  for  otlicr-
wise  so  many  may  come,  that  I  and  these
who  see  me  may  run  some  risk.  Albay/^ar
thought  tliis  well,  and  ordered  three  of  the
four  to  return,  and  come  in  tarn  if  the  other
should  be  vanijuished.  init  h.e  of  tlie  L-.uiy,
eiilier  by  virtue  of  her  favour,  or  because
they  were  of  httlc  worth,  soon  sent  them  all
to  tlie  ground,  and  would  have  sent  as  many
more  after  them,  if  iVlbayzar  would  have  let
them  come.  But  he,  being  displeased  at  the
foil  which  his  people  liad  received,  told  the
knight,  since  Fortuiie  had  given  him  so  good
a  day,  to  go  and  take  his  rest  for  the  re-
mainder of  it  ;  another  might  come  which
would  peradvemure  be  less  to  Ids  liking.
iSevcriheless,  replied  the  other,  1  still  wish
to  break  a  pair  of  lances  with  you  ;  but  as
tliat  cannot  be,  I  will  [jreak  lliem  with  this
giant  l)y  you,  if  you  tuink  good.  See,  cried
Albav/ar,  how  soon  fortune  will  pay  you
for  the  favour  sue  hath  sheun  !  Making  you
youiicU"  seek  t.ic  pa.menr,  and  ask  tor  ven-
g'  mce  upon  youi-:elf,  wliici.  i;i  this  request,
you  are  lui:  M-riain  to  m  ei  with.  Then
turning  to  the  gianr,   he   >ai  ,   uitn  a  s    i  e,

VOL.    IV.  *       2    A


2G6

Tor  the  love  of  mc,  rranuistantc,  indulge
this  knight  in  his  wish.

The  giant  kissed  his  hand  for  this  favour,
and  was  not  long  hefore  he  armed  himself  in
armour  of  blaek  polished  steel,  without  any
mixture;  his  helmet  and  shield  were  of  the
same  fashion,  and  were,  in  the  judgment  of
those  knights,  the  best  that  they  had  ever
seen.  In  truth,  though  this  giant  when  he
was  unarmed  had  appeared  terrible  and
mighiy,  far  more  so  did  he  appear  in  his
armour.  The  lady  was  stricken  with  great
fear  at  beholding  him  ;  Don  Duardos  who
perceived  this  approached  her,  and  encou-
raged her,  saying,  Lady,  fear  not  this  appear-
ance, for  by  what  we  have  seen,  God,  it  seems,
hath  made  your  knight  one  who  can  over-
throw any  thing.  The  lady  bowed  her  liead
and  body  down  upon  her  palfrey  in  cour-
tesy, making  him  no  other  answer,  for  fear
and  confusion  prevented  her.  By  this  time
they  ran  their  career,  and  encountered  each
other  on  the  shield  ;  tne  knight's  was  pierced;
the  giants  lance  splintered  against  his  breast-
plate, and  he  caught  hold  on  the  neck  of


'267

his  horse.  Ills  own  attaint  was  of  less  effect'
lor  touching  upon  pohshed  steel,  the  iron  of
the  spear  glanced  ofiV  without  shaking  or
ai]'eeting  the  giant.  Little  were  they,  who
wished  him  the  victory,  contented  with  this
first  encounter,  for  they  judged  that  he  must
needs  be  conquered,  seeing  the  might  of  the
giant  and  the  strength  of  his  armour  ;  he
himself  also  was  troubled  at  what  had  be-
fallen him  in  the  presence  of  such  persons.
Howbeit,  turning  again  to  the  giant,  and
giving  his  horse  the  spur,  they  ran  their  se-
cond course.  The  giant  liit  upon  the  edge
of  his  shield,  something  aslant,  brake  his
lance,  and  gave  the  knight  such  a  reverse,
as  had  well  nigh  cast  him  out  of  the  saddle  ;
but  the  knight's  encounter  was  of  better  for-
tune than  the  last,  for  taking  him  on  the
upper  edge  of  his  shield,  the  lance  point
glanced  off  again,  and  entered  the  vizor  of
his  helmet,  with  such  force  as  to  wound  hi)u
and  make  him  fall  back  on  his  horse;  and  as
he  held  the  reins  tight,  the  horse  reared  and
fell  back,  falling  upon  him,  whereby  he  was  so
sorely  hurt,  that  he  was  borne  senseless  from
the  iicld.  At  this  was  Albayzar  greatly  cha-
*    C  A  a


268

grilled,  for  he  had  expected  that  the  issue
would  have  been  otherwise.

Now  llien,  Sir  Albayzar,  said  he  of  the  Lady,
1  will  with  your  leave  go  rest  luyseir.  And
because  1  judge  by  the  discontent  whicli
you  have  received  irom  me,  that  I  should
not  be  we.l  welcomed  by  you,  1  will  go
v/ith  these  Sirs  into  the  ciiy  to  pass  the
night,  which  tliis  lady  also  desires  of  me.
1'o-morrovv  I  will  determine  upon  what  £
ought  to  do.  I  v\ell  undersiand,  replied  Al-
bayzar,  it  is  not  your  pleasure  to  accept  any
thing  from  me;  but  for  wnat  I  have  seen  of
your  prowesS;,  and  ais»  for  what  methinks
this  lady  deserveth,  Í  will  accompany  you
towards  the  ííates,  beinií  well  assured  that
with  king  Recindos,  and  these  Sirs,  [  aui
i»aie.  This  they  all  regarded  as  a  favour,
and  the  lady  made  him  due  obeisance  tor  it.
At  the  gate  Albayzar  took  his  leave,  first
asking  the  knight  of  the  Lady  to  tell  him
who  he  was.  You  ask  so  little  a  tiling,  be
replied,  that  being  where  Í  now  am,  1  should
err  in  not  telling  you — Í  am  the  knight  of
the  Savage  Man,  your  principal  enemy;  this


26y

îadj  is  the  qiicen  of  Thrace^  my  wife  ;  I  am
in  a  place  wlicie  we  may  daily  see  each  other,
and  serve  each  other.  Then  taking  oíF  his
helmet  he  discovered  himself,  a  gentle  per-
son, and  flushed  with  what  he  had  done.
But  Albayzar  was  so  troubled  that  he  made
him  no  answer,  for  this  was  the  man  in  the
world  whom  he  most  hated;  and  taking
leave  of  the  (jueen  and  of  the  others,  he  re-
turned in  so  discontented  a  mood  that  he
did  not  speak  all  that  day.

With  full  différent  hearts  did  Don  Duardos
and  his  companions  enter  the  city,  being  so
joyful  that  they  knew  not  what  to  do.     The
news  presently   reached   the  emperor,  who
resented   it  as   though   the  help  of  his  own
salvation  had  entered  the  gates.     This  was
the  day  in  which  the  queen  of  Thrace  seem-
ed to  triumph  above  all  others  of  her  time,
such  was  the  love  and  welcome  and  surpas-
sing courtesy   with  which  those   princesses
and  ladies  received  her.     They  were  not  only
astonished  at  beholding  her  so  beautiful,  Ijul
also  held  her  dress  to  be  a  marvellous  thing
and  worthy  of  admiration,  as  what  had  been
C   A  3


£70

worked  and  embroidered  by  the  hand  and
skill  of  the  infanta  Melia,  fur  the  uiarriage
ol"  a  daughter  of  kin?  Aruiatoof  Persia,  her
brother,  who  died  of  a  sudden  aeeitient  three
days  beloro  the  marriage,  as  has  been  before
said.  1'lie  emperor  couid  not  let  hi-^  strand-
son  go  from  his  enibraees  ;  neither  could  the
empress  and  queen  Flerida  ;  and  there  was
joy  in  all  the  court,  as  over  a  thing  which
had  not  been  expected,  and  which  some
thought  lost.  Florian,  when  the  emperor
released  him,  kist  the  hand  of  the  empress
his  grandmother,  and  of  Flerida  his  mother,
and  of  the  king  his  father  ;  and  went  on  offer-
ing courtesy  wherever  it  was  due  :  and  when
these  compliments  were  performed,  he  went
to  rest  after  his  labours.


^í


CHAPTER  \ryz.


That  you  may  know  how  it  was  the  knighl
0Ï  tlie  Savage  arrived  at  this  time,  it  has
been  aheacly  related  how  he  discovered  the
enchantment,  and  dehvered  the  queen  his
wife,  from  which  phice  he  took  nothing  with
liim  except  the  dress  which  Lioiiartia  wore
at  the  jousts;  it  being  his  wisii  that  in
that  attire  she  sliould  enter  Constantinople,
because  he  helil  it  for  the  rarest  that  he  had
ever  seen,  and  the  gal'antest.  And  thougli
his  intent  had  been,  after  she  was  disenchant-
ed, to  go  with  lier  awhile  about  the  world
Sicking  adventures,  that  she  might  perceive
what  he  was  good  for,  yet  knowing  from
DuHarle  the  necessity  in  which  Constantin-
ople siood,  uiKJl  ibe  ficize  which  was  laid  unt-o


272

it,  he  laid  aside  this  his  purpose,'  and  hasten-
ed thither,  desiring  to  be  present  in  those
dangers  and  diiheiiltics  to  the  whieh  his
friends  were  exposed.  And  thinking  that
he  could  b}'  no  means  enter  tlie  city  in  sight
of  the  enemies  who  compassed  it  round
about,  he  thought  the  best  means  which  he
could  devise  was  to  conceal  himself",  and
seem  as  if  he  came  thither  rather  at  his
lady's  command,  than  for  any  hatred  or  af-
fection to  either  part.  He  therefore  covered
the  shield  of  the  Savage,  as  he  was  always
wont  to  do  when  it  was  his  will  not  to  he
known,  and  took  the  other  which  hath  been
described,  and  which  he  found  hanging  up
in  one  of  the  halls  of  the  dwelling  wherein
Lionarda  was  enchanted,  it  being  to  his  con-
ceit a  goodly  one.  In  this  manner  he  pre-
sented himself  before  Albayzar's  tents,  where
he  sped  in  jousting  as  you  have  heard.  This
being  over  and  he  received  into  the  citj",
there  was  less  talk  of  the  victories  which  he
had  atchieved,  than  of  the  wonders  of  the
place  wherein  Lionarda  had  been  enchanted*
The  fashion  of  the  dress  also  in  which  she
was  clad  was   greatly  eyed,  as  the   quality


î273

iiiid  manner  thereof  deserved.  For  though
liiat  court  was  the  noblest  in  the  v/orld,  and
in  it  so  many  notable  and  iair  princesses  had
been  bred  up,  and  all  rich  and  costly  gallan-
Irits  and  inventions  which  men  could  devise
Averc  in  use  there,  yet  all  these  lost  all  value
in  comparison  with  the  richness,  costliness,
and  gallantry  of  thai  dress  in  which  the  queen
came.  One  of  the  thin2;s  which  there  was
most  to  talk  of  was,  that  it  appeared  as  if
it  had  that  very  hour  been  made,  though  it
Avas  more  than  four  hundred  3'ears  old,  it
being  as  much  as  that  or  more  that  the  in-
faiita  Meliahad  been  dead.  It  was  Iniown  to
he  the  work  of  her  hands  by  certain  letters  in
the  border  of  the  robe,  which  said,  AleJia,
a;Kl  which  were  curiously  wrought  in  many
])laccs  after  a  rare  manner.

When  Florian  of  the  Desert  had  rested  a
couple  of  (lays,  being  desirous  to  see  himself
in  the  field  with  Albayznr,  lie  besought  the
emperor  not  to  delay  the  battle  ;  and  it
Would  now  have  been  oiTcred,  if  all  the  men
and  horses  had  been  in  tit  condition.  It  was
thought  strange  that  the  Turks  had  given  no


all.ick  ;  Tor  it  did  not  appear  reasonable  that
tUcv  slioiîld  have  come  sO  Jar,  and  with  such
a  delerniination  to  la}'  siege  to  a  city,  upon
the  overthrow  of  which  depended  the  whole
empirci  oF  Greece,  and  now  leave  it  in  entire
repose,  without  doing  all  that  was  possible
in  assaulting  it,  to  bring  about  its  total  de-
struction. In  truth,  w  hat  they  judged  to  be
negligence  in  the  enemies  was  rare  counsel  :
for  Albayzar  and  the  princes  of  the  army
w^ell  knew  what  hurt  the  besiegers  arc  wont
to  receive  from  the  besieged  when  the  walls
and  stations  are  well  manned  ;  and  they
might  from  day  to  day  be  losing  their  peo-
ple in  vain  assaults,  and  at  last  not  take  the
city,  there  being  so  many  especial  knights
to  defend  it;  this  they  would  not  do.  They
knew  also,  that  as  so  great  an  assemblement
of  people  were  there,  stores  must  needs  fail
ere  long,  while  the}-  without  fed  upon  the
produce  of  the  land,  which  the  people  there-
of themselves  supplied  them  with,  that  they
might  not  destroy  them  :  and  when  they  in
the  city  had  consumed  all,  then  perforce
must  they  offer  battle,  when  their  besiegers
were  as  fresh  and  entire  in  their  streniith  as


'21 5

at  llu'ir  aiiivul,  wliicli  coiikl  not  be  ii"  tlicy
every  tluy  tidventuied  in  uncertain  combats.
For  this  reason  the  city  had  not  been  attack-
t'à  ;  anti  it  seemed  that  the  counsel  iiad  been
wisely  taken,  for  the  stores  could  not  hold
Diit  long,  and  thoui;h  they  should,  the  be-
sieged would  not  forbear  to  olTer  battle,
of  which  they  were  full  as  desirous  as  the
besiegers,  being  confident  in  themselves  and
in  the  justice  of  their  cause,  and  in  the  fa-
vour of  God,  who  alvvay  in  such  times  help-
eth  them  that  put  their  trust  in  him.

Things  being  in  this   state,  there  came  one
day  into  the  city,  about  the    hour  of  din-
ner, a  messenger  from  the  soldan  of  Persia  ;
and  being  forthwith  led  before  the  emperor
who    was    then    dining    with    the  empress,
setting  his  knee  to  the  ground  as  he  had  been
commandcfl,    he   said,     High    and   mighty
prince,  lhe  soldan  of  Persia,  my   sovereign
lord,  wiih  the  licence  and  consent  of  Albay-
zar  his  captain,  and  of  the  whole   l\irkish
army,  saith,  that  being  something  discontent-
ed at  what  bcfel  liim  in  the  joust  with  I'hnian,
lie  would  once  more  gladly  meet  him,  and


276

it  shall  be  siheg  this  manner  :  it'  your  majesty
will  permit  twelve  knights  of  your  court  in
whom  you  have  most  confidence,  he  being
one  among  tliem,  to  come  into  the  field  to-
morrow morning,  to  joust  and  combat  against
twelve  I'urks,  tjf  which  company  he   will  be
the  captain.    1'he  combat  shall  be  fought  be-
fore the  empress's  chamber  window,  to  the
end  those  princesses  and  ladies  ma}'  see   the
valour  and  prowess  that  shall   be  shown  on
both  sides;  and  they  will  agree  to  give  over,
and  end  the  combat,  when  these  ladies  shall
think  good  so  to   command  them,  notwith-
standing my  master  knoweth  that  by  this  pro-
posal he  and  his  couipanioiis  make  bad  terms
for  themselves.     Moreover,    he  beseecheth
the  empress,    that  it  may    stand  with  her
pleasure,  if  after  the  jousts  are  ended  they
remain  in  fit  state,  that  they  may  come  to  the
evening  ball  :  for  the  lame  of  the  beauty  of
her  court  maketh  them  who  have  never  seea
it  desire  this.

Certes,  replied  the  emperor,  the  sir  solrhin

*  asketli    like   a    gallant    and  gentle   knight,

and  his  age  and  ])rowcss  arc  worthy  to  be


277

esteemed  in  all  parts.  My  intent  was  not  to
have  consented  to  these  combats^  such  ahvaj
causing  envy  in  those  who  are  not  included
in  them  ;  but  who  is  there  that  would  not
break  through  any  intent  to  do  the  pleasure
of  such  a  prince  ?  Tell  him  that  I  am  con-
tent to  send  twelve  knights  as  he  desireth,
and  that  to-morrow  at  two  o'clock  they  shall
be  in  the  field.  The  empress  will  give  a
ball,  and  I  will  desire  the  ladies,  that  they
will  not  let  the  combat  proceed  so  far  as  to
prevent  them  from  coming  to  it.  AVitiial,  I
beseech  him  that  they  come  alone,  or  if  any
kniglils  come  with  them  to  behold  their  feats,
that  they  be  without  arms,  as  shall  be  done
on  our  part.  If  your  majesty,  replied  the
squire,  knew  truly  what  are  the  actions  and
contiition  of  the  soldan,  you  would  have
thought  this  cau^oii  unnecessary;  I  will
however  deliver  it,  and  it  siiall  be  as  your
majesty  desireth  ;and  with  that  he  made  his
obe.sunee  and  dc  parted,  bearing  this  answer
to  llie  solfian,  who  was  well  pleased  there-
with. Ills  eoiuiades  began  to  i)reparc  gallan-
tricb,  remembering  tnat  ihe  ladies  were  to
see  them.     Among  the  knigiits  of  the  eiii-

VOL.    IV.  %  9,    B


278

peror  there  were  some  disputes,  for  everyone
would  lain  have  heen  one  in  this  number;
at  last  it  was  concluded  that  he  of  the  Savage,
as  he  must  perforce  be  among  them,  should
chuse  the  rest.  This  ended  the  dispute,  and
dis|>utes  ought  alway  to  be  cut  short  at  first,
for  when  they  become  dangerous  the  end
cannot  be  good.


'279


CHAPTER  163.


Between  the  knights  of  the  emperor's  court
arose  a  great  controversy,  because  every  one
strove  to  be  of"  the  number  of  the  twelve;
but  as  this  was  impossible,  because  they
were  many,  and  the  number  challenged  was
so  few,  in  the  end  they  consented  to  what
was  reasonable,  and  agreed  to  obey  the  de-
termination of  the  knight  of  the  Savage,  he
being  the  chief  in  this  adventure.  They
wiioni  he  chose  were  I'ahnerin  of  England
his  brotlier,  prince  Florcndos,  Graciano,
Jîeroido,  Floraman  king  of  Sardinia,  Blan-
didon,  Platir,  Punipides,  king  Estrelante  of
II angaria,  Don  lîosuel,  Fiancian  son  to
king  Polendos,  and  J3on  Kosiram  de  la  Brun-
C  B  2


280

da*,  the  first  friend  and  companion  of  the
knight  of  the  Savage,  who  was  at  this  time
in  tlie  court,  having  arrived  with  the  troops
from  England.  All  these  were  armed  in  rich
armour,  with  gay  surcoats  of  great  cost,
wrought  and  adorned  hy  the  hand  of  their
ladies  ;  for  though  the  most  of  them  were
married,  yet  love  was  as  rooted  in  them  as  it
was  in  the  days  when  that  name  seemed  to
them  mare  worthy  of  reverence  than  all
others.  In  this  manner  they  went  out  of
the  cit},  accompanied  by  Don  Duardos,
Arnedos,  Ilecindos,  thesoldan  Belagriz,  and
Dramuziando,  they  being  unarmed,  who
went  to  see  tlie  battle,  thinking  that  by  these
twelve  they  should  judge  what  prowess  there
would  be  found  among  their  enemies^  as
they  knew  the  doughtiest  among  them  would
be  chosen.

"When  they  reached  the  field  of  battle,  which


*  These  twelve  knights  prove  to  be  thirteen,  including
Florian  There  are  very  many  such  petty  oversights  ia
the  book.


281

was  nighcr  to  the  city  than  to  the  army,  the
soldan  chusing  it  to  be  so,  to  the  intent  that
the  empress  and  her  ladies  might  the  bcller
behold  it,  tiiey  found  the  solckm  of  Persia
and  tlie  knights  of  his  company  akeady  there,
armed  hkc  men  who  in  the  fashion  and  rich-
ness of  their  arms  wished  to  show  that  they
were  great  personages,  and  also  to  appear
w^ell  before  tlie  ladies.  There  were  four
princes  among  them,  wlio  were  heirs  to
mighty  kingdoms,  and  the  other  knights
were  of  great  rank  in  arms  and  in  estate.
The  armour  and  devices  which  they  bare  are
not  here  related,  because  they  will  be  writ-
ten of  in  another  place.  Tht  king  of  Bam-
ba, the  king  of  Parthia,  the  knig  of  Arme-
mia,  and  the  giant  Pramustan.e,  with  some
other  knights  ol"  great  prowess,  came  to  ac-
company them,  unarmed.  Tlie  soldan  be-
ing desirous  to  cope  with  the  knighi;  of  the
Savage,  to  see  whetlier  he  could  revenge
himself  for  the  foU  which  he  had  from  him
received,  seeing  him  in  the  middle  of  the
christian  knights,  took  his  post  opposite  him,
with  the  king  of  Etolia  by  his  side,  who  was
the  signalest  knight  of  the  twelve,  and  a
2  B  3


Í282

special  good  jouster.  As  the  fame  of  ibis
king  was  known  in  the  court,  and  this  known
to  be  he  by  the  device  in  his  shield,  (^which
Avas  a  golden  bull  in  a  field  sable,  in  memory
of  such  a  one  which  he  had  won  by  tbrce
of  arms,  conquering  the  keepers  thereof,  an
atchievemcnt  upon  which  he  greatly  prided
himself,)  Pahiierin  confronted  him,  desi-
rous that  day  to  show  his  lady  Polinarda  how
constant  he  was  in  her  love.

The  soldan  now  put  down  his  beaver,  which
the  king  of  Armi^nia  adjusted  and  gave  him
his  lance  ;  his  companions  did  the  like.  And
being  all  on  both  sides  ready  in  their  places,
at  the  sound  of  a  trumpet  which  Fra-
mustaiite  blew,  they  ran  at  each  other  with
great  force  ;  and  each  encountered  his  an-
tagonist full  on  the  shield,  none  iailiug  in
his  attaint,  all  being  so  well  delivered,  that
the  greater  part  of  ihem  went  to  the  ground.
Palmerin  encountered  the  king  of  Etolia
with  such  might,  that  piercing  through  his
shield,  and  entering  his  armour,  the  spear
drove  him  from  off  his  horse  with  the  sad-
dle between  his  legs,  the  girth  bursting  ;  he


283

himself  not  heins:  so  little  sliaken  but  that  he
lost  both  stirrups,  though    he   speedily  re-
covered thein.     The  knight  of  the  Savage
and  the  soldan  of  Persia  encountered  with
their  lances,  and  the  soldan  not  able  to  bear
so  rigorous  an  encounter,  caught  hold  on  the
neck  of  his  horse  ;  but  their  horses  in  passing
ran  against  each  other  Vvith  such  a  shock,
that  both  were  stunned  and  fell  to  the  ground
with    their    riders.      Prince  Florendos   en-
countered Arjelao,    prince  of  Arfaria,  and
bearing  him  to  the  ground,  past  on  without
receiving  any  reverse.     In  brief,   they  were
all  unhorsed  on  both  sides,  except  Palmerin,
Plalir,  and   Florendos,  who  desiring  to  ac-
company their  frieiuls,  alighted  from  their
horses,  s»vord  in  hand,  and  placed  themselves
in  order  of  battle.     The  soldan,  who  was  not
satisfied  to  see  that  his  i)arty  had    received
any  foil    in  the  joust,  joincil    the    king    of
J:liolia,  who  held   himself  to  have  received
the  greatest  dishonour  of  all,  and  said,  Since
we  have  been  put  to  the  W()^^l   by  tne  fault
of  our  horses,  let  us  now  so  behave  ourselves
as  wilhouL    them  to  make  amends.     With
that  he  ami  his  companion»  began  the  com-


284

bat  with  the  sword,  in  wliich  they  would  have
gained  less  than  they  did  in  the  joust,  it"  t lie
succour  of  the  ladies  bad  not  stood  them  in
good  stead  ;  for  the  emperor  seeing  the  sol-
dan  of  Persia  in  great  danger,  by  reason  that
Fli)rian  had  won  the  advantage  over  him,  and
tha!  the  king  of  Eiolia  laboured  more  to
save  himself  from  Palmerin's  blows  than  to
offend  him  with  his  own,  and  that  l^'lorendos
also  had  his  antagonist  well  nigh  at  his  mercy,
though  among  the  others  there  was  little,
vantage  to  be  perceived,  and  they  were  still
performing  a  fair  and  beautiful  battle,  be-
sought the  empress,  for  the  sake  of  these
three  who  were  the  chief  among  them,  to  bid
them  cease,  that  thcv  mi[i;ht  be  in  condition
to  appear  at  the  ball,  as  they  had  requested.
It  fell  to  the  lot  of  the  fair  Miraguarda.  to
separate  them,  who,  accompanied  with  four
damsels,  and  the  kings  Polendos  and  Tarnaes,
went  into  the  field.  Certes  there  needed
none  of  her  intreaties  to  separate  them,  for
her  presence  struck  such  reverence,  that  at
beholding  her,  they  who  expected  victory,  as
well  as  those  who  despaired  of  it,  drew  back,
^liraguarda  thanked  them  for  their  courtesy.


f8ó

and  beinc:  accompanied  by  them  all^,  returned
into  the  city,  prince  Florendos  leading  her
by  the  hand,     la  truth,  though  among  all
these  Turks   there  was  not  one   who   would
not  at  that  hour  have  given  his  Hie  and  king-
dom, and  renounced  his   rehgion  into  the
bargain  to  serve  her,  yet  he  who  was  most
enrapt  amonc:  them  was  the  soldan.     He  fol-
lowed  heriikeonebcreftof  his  understanding,
and  addressed  himself  to  her  in  that  state
with  words  indicating  his  intentions,  calling
her  Polinarda,  whom  he  believed  her  to  be  ;
for  as  you  have  formerly  heard,  when  Bar-
rocante  and  his  companions  came  with  the
damsel   who  brought  the  first  embassy   con-
cerning  this   war,   among  oiher  conditions
of  peace  which  she  propounded,  the  prin-
cipal was   that   Polinarda  should  marry  the
soldan  of  Persia,  and  Florendos  with  Arme-
nia   liis    sister,    whereby    it   appeared   how
at  that  time  the  soldan  was  enamoured  of
her    by   report.       And  now  seeing    Mira-
guarda,  and  thinking  this  was  she,  love  had
less  to  do  in  him  ;  which  made  Palmerin,
when  he  heard  him,  as  great  a  Moor  at  heart
as  himself,  for  he  now  remembered  the  words


286

of  the  embassy  which  he  had  sent  to  ask  he''
to  wife,  and  if  there  had  then  been  oppor-
tunity for  him  to  have  satisfied  the  wrath
which  he  Ick,  he  would  not  have  waited  till
a  future  time  to  do  it.  And  he  then  deter-
mined in  every  battle  or  skirmish  which
should  take  place,  to  do  his  endeavour  to
seek  him  out,  and  make  an  end  of  him.

When  they  had  entered  the  city  and  reach-
ed the  palace,  the  soldan  and  his  compa-
nions were  well  received  by  the  emperor,
and  Miraguarda  by  the  empress,  Gridonia,
Flerida,  and  the  other  princesses;  she  had
enough  to  say  to  Polinarda,  telling  her  how
amorous  the  soldan  was,  and  laughing  at
what  he  had  said  to  her  in  lhe  other's  name.
Lady,  replied  Polinarda,  you  have  such  pow-
er over  all  who  behold  you,  that  the  soldan
is  little  to  blame  for  what  he  did  ;  neverthe-
less, the  hatred  which  I  have  long  resented
towards  this  man,  for  w hat  he  ibrmerly  pro-
posed about  me,  will  not  let  me  take  any
pleasure  in  any  thing  concerning  him.  I
pray  you  let  us  not  waste  time  in  talking  of
him.    The  empress  now  came  to  them,  and


287

desired  them  to  adorn  themselves  for  the
ball,  with  Lionarda  and  the  other  princesses,
who  were  gone  to  the  Garden  of  Flerida,
where  the  emperor  was  wont  to  entertain
strangers,  it  being  a  full  pleasant  place,  and
meet  for  joyful  occasions  ;  the  empress  had
now  given  orders  that  it  should  he  full  featly
prepared,  as  one  who  foreboded  that  this
would  be  the  last  day  of  her  pleasures  ;  for
at  such  times  the  heart  divines  its  sorrows,
and  it  seemcih  that  it  forehodcs  evil  with
more  certainty  than  good.  The  emperor
placed  the  soldan  next  to  himself  with  gieal
courtesy,  which  he  showed  also  to  the  kings.
Don  Duardos,  Arnedo?,  and  ilecindos  did
the  like  to  the  other  knights,  so  thai  it  might
"well  be  seen  how  greatly  the  courtesy  and
Jiumanity  of  that  court  differed  from  what
was  to  be  found  in  other  places.  Those
among  the  Turks  who  thought  nothing  con-
cerning love,  seeing  the  chivalry  of  that
lunise,  judged  it  to  exceed  all  in  the  world.
But  the  soldan  and  others,  who  had  iixcd
their  thoughts  U[)on  the  ladies,  had  more  to
marvel  at,  seeing  so  many  of  such  excellent
beauty,  and  tliey   thouL^hi  it  not  much  that


288

any  one  should  give  up  his  time  and  surren-
der his  liberty  to  them,  seeking  in  their  ser-
viee  whatever  chance  or  fortune  might  prof-
fer; and  they  judged  that  the  notable  feats
and  exploits  worthy  of  immortal  fame,  which
the  knights  of  thai  house  were  wont  to  al-
chieve,  proceeded  more  from  the  force  of
their  love,  than  from  that  which  nature  had
given  them.  Truly  no  such  thought  as  this
could  ever  enter  the  mind  of  such  as  are
heretics  to  love,  and  hereby  it  may  bejudg-
ed  how  strong  hold  love  had  taken  upon  those
who  held  this  fancy.  The  soldan,  who  till
now  lîad  not  taken  his  eyes  from  Miraguarda,
thinking  her  to  be  Polinarda,  saw  now  by  the
orderof  their  seats  that  he  had  been  mistaken,
for  riorendos  was  by  her,  and  Palmerin  by
Polinarda;  this  made  him  understand  the
truth  ;  and  as  his  mind  had  been  long  fixed
upon  Polinarda,  but  his  eyes  most  upon  the
other,  he  could  not  determine  which  of  the
twain  had  most  po^er  over  him,  neither  could
he  judge  which  had  the  advantage  in  beauty.
The  other  Turkish  princes  being  confident
in  their  own  victory,  and  that  they  should
\\  in  tlie  city,  divided  in  their  own  mind  those


289

ladies  among  themselves,  each  allotting  her
to  himselt  whom  he  liked  best.  And  after-
wards wlien  they  returned  to  thé  camp  they
agreed  upon  this  allotment,  the  soldan  then
making  up  his  mind  and  determining  upon
Polinarda,  Avhoni  he  took  tor  his  share.  The
kingof  Etolia  fixed  upon  Miraguarda,  leaving
the  princess  Lionarda  for  Albayzar,  believ-
ing that  by  reason  of  the  gnat  enmity  and
iiatred  between  him  and  tb.e  kniglit  of  the
Savage,  that  spoil  fell  to  hiui  by  right,  la
this  manner  each  chose  his  captive.  The
king  of  Caspia,  though  he  was  a  young  man,
was  so  amorous  of  Flerida,  that,  leaving  all
the  younger  beauties  he  resolved  to  have  her
lor  his  share.  And  from  that  time  these
princes  wore  their  colours  when  they  went
into  the  field,  with  surcoats  in  conibrmity  ;
and  some  of  tlu-m  bore  their  names  i.pon
the  hem  of  ilieir  irarmcnts,  and  the  rims  of
their  s)iields,  thinking  that  with  theiu  thty
should  discomlit  tlieir  cnenucs.

The  ball  lasted  a  long  time,  with  excellent
music  of  rare  instruments;  it  seemed  tiiat  ibis,
iis  tlie  crown  and  finish  of  all  that  had  been

\  UL.    IV.  '2  c


•     290

held  there,  Avas  more  worthy  to  he  seen  than
all.  It  Í3  plain  that  whoever  had  been  bred  in
that  court  and  seen  the  gallantry  and  noble-
ness of  the  emperor's  housc_,  and  now  saw
that  this  day  all  the  joyous  festivities  were  to
end,  in  which  the  dwellers  therein  had  alway
tillnowrevelled,  itisplain^  I  say,  that  noheart
could  have  dissembled  the  great  grief  that  this
thought  must  needs  occasion,  unless  it  were
wholly  insensible  ;  they  who  are  so  having
this  good,  that  neither  doth  great  joy  de-
light them,  nor  great  affliction  cast  them
down.  The  ball  being  ended,  the  Turks
look  their  leave,  going  away  far  more  amor-
ous than  they  came  :  the  emperor  sent  torches
with  them,  to  light  them  to  the  camp.  But
before  they  departed  one  thing, befel  which
Jîîust  be  put  in  remembrance  ;  and  it  was
this  :  All  the  while  the  ball  lasted  the  giant
Framustante  never  took  his  eyes  from  Arlan-
za,  who  was  w  ith  Dramuziando,  his  inclina-
tion leading  him  to  her  rather  than  to  any
other;  and  this  passion  so  got  the  better  of
him,  that  when  he  took  his  leave  he  let  fall
some  words  of  such  pride  and  unseemliness,
that    Dramuziando  was  forced  to  cut  them


Í291

short  ;  in  fine,  they  defied  each  other  for  the
morrow,  greatly  against  the  will  of  the  em-
peror. But  Drainuziundo  was  held  to  be
one  so  temperate  in  all  his  dealings,  that
what  he  did  was  never  without  good  and
just  cause.  Presently  they  exchanged  their
gages  :  the  emperor  secured  the  field  on  his
pan,  and  the  soldan  of  Persia  promised  the
same  for  Albayzar.  This  being  concerted
they  went  their  way,  wishing  the  niglit  were
past  that  they  might  see  this  notable  battle";
for  Framustunte  was  held  for  a  right  valiant
one  and  a  mighty.  For  this  reason  Albayzar
regarded  him  with  great  favour,  which  made
him  the  prouder.


2  c   J


292


CHAPTER  164,


On  the  morrow,  before  the  hour  of  tierce,
Dramuziando,  who  for  anger  and  melancholy
had  not  slept  that  night,  went  into  thi  field,
armed  in  strong  arms  witnout  any  bravery
whatever,  and  aciompanicd  by  the  emperor
Vernao,  and  Don  Duardos  and  his  sons  ;  for
though  he  was  well  beloved  by  all,  these
were  they  who  treated  him  with  especial  res-
pect and  love.

It  was  not  long  before  the  giant  Framustante
came,  attended  on  by  divers  of  his  friends,
he  being  in  an  armour  very  rich  and  strong,
as  it  was  necessary  for  liim,  deaiing  with
so  mighty  an  enemy  :  and  as  in  bigness  of
body  lie  far  exceeded  Dramuziando,  aiid  rode


Í93

a  great  and  powerful  horse,  he  gave  great
confidence  to   his  friends,   and  occasioned
some  fear  in  his  enemies;  but  they  who  had
tried  the  strength  of  Dramuziando  had  such
confidence  in  it  that  they  did  not  lose  it  in
this  danger  ;  and  Albayzar  was  of  their  num-
ber: for    the  blows  whicli  he  had  received
from   his  hands   taught  him  to  make  more
account  of  liim,  than    others  did  who   did
not  know  him  so  well.     Some  words  past  be-
tween them,  but  they  were  few  ;  for  Dramu-
ziando, as  one  who  was  melancholick,  would
not  suffer  Framuslante  to  indulge  his  pride
in  long  speeches.     So  giving  their  horses  the
spur  they  encountered  with  their  full  force  ;
their  spears  were  so  well  driven,  that  piercing
through  both  shields,  they  splintered  against
the  armour  underneath,  and   both  clung  to
their  iiorses  necks,  having  lost  their  stirrups  ;
but  each  had  such  presence  of  mind  always,
that  they  speetlily  recovered  their  saddles.
Certes,  whoever  had  seen  the  force  of  these
encounters  might  well  have   perceived  how
different  they  were  from  those  of  other  men,
and  might  thence  have  conceived  what  the
battle  would  be,  for  it  might  well  be  believed
•2  c  3


294

that  here  was  the  ij;i'catc&t  and  most  sur-
passing strength  which  could  peradvcnture
be  found  in  the  world,  'ihey  drew  out  their
swords,  full  keen  ones,  and  beyond  the  size
of  those  of  ordinary  men  ;  yet  did  they  seem
bigger  in  the  hands  oi'  their  masters,  who
easily  wielded  them,  delivering  mighty  and
tern  Lie  blows.  And  because  iheir  horses,
weaiy  with  the  great  weight  which  tliey  car-
ried, began  to  wax  feeble  and  could  not
move  so  deliverly  as  the  riders  desired,  they
both  alighted.  Then.  thouLili  the  battle  had
before  appeared  rigorous  and  cruel,  it  was
now  full  dilfcrent,  when  they  could  better
come  at  each  other.  If  Dranniziando  knew
by  his  skill  and  activity  how  to  defend  him-
self from  his  enemy's  blows,  Framustante
was  not  less  skilful,  in  warding  his.  Each
in  that  hour  put  forth  all  his  skill  and  strength,
anfi  thus  they  went  on  long  time,  hewing  and
smiling,  without  shew  of  vantage  or  weak-
ness on  either  part:  till  their  shields,  though
bound  round  with  hoops  of  iron  and  steel,
were  so  broken  and  defaced,  that  they  could
find  but  little  defence  in  them  ;  and  their
armour  was  so  cruelly  cut  and  mangled,  that


^95

llicir  bodies  were  exposed.  All  tlie  regaril-
auts  of"  this  combat,  even  tliey  who  were  llie
grealesl  masters  of"  these  things  tind  had  had
most  experience  of  them,  held  this  to  be  the
greatest  that  ever  was  seen  ;  though  that  per-
liaps  between  Dramuziancio  and  Barrocante
might  compare  with  it;  for  thouj,h  Barro-
cante was  held  to  be  the  fiercest  of  all  giants
in  the  worl;!,  Framustante  was  more  active
than  he,  and  this  made  the  victory  appear
more  doubtful.  But  the  destiny  of  both,
wliic')  was  reserved  for  another  hour,  occa-
sioned the  baille  to  be  broken  off,  greatly  to
the  di»|jleasuie  of  both:  for  at  that  very
time,  Targiana  and  tlie  princess  Armenia
arrived  in  the  camp,  accompanied  with  many
knigh's.  Concerning  tlieir  coming  it  is  re-
covded,  that  as  it  was  now  some  time  since
Albayzar  and  the  soldan  had  departed  with
the  licet,  largiana  being  certified  that  the
army  were  securely  encamped  before  the
Axalls  of  (Joiistantinople.  and  the  defenders
thereof  so  begirt  round  about  that  they
could  not  come  fbith,  and  moreover  that  all
the  adjoining  country  was  under  the  power
of  the  Turks,  she  being  naturally  dcsiroi  s


29)

of  seeing  great  things,  and  moved   also  by
her  affection  for  Albayzarj   determined   to
go  and  visit  him.     So  providing  first  for  the
government  of  her  kingdoms,  and  taking  with
her   two   thousand  knights  whom   Albayzar
had  left  to  serve  her  and  guard  his  court,
and   having  also  let    the  princess  Armenia
know   her  purpose,  they    twain   made    the
journey  with  this  great  company  of  knights,
and  arrived  in  the  empire  of  Constantinople.
It  is  related  in  the  Chronicles  of  that  house,
treating  of  the  virtue  and  humanity  of  Tar-
giand,  that  so  sensible  was  she  of  the  honour
which  the   emperor  had    shown  her  in  that
court,  that  when  she  came  into  his  country,
and  saw  the  dwellers  therein   oppressed  and
cruelly  treated,  she   did   not  without   great
pain  hear  their  cries;  and  when  she  came
within  sight  of  the  valley  of  the  city,  and  saw
how  it  was  beleagered  round  about,  and  that
the  lords  thereof  were  brought  so  nearly  to
destruction,  she  shed  many   tears  and  mani-
fested great  sorrow,  as  one  who  would  have
wished  with   far  other  guerdon  to  have  re-
quited the  great  feasts  and  courtesy  and  love
with  which  she  had  been  entertained  in  that
court.


e:)7

Having  reached  llie  arui\\,  and  lieaiiug  ibat
])ranniy,iatulo  and  rrauiustaiite  were  engaged
in  baltic,  she  would  not  that  any  caubC  of
sorrow  sl'.oidd  helide  on  the  day  oHier  ar-
rival, more  espeei.dly  because  siie  Uucw
-Dranuiziando  and  the  great  worth  of  liis
]jerson,  and  also  the  great  account  which
Albayzar  made  of  I'Vamiistante.  iSo  before
she  alighted,  accompanied  by  jMbayzar
her  husband,  (who  greatly  rejoiced  at  her
coming  and  at  the  princess  Armenia's,  that
ihey  might  behold  tlie  revenge  which  h'e  so
greatly  desired;  the  soldan  also,  and  sund:y
other  kings  going  with  her,  she  came  to
the  place  of  battle.  Targiana  went  into  the
lists,  having  her  face  unveiled,  and  ap-
proaching Dramuziando  she  laid  her  hand
on  bis  shoulder  and  said,  ]\Iethiid<s  it  were
reason,  Dianiuziando,  that  all  milancholy
should  1,'C  ended  at  the  arrival  olone  who  is
so  nincli  vour  friend.  Dramuxiando  tuiaincr
liis  eyes  upon  her,  atid  knowing  her,  drew
back  a  little,  saying,  (.'ertes,  Lady,  he  must
be  of  \\eak  understanding  who  woidd  not
rather  he  vani]uisl)ed  and  serve  Von,  than
lemain  coti(]t;cM;or  in   your  disservice,  much


298

inorc  so,  when  in  giving  over  the  combat  I
receive  favour,  seeing  I  am  matched  with
such  a  strong  and  puissant  enemy.  I,  re-
plied Framustante,  receive  no  favour,  and
though  I  know  well  that  these  glozing  words
are  not  spoken  from  the  heart,  nevertheless,  I
shall  make  you  find  them  true  in  the  end.  1
pray  thee,  Framustante,  said  Dramuziando;
shew  thyself  at  this  time  obedient  to  the  lady
Targiana  ;  we  are  in  a  place  where  we  may
at  all  times  try  ourselves  together.

Albayzar  then  commanded  Framustante  to
leave  the  combat,  and  not  reply  farther,  for
he  feared  some  arrogance.  Then  Don  Du-
ardos  and  the  emperor  Vernao,  who  knew
Targiana,  approached  with  the  other  princes,
except  the  knight  of  the  Savage,  who  re-
turned into  the  city,  because  he  would  not
have  her  see  him,  and  carried  the  news  of
her  arrival.  Targiana  received  them  with
fit  welcome,  making  them  such  courtesy  as
such  high  princes  deserved,  and  minutely
enquiring  for  the  health  of  the  emperor  and
empress,  and  all  her  friends  ;  then  taking  her
leave,  they  went  into  the  city,  carrying  Dra-


S9è

muziando  with  them,  who  was  wearied,  but
not  hurt.  Targiana  returned  to  the  army,
where  there  were  that  day  great  feasts  and
rejoicings,  especially  among  the  common
sort,  who  ahvays  rejoice  for  the  pleasure  of
the  great;  and  among  the  great  also,  they
remembering  with  how  much  more  delight
they  should  now  carry  on  the  war,  since
there  were  ladies  in  the  camp,  before  whom
they  might  display  themselves  ;  and  they
thought  that  to  serve  them  they  would  labour
to  do  greater  feats  than  before,  this  being
the  only  thing  for  which  they  had  envied
ihem  in  the  city.

The  emperor  of  Allemaign  and  Don  Duardos
went  discoursing  on  the  beauty  of  the
princess  Armenia,  for  that  of  Targiana  was
something  faded.  When  they  reached  the
city,  there  they  found  greater  stir  for  the
coming  of  Targiana  than  there  was  in  the
enemy's  army,  for  she  was  marvellously  loved
in  that  land,  ever  since  it  had  been  seen  how
grateful  she  was  for  the  favours  which  she
had  received  there.  All  that  day  was  past
in  sending  visits,  for  not  only  the  emperor


300

inul  ciiipresá  sent  to  visit  her,  t>ul  every
princcss  and  lady  did  so  also  ;  and  the  same
n;is  done  to  Armenia,  because  she  came  in
bcr  coin[)any.  IJnt  Targiana,  not  contented
with  this  ambassadry  ot"  visits,  obtained
leave  iVom  Albayzar  to  go  and  sec  the  em-
press and  her  daughters.  So  on  the  morrow,
being  accompanied  liy  lair  and  gallant  dames,
whom  she  bronght  with  her  íbr  lhe  i^once,
she  and  Armenia,  being  right  richly  attired
and  adorned,  taking  with  them  the  soldan
and  the  kings  who  were  in  the  can)p,  went
to  the  city.  The  emperor,  though  by  rea-
son of  his  condition,  he  did  not  go  out  of
the  hoTise,  ordered  himself  to  be  carried
upon  men's  shoulders  to  the  city  gates  to
receive  her,  and  there  taking  her  in  his  arms
with  such  love  as  if  she  had  been  one  of  his
daughters,  he  held  her  awhile  with  speeches
answerable  to  that  good-will  which  he  bare
towards  her.  Then  he  welcomed  with  great
courtesy  Armenia,  the  soldan  of  Persia,  and
the  other  kings  that  came  in  her  company  ;
and  I  then  discoursing  with  Targiana,  he  was
..  carried  with  them  to  tlie  palace,  where  at  the
cutraiice  of  tue  court-yard  thty    iuund  the


301

enipicsb  with  all  her  family,  by  wiujiu  Tar-
giaiia  was    received  wiili  such  honour  and
such  demonstrations  ot"  love,  tlaat  more  could
not  Iiave  been  done  had  she  been  in  the  house
of  the  Great  Turk,   lier  father.     She  in  ac-
costing all  these  princesses,  when  she  caine
to  Fierida,  asked   of  Polinarda,    ^\  ho    held
her  by  the  hand,  who  slie  was;  and  when  .it
was  told    her,  she    stood  awhile   beholding
her;  for  though  Tlerida  was  pnst  her  yor.th,
yet  was  she  of  rare   and   excellent   beauty.
When   she  had    knowledííe  of  Mirao:uarda
and  Lionarda,  she  had  then  enough  to  think
of  and  enough  to  envy,  especially  seeing  her
at  liberty   whom  she  thought  she  lield  fast
enclianied  :  and  addressins;  herself  to  Mira-
guarda  she  said.  Now,  Lady,  1  do  not  blame
Albavzar,  nor  any  one,  lor  any  exces■^  which
can  have  been  connniited  for  you.     Towards
Lionarda  she  used  fewer  words,   remember-
ing that  she  was   married  to  I'lorian,  whom
she  hated  as  her  mortal  enemy.    The  pruicess
Armenia  was  abashetl  at  what  she  sau,  and
aI>o  lor   ihat  she  was  not  acquanued   with
any   of  the    ladies   of    that  court,    and  she
went  among  ihcm  like  o:ie  w  lio^e  judgLUcnt

VOL.    IV.  „  'i   D


302

was  troubled,  turning  her  eyes  from  one  to
another,  and  envying  the  beauty  of  some,
that  being  the  thing  of  all  others  which  wo-
men envy  most;  and  that  her  envy  might
be  the  more,  she  was  between  Miraguarda
and  Lionarda,  who  accompanied  her  in  this
way  to  do  her  honour,  they  being  the  persons
in  that  house  of  whom  she  had  most  cause  to
be  envious.  Their  ladies  were  entertained
by  those  of  the  empress  while  they  stayed
there.  The  emperor  meantime  was  in  his
hall  conversing  with  the  soldan  and  his
companions  of  the  battle  between  Dramu-
ziando  and  Framustante,  and  of  other  things,
with  as  little  appearance  of  hatred  as  though
there  had  been  none  between  them,  nor  rea-
son for  any.  It  now  being  late,  they  requested
permission  to  return:  the  day  seeming  short  to
Targianain  comparison  of  the  time  which  she
would  have  wished  to  pass  with  those  ladies,
of  whom  she  took  her  leave  with  many  tears,
embracing  them  one  by  one,  and  acquitting
herself  of  this  war,  which  had  been  under-
taken against  her  intreaties.  They  all  ac-
companied her  out  into  the  place  before  the
palace,  where  the  farewell  was  given   with


303

so  many  tears,  that  there  Avas  neither  room
for  words  nor  compliments  ;  some,  hevvever,
were  shown  to  Armenia;  for  as  they  knew  her
not,  and  therefore  had  no  friendship  for  her,
there  was  neither  love  nor  sorrow  to  take
place  of  these  forms.  The  emperor  accom-
panied them  to  the  city  gates,  where  he  took
leave  of  all,  and  of  Targiana  last  of  all.
And  when  she  would  then  have  excused
herself  touching  the  war,  saying  how  much
it  was  against  her  wishes,  he  interrupted  her,
saying,  Lady  Targiana,  nothing  grieveth
me  so  much  as  that  1  am  now  of  an  age  not
to  be  able  to  requite  you  for  your  true  and
manifest  good-will.  As  for  the  rest,  things
of  this  nature  are  so  doubtful,  that  only  at
the  end  can  it  be  told  who  gains  and  who
loses.  1  am  so  confident  in  the  reason  and
justice  of  my  own  cause,  and  in  the  little
which  Albayzar  hath  for  destroying  my  coun-
try, that  I  expect  this  will  decide  all  things
rightfully.  Do  you.  Lady,  think  of  this
house  to  make  use  of  it  as  your  own  ;  as  for
all  else  I  know  not  yet  whom  you  will  have
most  need  to  lament  for.  With  that  they
parted.  The  emperor  was  carried  back  to
2d  C


304

his  paliicf,  aiitl  Targiana  was  conducted  to
rlio  c:iimp,  accompanied  with  the  cinpcior
\  cinao,  the  kings  of  England,  IVance,  and
Spain,  and  all  the  knights  of  the  emperoi's
court,  who  having  biouglit  her  to  tlie  camp,
took  their  leave  and  returned  to  the  citj',
talking  of  the  nobleness  of  Targiana  and  the
beauty  of  Armenia  ;  and  some  of  them,  as
the  Turks  iiad  done,  devising  severally
among  themselves,  to  whose  lot  they  should
Jail;  for  it  is  oftentimes  the  nature  of  sol-
diers to  share  and  divide  the  spoil  among
themselves,  before  fortune  hath  delivered  it
into  theh-  hands.


SOS


CHAPTER  165.


Not  many   days    after   the    arrival   of  the
princess  Targiana,  the  princes,  as  well  on
the  one  side  as  on  the  other,  concluded  to
join  in  battle.     The  Christians  were  more
desirous  thereof  than  the  Turks,  because  the
victuals  began  to  wax  scant  within  the  city  ;
besides,  Albayzar  came  oftentimes,  and  pro-
voked them  also  with  his  standard  and  en-
signs displayed,  which  urged  the  people  to
cry  and  call  to  their  commanders  and  cap-
tains, to  suffer  tiiem  to  sally  forth  of  the
city  ;  for  it  was  a  grief  to  them  to  be  so  en-
closed within,  and  to  see  their  enemies  come
daring  them  so  boldly  without  :  ull  with  one
voice   cried  out  for  leave  to  attack   them,
whea  peradventure  they  might  make  them
*     2  D  ÎÎ


306

lose  some  of  their  confidence.  îf  Priiiialeon
liad  had  his  will,  it  would  have  heen  seen  be-
fore now  by  \vhoie  courage  the  issue  was  to
be  decided  ;  but,  as  ye  liave  heard,  many  of
those  allies  who  had  come  from  distant  parts,
were  weak  and  sickly  with  travelhng  on  the
seas,  especially  tlie  emperor  Vernao's  people,
\vho  were  the  last  that  arrived;  therefore  they
determined  to  recover  themselves  in  perfect
assurance  of  their  health,  before  they  would
thrust  themselves  into  the  face  of  danger.

7\fier  they  had  well  rested  and  recovered
themselves,  and  found  that  they  were  strong
and  able  to  deal  with  the  eneni}-,  and  all
were  eager  for  it  :  one  Sunday  in  the  month
of  April,  the  day  being  clear  and  bright  and
fit  for  so  signal  a  thing,  after  mass  they  drew
out  their  banners  through  two  of  the  city
gates,  and  the  captains  began  to  put  their
lîien  in  battle  array  with  great  stir  and  joy-
fulness.  Don  Duardos,  as  general  of  the
whole,  allotted  each  his  post,  and  divided  the
horse  into  six  battles.  The  first  was  con-
ducted l»y  the  soldan  Belagriz,  to  whom  was
Gommitted  five  thousand  good  soldiers,  being


J07

all  his  own  subjects.  The  second  was  given
in  cliar'gc  to  Uecindos  king  of  Spain,  who
had  the  conduct  of  three  thousand,  two  of
which  were  they  wlio  came  from  Spain.
The  third  was  led  by  Arnedosking  of  France,
who  had  the  charge  of  the  like  number  as
the  king  of  Spain  had,  including  the  two
thousand  that  were  sent  him  from  France.
The  i'ounh  was  under  the  conduct  of  Folcn-
dos  king  of  Thcssaly,  who  had  the  like  num-'
her.  The  fifth  was  in  the  charge  of  the  em-
peror \  ernao  of  Allemaign,  being  as  many.
And  the  sixth  and  last,  being  four  thousand,
was  conducted  by  Don  J)uardos.

Primalcon  would  not  this  day  take  upon  liim
any  charge,  that  he  might  the  better  give
succour  to  those  places  wlicre  he  perceived
most  danger  ;  he  therefore  remained  among
the  knights-adventurers,  who  were  these:
Bclcar  ;  duke  Drapos^  of  Normandy  ;  May-
ortes,  the  Great  Khan;  Palmcrin  of  Eng-
land; I'lorian  ol'  the  Desert;  Florendos  ;
Flatir  ;  lih'.ndidon  ;  Berijldo,  prince  of  Spain  ;
lloraman  of  Sardinia;  Ciraeiano  of  iVance;
l)(jn   UoMicl  ;   Btlisarte;    Onistaldo  ;    Tcnc-


:308

bror  ;  Fraucian  ;  Potnpides  ;  Daliarie  ;  Es-
trelante  ;  Frisol;  Albanis;  Rorainonte -,  Dra-
gonalce,  king  of  Navarre  ;  Liiymanes  of  Bur-
gundy; Germain  of  Orleans;  Tremoran  ;
Rosirain  de  la  Brunda;  Dramuziando  ;  Al-
mourol  ;  and  all  the  most  renowned  knights
of  the  emperor's  court.  All  these  took  their
post  at  the  onset  in  the  van  of  the  soldan
Belagriz's  battle  ;  all  concluding  witii  them-
selves, that  so  soon  as  the  battle  should  be
begun,  they  would  each  of  them  take  part
on  that  side,  where  their  duty  and  affection
did  best  serve  them.

In  the  city  there  only  remained  king  Tarnaes
wit!)  a  few  knights  for  its  guard.  Of  the
footmen  fit'ty  thousand  were  stationed  in  the
rear,  to  support  the  horse,  the  others  remain-
ing for  the  defence  of  the  city.  Don  Duar-
dos,  being  armed  at  all  points,  and  with  his
aventayle  open,  went  round  visiting  all  the
battles,  putting  them  all  in  due  array,  foot  as
well  as  horse,  encouraging  them  in  noble
speeches,  and  with  a  countenance  bewray-
ing the  invincible  mind  of  a  conqueror,  de-
siring  them,    to    remember   their    knightly


309

ílceds  passed,  which  might  lie  an  occasion
to  stir  ihem  up  more  nobly,  in  defence  of
the  ilowcr  of  all  Christendom.  With  these
and  other  such  like  s[)C'Cchcs,  he  did  so  ani-
mate and  cnibojilen  all  his  train,  as  they  that
were  the  most  fearful,  and  had  least  mind
to  deal  with  their  enemies,  seemed  as  wil-
ling and  forward  to  the  battle  as  he  that
was  the  bravest  soldier  in  the  field  :  in  fine,
all  thought  that  in  him  the  victor}'  was  cer-
tain. Jiaving  seen  to  every  thing,  like  a
good  commander,  he  withdrew  to  his  own
post,  commanding  the  soldan  Belagriz  to
give  the  first  assault.

Albayzar  ordered  his  army  with  no  less  skill
and  [)rudencc.  He  divided  his  horse  into
ten  battles,  giving  to  each  five  thousand.
The  first  was  conducted  by  the  soldan  of
Persia,  who  was  accompanied  with  the  great
giant  Framustante,  and  about  five  hundred
knights-adventurers,  besides  the  five  thou-
sand, all  persons  of  great  name  and  not  less
prowess.  Tlic  second  was  given  in  charge
to  the  king  olTrcbisond.  The  third  to  the
king  of  Caspia.     'J'he  fourth  to  the  king  of


310

Aimcuia.  The  fifth  to  the  king  of  Bamba.
Tiic  sixth  lo  the  king  of  Parthia.  The
seveutli  to  the  kingof  Bythinia.  The  eighth
to  prince  Arjelao  of  Aifasia.  The  ninth  to
the  king  of  Etolia.  Ihc  last  was  conducted
by  the  soldan  Aihay/,ar  himself,  with  wliom
were  the  seven  giants  for  the  guard  of  his
person,  all  except  Franuistante;  for  when  he
espied  Drainuziando  in  the  forefront  of  the
Cliristians'  army,  being  desirous  to  approve
himself  against  him  only,  he  went,  by  the  li-
cence of  Albayzar,  to  tlie  foremost  squadron
of  the  Turks,  The  foot  were  divided  into
four  bodies  to  support  the  horse;  each  body
contained  live-and-twcnty  tliousand  ;  and
they  that  were  left  be.-ide,  horse  as  well  as
foot,  remained  in  the  camp,  for  safeguard  of
Targiana  and  the  princess  Armenia,  and  of
the  tents  and  stores  of  the  army.

As  for  the  richness  of  the  armonr,  and  in-
genioi  s  devices  whicli  tiiese  knights,  as  well
on  the  one  side  as  the  other,  bare  in  this
conflict,  albeit  that  to  make  a  true  and  suffi-
cient discourse  thereof  would  be  impossible,
aevertlieless,  to   yield  the  greater  content-


su

tncnt  to  those  ^vho  take  deliiiiiL  iii  readinii;
ot  tliis  tainous  history,  1  will  make  record  oi'
sonic,  whom  uholly  to  prctennit  would  be  a
fauh,  especially  in  so  notable  a  battle.

Bcoinninir  then  with  the  Cliri^tians,  uho  ad-
vaneed  by  twos  and  by  threes,  I  say  that
Don  Duardos,  the  emperor  Vernao,  and  the
soldai!  Belagriz,  had  their  armour  of  white
and  black,  with  bars  of  gold,  strone;  and
splendid  withal,  and  in  their  shields  they
bare  a  black  (jriflbn  in  a  field  sable,  carrvinu;
in  his  beak,  written  in  letters  of  gold,  the
names  of  siicli  as  each  esteemed  to  be  his
best  beloved.

]^rimalcon  and  king  Polendos  were  in  w  hitt
armour  without  any  adornment,  and  in  their
sliii.'lds  was  pourtrayed,  in  a  silver  field,  a
cloven  Rock,  which  device  Primaleon  wa:i
wont  to  boar  when  he  was  amorous  of  the
princess  Ciridonia  his  wife.  Reciiidos  and
Arnedos  l)orc  arms  suitable  to  their  years,
ol"  grey  and  murrey  checcpicrs,  Lions  rauj-
pant  in  their  shit  Ids,  in  a  u,rey  lield.  'ving
•Estrrlanlc-,  and  lielcar  his  u  .cic^  were  in  ar-


iiiuur  ui  Ijlack  and  gold,  strong  and  little  or-
naiiKiUod,  because  it  was  not  long  since  tli«;
decease  of  king  Fiisol  and  Ditreo,  and  for
their  devices  they  had  iigured  in  their  shields
a  golden  Tree  in  a  field  sable.

rahncrln  of  England  and  Florendos  were  in
green  aruiuur,  studded  with  little  flowers  of
gold,  and  in  their  shields  was  iigured  For-
tune lying  on  her  face,  whereby  was  under-
stood, that  they  did  not  repose  their  trust
in  her.

King  Floranian  of  Sardinia,  and  the  knight
of  the  Savage  jMan,  had  their  armours  of  au
Indian  colour,  all  ^vrought  over  witli  little
s4irubs  of  gold,  more  gay  than  it  might  have
been  thought  beseemed  the  manner  of  Fio-
raman's  life;  the  devices  of  their  shields  were
contrary;  for  Floraman  had  pourtrayed  in
his  shield.  Death  holding  a  lady  by  the
hand,  in  a  field  of  sable  :  and  Florian  kept
his  Savage  device,  v>here\.vith  he  had.
atchieved  so  many  honourable  victories.
Dragonalte  king  of  Navarre,  and  A! banis  of
F'risa,  king  of  Denmark,  were  in  red  armour.


313

with  birds  of  silver,  and  in  their  shields  \\i\i
pictured  in  a  field  vert.  Love,  holding  a  knight
underneath  his  feet:  for  this  device  Mira-
guarda  commanded  Dragonahe  to  carry  all
his  life-time,  when  he  was  vanquished  before
her  by  Florendos  at  the  castle  of  Almourol.

Prince  Beroldo,  and  Onistaldo  his  brother,
were  both  in  gilt  armour  spotted  with  black,
and  in  their  shields  were  flames  of  gold,  in  a
field  of  sable.  Poli  nardo  and  Francian  had
tlieir  armour  of  green  and  carnation  colours
in  stripes,  and  in  their  shields  was  displayed
a  silver  sea,  in  a  field  vert.  Blandidon  anci
Frisol  were  in  black  and  yellow  armour,  the
colour  being  wedge-shaped,  carrying  for
their  devices  in  their  shields,  two  black
Griffons,  studded  with  roses  of  gold,  in  a
yellow  field.  Pompides  and  Platir  were  in
green  armour  of  hope,  and  each  of  them
carried  in  his  shield  a  silver  Bull  in  a  field
vert  ;  for  Pompides  took  great  delight  in  this
device.

The  armour  of  prince  Graciano,  and  that  of
Goarim  his  brother,  was  of  greoii  and  white,

VOL.  IV.  *  2  E


314

T\ith  fillets  of  gold  cross  striked  to  se-
parate the  colour?,  and  in  their  shields  was
íÍ2;ured  a  green  sea  in  a  white  field.  Ro-
ramontc  and  Belisarte  had  their  armour  ot"
vermilion,  and  in  their  shields  they  carried
dead  Hope,  in  a  bloody  field,  as  men  who
needed  hope  no  longer.

Don  Rosuel  and  Dramiante  were  both  iu
v/hitearmour^,  beset  with  roses  of  gold,  their
helmets  fastened  with  laces  of  the  same,  and
ii'i  their  shields  was  pictured  a  white  swan  iu
a  golden  field.

Basiliardo  and  Dirdem,  the  sons  of  Mayortes,
were  in  grey,  wrought  over  with  little  silver
shrubs,  anrl  in  the  same  manner  were  their
shields.  Tenebror  and  Germam  of  Orleans
wore  no  bravery,  only  what  they  were  wont
to  wear,  which  was  arm  ur  of  their  ladies*
colours.  Luvmanes  of  Burgundv,  and  Tre-
moran,  had  their  armour  of  tawny  colour,  a
colour  conformable  to  their  thoughts:  be-
cause Tremoran  being  out  of  hope  to  es-
pouse his  lady,  carried  his  device  accord*
ing  to  his  JU  iaap:  and  j-uymanes  of  Bur-


315

gundy,  having  nothing  lo  hope,  was  the
more  willing  to  keep  him  company  ;  and
therefore  theycarried  for  their  devices  in  their
shields,  sable  Sadness  in  a  vellow  iield.  Dali-
arte  of  the  Dark  Valley,  and  Don  Rosiram
de  la  Brunda,  were  in  white  armour  without
any  adornment.  Daliarte  had  th'e  figure  of
god  Apollo  in  his  shield,  in  a  field  vert,  which
he  was  always  wont  to  bear  ;  and  Don  Rosi-
ram  had  in  a  field  gules,  the  Tower  of  Niui-
rod,  from  whom  he  was  lineally  descended.
Mayortes  the  Gr.ind  Khan,  and  the  giant
Almourol,  were  in  black  armour  and  strong,
without  any  finery,  and  their  shields  of  the
same  colour,  without  any  maimer  of  device,
garnished  with  iron,  and  fit  for  the  nonce.

Dramuziando  appeared  alone  upon  apowcrful
horse  of  iron  grey,  armed  in  plates  oi  steel
which  were  right  strong;  his  shield  was  of
steel,  and  had  moreover  steel  rims,  which
made  it  the  stronger  ;  and  as  he  was  of  great
stature,  and  wore  such  strong  armour,  and
was  moreover  greatly  l)eloved,  the  people
eyed  him  with  great  aflection,  and  had  mucli
hope  in  him.

'*         3  E  3


316

I'liis  was  the  fasliion  in  wlilcli  the  kings,
princes,  and  knights  of  the  emperor  went
forth  ;  many  others  were  there  which  were
v^orthy  to  be  put  in  reineuibrance,  and  if
I  let  them  pass,  it  is  to  avoid  jiroUxity.

iMbayzar,  soldan  of  Babylon  and  heir  to  the
Turk's  dominions,  and  commander  general
of  the  field,  came  forth  upon  a  right  good
horse  which  the  king  of  Media  had  sent  him,
and  which  he  had  reserved  for  this  day  ;  he
was  armed  in  green,  the  token  of  hope,  as
surel}'  expecting  victory  ;  in  his  shield  he
bore  an  image  wrought  of  gold  in  a  field
vert,  made  to  the  likeness  of  Targiana,  from
the  breast  upward,  adorned  with  much  jew-
elry, and  more  fit  to  be  looked  at  and  care-
lully  preserved,  than  exposed  in  battle.  His
aventayle  was  open,  and  being  by  nature  a
goodly  and  gentle  personage,  he  seemed
wortliv  of  so  ffreat  a  charge.

The  soldan  of  Persia  was  in  armour  of  greeu
and  white,  the  colours  being  divided  by  bor-
ders of  gold  and  Jewelry,  in  the  shape  of  a  P,
that  beino:  the  first  letter  of  the  name  of  Poli-


317

navfîa,  towards  whom  he  was  marvellous  aíTec-
tionaie,  and  wiiom  he  expected  to  have  for
the  spoils  of  this  victory  ;  in  his  shield  was
figured  contented  Hope,  in  a  gretn  vesture,
like  a  damsel,  and  round  ahout  the  rim  of
his  shield  was  written  in  letters  oi  gold  the
name  of  Polinarda.  'lhe  king  of  Caspia
was  in  tawny  armour,  sircu'ated  over  in  di-
vers places  witn  bhick,  in  sign  that  he  had
been  vanquished  in  the  comLai  pust  ;  and  in
his  shield  he  bore  ior  his  device,  an  Ounce,
havmq  his  claws  all  blood}-,  in  a  field  of
sa  oie  ;  whereby  he  ga .  e  them  to  understand,
that  he  had  good  hope  to  bathe  his  hands
in  the  blood  of  his  enemies.  The  kmg  of
Trebisond  was  in  red  aimonr,  all  over
figured  vvith  little  silver  birds,  having  their
wi:)gs  spre;id  abroad,  in  manner  as  they
were  flying  ;  h.c  canied  the  picture  of  Mars
in  his  shield,  in  a  field  azu  e,  and  according
to  the  manner  in  which  that  (jod  was  repre-
sented in  old  times.  The  king  of  Parthia,
unlike  the  rest,  was  in  white  armour,  bright
and  shining,  but  without  any  mixture,  and
in  his  shield  was  pourtrayrd  a  Lion  torii  in
pieces,  in  a  white  field,  because  he  had  torn
2  £  3


318

a  lion  himself,  \vlicn  lie  was  in  his  youthfu'
time.  The  l<ing  of"  Etolia  was  in  armour  of
sinople  and  murrey,  eoiours  of  litilc  gaiety,
and  not  far  unlike,  without  any  hordering»
and  in  his  shield  a  black  Bull,  in  a  field  of
gules.  I'he  king  of  ^Armenia  was  in  grey
armour  wrought  all  over  with  roses  of  gold,
and  in  his  shield  was  figured  a  Phoenix  in  a
grey  field  :  whereby  his  meaning  was,  that
Jiis  lady  was  the  only  phoenix  of  beauty  in
the  world,  to  wliom  no  other  might  equal
lierself.  The  king  of  Bamba  was  in  gilt  ar-
mour, with  his  basses  of  silver,  and  in  his
shield  was  pictured  a  golden  Lion  in  a  silver
field.  The  king  of  Bythinia  was  in  green
armour,  cross  streaked  with  bands  of  silver,
coupling  ill  manner  of  knots  ;  and  in  his
shield  he  carried  a  Tyger  of  beaten  gold  :  the
rim  of  his  shield  was  fastened  with  jewels  of
great  cost.  Prince  Aijelao  of  Arlasia  had
his  armour  like  to  the  king  of  Bythinia,  being
his  friend  and  comrade.  ]SJany  oilier  of
Albayzar's  knights  came  into  the  field  bravely
armed  ;  but  I  let  them  pass,  inasmuch  as  they
being  on  the  enemies  side,  such  clear  infor-
mation concerning  them  could  not  be  had,


319

as  for  them  lo  be  truly  described.  Fra-
inuslante  and  the  other  seven  giants  were
armed  in  bright  and  strong  armour,  poHshed
and  thick,  without  any  mixture  of  colours;
and  being  of  such  huge  stature  that  they
far  overtopped  all  others  in  the  army,  and
their  harnesses  and  helmets  flashing  over  the
field  far  away,  as  the  sun  shone  on  them,
thcv  struck  lircat  fear  into  the  minds  of  their
enemies,  especially  of  those  who  had  not
been  accustomed  to  stand  against  such  mon-
sters ;  and  consequently  they  gave  to  those
on  their  own  side  creat  confidence  of  victorv
and  vengeance.


320


CHAPTER  166.


The  armies  on  either  side  being  appointed  in
good  and  fitting  manner,  the  potentates,
kings,  princes,  and  persons  of  most  autho-
lity,  would  needs  go  place  themselves  in  the
foremost  rank,  holding  this  opinion,  that  n
surh  a  renowned  battle,  and  of  so  great  peiil,
tliey  alone  which  presented  themselves  ti'ie
foremost  in  fight  should  deserve  honour.
Some  kings  therefore  whose  bodies  were  to
advance  in  order,  left  the  command  to  others,
that  they  might  place  themselves  in  the  face
of  the  battle.

All  being  in  order,  and  all  in  readiness  for
the  charge  ;  with  the  greatest  and  signallest
and  terriblest  uproar  in  the  world,  the  trum-
pets sounding  on  either  side,  they  charged


321

the  soldai!  of  Persia's  batile,  and  many  were
the  notable  encounters  there  given.  Prima-
leon  encountered  the  king  of  Caspia,  and
brake  his  lance  so  bravely  on  him,  as  himself
forsook  both  his  stirrups,  but  the  king  of
Caspia  had  such  a  forcible  stroke,  that  being
pierced  through  shield  and  armour,  he  was
sent  to  the  earth,  with  a  slight  wound  in  the
breast.  Palmerin  of  England  served  the
king  of  Etolia  in  the  same  manner,  albeit
he  was  reputed  amongst  the  Turks  for  an
especial  good  knight  at  arms.  Florendos
and  the  king  of  Armenia  lailed  in  the  joust,
hut  they  met  so  forcibly  together  with  their
bodies,  as  both  they  and  their  horses  tumbled
to  the  ground;  they  were  speedily  holpcn,
but  the  Turk  was  so  amazed  with  his  fall,
that  he  was  not  able  to  rise;  whereupon  two
of  his  cousins,  who  were  appointed  to  guard
his  person,  carried  him  out  of  the  field.  Be-
roldo  and  Floraman  addressed  themselves  to
prince  Arjelao  and  the  king  of  Bythinia,  and
encountered  with  them  so  furiously,  as  they
were  all  cast  forth  of  liicir  saddles,  being  not
able  soon  to  mount  theinselves  again,  be-
cause  the  number   was    so    great^   and   the


322

fight  so  hot  where  they  were.  "Recindos
and  Aiiiedos,  who  were  also  in  the  front  of
the  haitle,  ran  against  the  kings  of  liamba
and  Parthia,  and  they  were  all  unhorsed  ex-
cept king  Recindos,  who  kepi  his  horse  va-
liantly. The  soldan  Belagriz  and  the  king
of  'Irebisond  met  together,  and  brake  their
lances  bravely,  not  being  any  thing  shaken
in  the  encounter,  and  past  on.

The  soldan  of  Persia,  who  thought  himself
the  best  of  hh  own  side,  had  no  sooner
espied  the  knight  of  the  Savage  Man,  but
he  i;ave  his  horse  the  spurs,  and  encountered
with  him  full  nobly;  but  they  did  not  come
off  equally  from  that  encounter.  He  of  the
Savage  lost  one  of  his  stirrups,  which  he  re-
covered again  presently  ;  but  the  soldan  was
so  sore  sl)aken  as  he  lay  along  on  the
neck  of  his  horse,  and  if  he  had  not  been
immediately  succoured, he  might  there  have
met  his  end,  or  have  been  fain  to  be  carried
out  of  the  field,  like  the  king  of  Armenia.

But  of  all  these  first  encounters,  that  which
was  most  eyed,  and  which  was  the  most  not-


323

able,  was  that  of  Dramuziando  and  Framu-
stante  ;  for  as  they  hated  each  other,  and
each  desired  to  display  what  there  was  in
him,  they  ran  at  each  other  with  all  their
force,  and  failing  at  their  lances,  inetin  such
manner  together  with  their  bodies,  like  two
towers,  that  both  horses  and  men  were  .sent
to  the  ground  ;  and  recovering  themselves
nimbly  again,  they  began  on  foot  a  furious
and  cruel  combat.  The  other  knights
charged  also  each  his  enemy;  but  they  are
not  here  particularized,  to  avoid  tediousness,
and  also  because  the  names  of  their  anta-
gonists arc  not  known;  suffice  it  to  say, that
for  the  most  part  tlie  Christians  remained
with  the  honour  of  this  tirst  encounter,  in
which  all  the  princes  of  the  emperor's  comt
were  engaged,  except  Don  Duardus,  the
emperor  V'ernao,  and  king  Polendos,  who,
greatly  as  they  desired  it,  would  not  deiuut
from  their  charge,  icaring  lest  their  men
would  disperse  themselves  out  of  order.  'I'he
gi;  nt  Ahnourol  kept  them  company  likewise,
bee  luse  he  saw  no  more  giants  in  the  lore-
mos.  rank  except  Framustante,  and  as  I>ra-


'J'24


muziaiiflo  was  ongaçred  to  liim,  iic  chose  (<.•
remain  with  Don  Duardos.

After  they  had  thus  encountered  witli  their
lances,  and  many  knights  thrown  to  the  earth,
some  slain  outrighr,  and  other  .some  in  little
better  case;  they  drew  their  swords  on  all  sides,
and  began  the  most  cruel  battle  that  ever
was  seen  ;  and  the  captains  returned  ao-ain
to  their  several  charges,  because  they  would
not  have   them   fall  out  of  order.     Arjelao
and  the  king  of  Bythinia,   fighting  on  foot
against  Floraman   and  Beroldo,    were    suc-
coured by  the  soldan  of  Persia,  who  like  a
noble  captain  pranced  among  the  ranks  to
animate   and  encourage  the   minds    of  liis
friends,  and  assembling  them  in  sundry  com-
panies, he  came  where  these  four  continued
the  fight  still  fiercely;  but  the  soldan  Bela-
griz,  with  his  train,  shewed  such  prowess  on
the  fresh  comers,  as  within  a  while  both  the
soldan  of  Persia  himself,  and  the  company
he  brought  with  him,  were  enforced  to  give
them  place  against  their  wills,  leaving  Arje-
lao  and  the  king  of  Bythinia  in  such  danger.


^<25

fts  bad  not  the  king  of  Trebisond  come
upon  ibeir.  witli  the  second  battle,  the\'  liad
been  slain  by  ilie  bands  of  Floraman  and
Bevoldo.  Tlic  soldan  of  Persia,  who  gained
great  honour  that  day,  seeing  his  men  so  out
of  heart,  that  neither  by  force  nor  persuasions
could  he  keep  them  to,  cried  out  to  the  king
of  Trebisond  to  charge:  which  he  did  with
such  force,  that  by  his  aid  he  returned  to  re-
cover what  was  lost,  and  at  length  made  the
means  to  get  Arjelao,  and  the  king  of  Bythi-
nia,  thorow  the  press.

He  thathad  then  seen  Primaleon  at  thathour,
might  plainly  have  discerned  that  he  fought
like  the  principal  in  this  great  war  ;  for  his
sword  and  armour  being  all  bathed  in  blood,
he  laid  on  load  so  on  ever^  side,  and  lollowed
ii[)on  his  enemies  with  his  train  so  nobly,  as
not  one  durst  stand  before  him  to  endure  his
fury:    by    this   means    he    recovered    horse
again   to  Floraman  and  Beroldo  ;    but  the}'
were  so  wounded,  as  they  were  fain  to  retire
.awhile  from  the  battle.     Then  with  the  aid
of  Palmerin  of  England,  and  Florian  of  tiie
Descri,  he  held  the  i%iui;  of  Trcbisoud's  baule
VOL.  ÎV.  i^  e


326

so  hot  play,  tliiit  no  more  ground  was  lost
than  had  been  at  the  second  charge.  But
on  the  left  hand  of  this  squadron  was  the
brunt  of  the  battle,  whore  Framustante  and
Dramuziando  were  íighting  on  foot;  and
Dramuziando  having  broken  his  sword  grap-
pled vith  his  enemy  :  upon  this  each  suc-
coured their  own  party  ;  above  an  hundred
knierhis  on  both  sides  alighted,  for  Framu-
stante was  greatly  esteeined  b}'  Albayzar,
and  Dramuziando  well  beloved  by  all,  and
he  would  have  been  a  great  loss.  Primaleon
perceiving  this,  called  to  Palmerin  and  said,
Now  is  the  time  when  your  prowess  must  re-
medy this  great  urgency  i  iet  us  go  succour
Dramuziando, for  with  a  soyjy  heart  should  I
return  into  the  city  without  him.  Certes,
Sir,  replied  Palmerin,  the  want  of  his  person
would  besuch,  that  did  we  lose  hiniy  1  should
regard  all  other  good  hope  as  lost.  With
that  forcing  their  wa}-^  together  througli  the
press,  in  spite  of  all  resistance,  they  made
way  up  to  Dramuziando,  where  they  found
on  foot,  the  knight  of  the  Savage  Man,  Flo-
rendos,  Platir,  Polinardo,  Pompides,  Da-
liarte,  M  avortes,  Frisol,  Blandidon,  Belcar,


S^7

and  his  sons,  with  more  than  twenty  knights,
come  in  the  hke  manner  to  his  help;  and  on
the  other  side  the  soldan  of  Persia,  who
-signalized  himself  in  all  danger,  and  the
king  of  Trebisond,  and  above  a  hundred
knights  of  great  valour,  they  being  all  on
foot.

Primaleon,  though  he  was  now  of  an  age
that  needed  repose,  had  a  heart  in  him  which
could  not  endure  to  be  away  from  his  friends
when  they  were  in  danger.  When  he  saw  his
friends  without  their  horses  he  alighted  like-
Avise,  and  so  did  Palmerin,  who  alway  iic-
companied  him,  as  being  his  lady's  father.
This  threw  all  the  army  into  contusion  ;  lor
when  the  other  Christian  knights  heard  that
Primaleon  fought  on  foot,  they  thougiit  it
not  seemly  to  continue  on  horseback.  The
same  was  done  on  the  other  side,  beca.ise
the  soldan  of  Persia  had  alighted  to  succour
Framustante.  Truly,  the  feats  and  chivalry
which  were  then  displayed  might  well  put  in
forgetfulncss  all  actions  of  past  times,  how
worthy  soever  of  fame  and  eternal  remem-
brance. Dramui:ianrJo  and  Tramustante  still
<^  F  '2


328

closing  together,  laid  upon  each  other
with  the  pummels  of  their  swords,  but  they
were  so  sore  travailed,  as  their  strokes  could
but  little  hurt  them.  ])ramuziando  seemed
to  have  the  belter  wind  of"  the  two,  for  in
this  virtue  of  being  unlatiguable  he  was  held
to  be  gifted  above  all  others.  Primaleon  and
the  king  of  Trcbisond  buckled  together,  but
such  was  the  press  that  crowded  upon  them
that  they  were  forced  asunder.  The  like
happened  to  Palmerin  of  England  and  the
soldan  of  Persia.  The  knight  of  the  Savage
Man  slew  two  doughty  knights,  who  were
striking  at  Drauuiziando  and  Flor^ndos
behind.  The  others  were  not  bO  idle  but
that  they  began  to  win  ground  upon  their
enemies  ;  and  among  them  the  good  old
]M avortes  the  Grand  Khan,  had  thrust  for-
ward so  far  into  the  thick  of  the  Turks,  doing
wonders,  that  he  was  surrounded  by  them,
^nd  none  of  his  friends  could  help  him,  and
at  length,  heing  covered  with  wounds,  and
fightin;z  to  the  last  like  a  right  good  knight,
he  fell  dead.

He  of  the  Savage,  who  was  the  first  that  cut


329

his  way  to  him,  not  being  able  to  bear  a
sight  of  such  great  sorrow,  began  to  work
new  wonders.  \\  hen  the  news  of  the  death
of  the  Grand  Khan*  was  known,  there  was
not  a  person  who  was  not  marvellously  sor-
rowful, for  he  was  a  rare  prince  and  excel-
lent captain,  and  moreover  of  such  conver-
sation as  might  well  be  the  occasion  of  great
pain  to  those  who  had  lost  him.  But  as  the
one  ill  whom  this  grief  made  the  mi)àt  im-
pression was    Diidem   his  son,  he  with  ex-


*  Tliis  Gran  Can  is  so  interesting  a  personage  in  the  his»    tVco,-^
tory  of  r'rimaleon,  or  rather  ot  Don  Duardos,  that  it  the
reader  were  versed  in  that  true  history,

He  could  not  chuse  but  shed  a  tear
A  tear  lor  good  Mayortcs.
"  And  now  I  dare  say  th^t  Mayortes  there  thou  liest  that
were  never  matched  of  none  earthly  dogs  might  ;  and  thou
wert  the  curtiest  dog  that  ever  bare  collar;  and  thou  wert
the  truest  dog  to  thy  master  that  ever  followed  horse  ;  and
thou   wert  the  tiucst  lover  of  a  sinful  dog  that   ever  loved
man  ;  and  thou  wert  the  kindest  dog  that  ever  siruck  stroke
w  th  fore-paw  ;  and  thou  wert    the  goodliesi  fjerson  of  a
dog  that  ever  came  among  company  of  knights  ;  and  thou
wert  the  meekest  dog  and  the  gentlest  that  ever  catc  i  ,  hall
among  ladies  j  and  thou  wert  tlic  sternest  dog  V)  thy  raoria
foe,  that  ever  took  Lien  by  the  thioat  I"
'2  Í  J


330

treme  anguish  of  mind  cast  himself  amongst
his  enemies,  and  within  a  while  he  behaved
himself  so  well,  slaying  and  smiting  away
without  thought  ot  death  or  iear  of  ii,  so
as  the  Turks  knew  to  their  cost  his  extreme
grief  for  the  death  of  his  father  :  till  at  length,
worn  out  either  with  toil,  or  anguish,  to  see
his  father  covered  with  blood  and  wounds,
he  fell  beside  him,  and  gave  up  the  ghost
also.  Great  grief  and  exceeding  and  of  long
endurance  was  this  to  Don  Duardos.

And  because  he  judged,  that  fighting  thus
on  foot  would  be  the  cause  of  many  disasters,
he  commanded  all  the  battles  to  charge,
whereby  he  succoured  his  people,  in  such
sort  as  all  his  friends  were  mounted  on
horseback  again,  and  Dramuziando  and
Framustante  were  separated  asunder,  which
Albayzar  also  had  ordered.  This  was  not
done  before  the  king  of  Trebisond  was  slain,
by  the  hand  of  Palmerin.  Dramuziando  and
Framustante  were  in  such  condition  that  they
did  not  return  to  the  fight,  but  were  borne
away,  the  one  to  the  Turks'  tents  and  the
other  to  the  city,  to  be  tendered  with  present


331

regard,  according  as  their  dangerous  estates
required.  The  general  charge  being  thus
made,  divers  ihat  had  ciuered  with  ttie  first
battle,  retired  to  take  breathing  :  but  Pri-
maleon,  Pahnerin,  nor  any  ot  that  cast,  were
of  them  :  for  il  secnied  as  if  ihey  were  not
born  to  feel  weariness.

The  frusehing  of  arms  and  the  splintering  of
shields  and  tiie  breaking  of  lances  sounded
so  iar  and  with  scch  a  din,  that  it  seemed  as
if  the  wliolc  human  i.ice  we;e  being  there
and  then  destroyed;  the  yeiis  of  the  barba-
rians pierced  the  skies,  and  the  groans  of  the
Avounded  and  the  dying  soundeil  so  dolefully
in  the  ears  of  their  friends,  that  none  could
hear  thcui  without  being  moved  to  coin-
passion  and  tears.

The  empress  and  all  her  household  seeing
this  great  battle,  and  so  great  cruelty,  and  re-
membering what  was  adventured  in  it,  shut
themselves  up  in  her  apartment,  where  they
lamented  in  sue  h  grievous  manner,  as  if  they
had  seen  the  enemy  entered  into  the  city.
This  cry  spread  through  the  whole  city,  and


352

many  matrons  and  dames  of  great  rank,  tear-
ing llicir  hair  and  tlieir  faces,  went  crying
aloud  through  the  streets,  till  they  came  to
the  palace,  where  in  short  time  a  great  com-
pany of  them  were  assembled  together,  as  if
they  thought  their  true  help  and  saicty  lay  in
the  aged  emperor.

King  Tarnaes  would  have  denied  them  en-
trance into  the  palace,  but  it  was  more  than
he  could  well  do  :  for  hardly  can  the  com-
mon people  be  restrained,  especially  when
a  general  fear  of  their  lives  is  threatened
before  their  eyes.

The  emperor  himself,  whose  debility  in  years
deprived  him  of  his  wonted  good  judgment,
could  not  bear  up  against  this,  according  to
his  custom,  but  resisted  these  terrors  with
a  womanly  spirit,  rather  than  the  invincible
mind  he  had  alway  borne  heretofore.  Tar-
giana,  Armenia,  and  all  the  ladies  of  the
Turks'  camp,  heard  the  uproar  of  the  battle
with  the  same  dismay.

All  order  was  now  at  an  end;  and  they  who


vveie  to  guard  the  several  princes  were  so
lorcccl  jipart  by  tlie  press  of  Hglit,  that  each
could  think  only  ol:"  guarding  himself.  Don
Diiarnos,  being  fresh,  and  desiring  to  wit-
ness his  noble  valour  in  the  field,  dismounted
three  knio-hts  one  after  another  with  one
lance:  arierward  drawing  his  sword,  he
charged  the  enemies  on  all  sides  about  hini
so  valiantly,  as  they  were  glad  to  avoid  and
give  him  placo.  And  Albayzar  likewise,
seeking  to  hemour  himself  this  day  with  the
rcnow  n  of  tlu;  field,  came  upon  the  Chris-
tians with  incredible  prowess  :  none  among
all  the  host  of  the  Turks  was  more  eyed,  for
the  great  feats  which  he  atchieved.  Were  all
the  great  feats  to  be  related  which  every
knight  performed  that  day,  it  would  be  to
begin  a  relation  which  would  be  endless;  the
battle  endured  a  long  time  bloody  and  cruel,
but  so  equal  that  a  man  could  not  judge
which  side  hatl  the  most  advaniage.

But  as  the  force  of  the  enemies'  numbers
began  now  to  b;;  lelt,  and  seven  giants  came
in  frr-li  among  them,  the  Christians  were
enforced    to   retire.      Tlie  giant   Ahuouiol,


S34

\vho  had  all  this  while  kept  company  with
king  Jlecindos  his  lord,  seeing  that  one  of
the  giants,  called  Dramoran,  was  coining
against  him  with  a  mace  charged  with  many
spikes,  the  throng  making  way  as  he  came,
stept  forward  before  the  king.  Recindos
willing  to  requite  his  loyalty  with  the  like
aid,  as  he  had  ever  been  wont  to  do,  seeing
another  giant  coming  in  aid  of  Dramoran,
his  heart  never  being  used  to  refuse  an}-  dan-
ger, he  advanced  and  met  him  in  hiscourage.
Recindos  was  now  an  old  man,  weary,  and
out  of  the  custom  of  such  dangers,  and  suc-
cour failing  him,  the  blows  ofTrafamor,  as
this  giant  was  called,  came  on  liim  with  such
force,  that  the  edge  of  his  sword  piercing
through  to  his  very  entrails,  he  fell  at  his
feet,  thus  giving  that  end  to  his  life  which
he  had  alway  desired  for  it.  At  this  point
of  time  the  great  Palmerin  of  England
came  up,  weary  and  worn  with  what  he  had
done  that  day,  and  covered  with  blood,  his
own  as  well  as  his  enemies.'  ;  he  seeing  the
great  disaster  which  had  befallen,  attacked
Trafamor.  Some  time  they  fought,  none
coming  near  to   separate  them,  till  in  fine


335

Tiafanior  paid  for  the  death  of  Recindos^
and  Palinerin  was  left  in  such  state  that
he  was  forced  to  leave  the  hattle  ;  and  by  the
cominandment  of  Prinialeon,  he  was  carried
into  the  city,  where  he  lainted  while  his
wounds  were  drest,  by  reason  he  had  lost
such  abundance  of  liis  blood.

Almourol  and  Dramoran  were  sundered.  The
death  of  Recindos  king  of  Spain  was  pre-
sently blazed  through  the  army  ;  which  was
such  heavy  news  to  Arnedos  king  of  France,
his  cousin,  and  singular  good  friend,  that
making  no  account  of  his  life,  as  one  who
did  not  desire  to  livejonger,  he  threw  himself
amongst  the  thickest  of  his  enemies,  where
seeking  to  revenge  the  death  of  the  king  of
Spain,  he  fell  covered  with  wounds,  and  by
him  Onistalcio,  son  to  king  Recindos,  who
in  great  agony  of  mind  followed  Arnedos,
to  revenge  his  father's  death  and  seek  his
own.

The  exceeding  great  sorrow  which  Prinialeon,
Don  Duardos,  and  the  other  princes  resented
at  these  deaths,  so  overpowered  their  hearts.


336

ihac  they  inn  amongst  the  thickest  of  theu-
encmicá,  and  kiid  on  load  like  desperate  men,
ijor  could  thing  wjiicli  they  did  now  yield
them  any  contentment  :  tiie  knight  of  the
Savage  Man,  on  whose  shicdd  no  manner  of
device  could  be  discerned,  it  was  so  hacked
and  bj'oken  in  pieces,  came  unto  the  giant
Dramoran,  who  already  bore  good  marks
from  Almourol's  hands,  and  handled  him  in
such  knightly  order,  that  he  satisfied  his
wrath  upon  him,  and  slew  him  ;  but  he  him-
self was  not  so  little  punished  as  to  be  able
to  do  more  that  day,

Belcar  and  king  Polendos,  who  were  not  they
that  had  done  least  in  this  battle,  having  ad-
vanced farther  than  help  could  follow  them,
were  surrounded  by  more  than  a  hundred  of
the  king  of  Etoli-i's  knights,  and  were  in  the
end,  having  made  valiant  slaughter  among
them,  enforced  to  pay  the  sharp  tribute
which  death  demandeth  of  nature.  Such
grief  did  the  bruit  of  these  deaths  carry  with
it,  that  all  now  fought  like  men  who  cared
not  for  their  own  lives.  At  this  time  prince
Beroldo    of  Spain  returning  to   the   l)atLle.


537

iicaid  thatRecindos  his  father,and  Onistaldo
his  brother,  were  slain  ;  at  this  heavy  grief,
being  bereft  of  his  judgment,  like  a  brute
creature  without  discourse  of  reason,  he
rushed  among  the  thickest  of  the  enemy,
working  wonders  among  them,  and  aiming
to  reach  the  place  where  his  father  lay,  and
there  die  beside  him  and  his  brother,  that
he  might  not  endure  this  insupportable  sor-
row.

rioraman  followed  close  after  him,  butcher-
iig  the  Turks  on  every  side;  and  as  Beroltlu
was  dearly  loved  by  many,  many  laboured  to
be  with  him  in  that  danger,  and  they  follow-
ed him  with  such  good  will,  that  it  seemed  now
as  if  all  the  labour  of  the  day  had  no  whit
abated  of  their  strength.  Among  tliem  all
he  that  made  the  greatest  display  of  prowess
was  Florendos,  who  had  now  neither  armour
nor  shield,  the  strokes  of  the  enemy  having
demolished  all,  and  he  had  many  wounds  ;
but  the  sorrow  which  lie  resented  for  tbese
deaths  suffered  him  not  to  feel  other  pain.
Certes,  this  battle  may  be  rojiutcd  for  the
most  cruel  and   perilous,  and   this  day  the

VOL.    IV.  2    G


338

most  dolorous,  that  ever  nature  appointed  ;
for  besides  so  many  deaths  of  famous  prin  ce
and  renowned  knights,  another  sorrowful
and  unwonted  speciaele  arose;  for  there  you
might  have  seen  Don  Ilosuel  and  Behsarte
break  through  the  press  of  ilieir  enemies,
without  either  fear  or  regard  of  their  own
hves,  calling  out  for  their  noble  father  prince
Belcar  ;  and  Francian  on  the  other  side  lor
his  father,  king  Poleiidos.  Every  one  tlieu,
they  being  such  personages  and  so  near  allied
to  the  emperor,  folio vved  after  them,  to  see
to  their  succour.

Beroldo  at  length  came  to  the  place  where
his  father  lay  slain  ;  there  he  found  Almourol  :
that  true  and  loyal  giant  had  lost  his  helmet,
his  hair  was  hanging  loose  about  his  bloody
face,  his  eyes  were  full  of  tears,  and  tears  and
blood  were  streaming  down  his  cheeks  loge-»
thcr,  and  the  whole  countenance  of  the  man
\vas  so  terrible,  that  it  struck  fear  into  any
one.  He  had  taken  his  sword  in  both
hands,  and  was  fighting  right  valiantly,  and
crying  aloud  for  sorrow  the  while;  seven  or
eight  knights  had  lie  laid  dead  at  his  feet.


339

and  there  in  that  place  was  he  resolved  tiiat
liis  own  body  should  be  laid  lifeless  also,  in
token  of  the  great  faith  and  love  and  loyalty
whieh  he  had  ever  borne  to  his  master  king
Recindos.  And  though  he  \\as  now  at  the
last  extrcmity,  for  he  had  many  deadly
wounds,  yet  his  strong  anger  u[)held  him.
Pjince  Bcroldo  still  forcing  on  upon  the
enemy,  did  not  meet  witli  such  slender  re-
sistance that  he  could  have  made  way  fur-
ther ;  and  ii'at  that  time  the  emperor  \  crnao,
Priii.alcon,  Florendos,  and  Blandidon,  had
not  come  to  his  succour,  his  heart  would
then  have  found  its  desire,  whicli  was  to  die
beside  his  father.  Primaleon  laboured  all
he  could  to  get  the  giaiit  Ahnourol  forth  of
the  battle,  because  he  was  without  a  helmet,
his  armour  bioken  very  much,  and  his  body
uoundcd  in  many  places;  but  his  faithful
brutishness  was  accompanied  witli  such  con-
stancy, that  he  was  not  to  be  persuaded.
The  enemies  now  began  to  bear  hither-
v\aros,  for  the  soldan  of  Persia,  who  some
time  since  had  kit  th>  battle,  having  now
recovered  strength,  entered  the  Held  anew
2  G  2


340

wiíli  rclVcshccl  troo|)s,iiiul  hearing  of  ihcfeals
of  Almoiirol,  betook  himsell"  there.  Who-
so had  then  seen  the  gallant  behaviour  of
Priiiialcon  and  Tiorendos  his  s-on,  in  delcnd-
ing  Ahuourol  IVoni  ihc  enemies'  fury,  he
having  his  head  unarmed,  would  have  ima-
gined the  very  ty[)e  of  knightly  valour  to
consist  in  these  two.  A  sorrowful  thing  it
was  to  see  Almourol  determined  to  seek  liis
own  death,  and  not  be  able  to  persuade  him
from  that  mind.

A\'ith  these  fresh  troops  came  the  giant
Gromato,  a  giant  of  surpassing  force,  who
brcakii.g  througli  the  enemy  came  up  to
Almourol,  whom  all  the  rest  feared;  but  the
brave  Florendos  stept  forward  to  protect  his
old  friend  ;  and  certes,  there  Florendos  had
come  to  his  cud,  sorely  handled  as  he  was,
and  all  his  armour  having  been  demolished,  if
Almourol  had  not  sprung  on  and  grappled
witti  Gromato,  before  he  could  deliver  one
blow.  Then  the  press  thickened  on  both
sides,  each  party  striving  to  succour  their
champion.  In  fine,  Almourol  died  in  Gro-
mato's   hands,   upon    whom    Beroldo    laid


341

such  load  of  blows^  that  he  also  died  at  the
same  time.

Now  betran  the  coura!i;e  of  the  Christians  to
cncrease  worthily,  in  that  they  were  stronger
in  that  place  than  the  Turks  ;  for  the  soklan
of  Persia  was  conveyed  forth  of  the  battle,
by  reason  of  a  \YOund  that  he  had  received
in  the  throat:  so  that  the  soldan  Belagriz
found  good  opportunity  to  carry  the  bodies
of  king  Recindos  and  Onistaldo  his  son
forth  oi  the  field  :  Beroldo  followed,  because
himself  had  lost  so  much  blood,  as  he  could
scantly  hold  out  any  longer.

Primaleon  neglected  nothing  :  with  his
strength  he  fonghi,  and  with  his  eyes  he
watched  ;  and  now  hr  saw,  on  the  other  part
of  the  field  where  Don  Duardos  was  fighting,
that  the  Ciuistians  were  driven  to  the  retire,
for  ihat  Albayzar,  accompanied  with  three
giants  and  a  number  of  knights,  seeing  them
sore  travailed,  came  upon  them  with  a  fresh
charge  :  Don  Duardus  met  his  proud  enemy
with  such  puissance,  as  for  awhile  to  main-
tain lh€  field,  his  sons  Pompides  and  Dali-
2  G  3


342

arte  aiditig  him,  and  Platir,  who  with  his
armour  all  hewn  in  pieces,  still  presented
himself  to  the  cliietest  danger,  and  Vasili-
ardo,  Frisol,  Giermam  of  Orleans,  Luymanes
of  Burgundy,  Roramonte,  Albanis  of  Frisa,
Dragonalte,  Don  llosiram  de  la  Brunda,
Tremoran,  Tenebror,  Don  Ilosuel,  Belisarte,
and  divers  other  knights  ;  but  they  were  all
now  so  foredone  with  weariness  and  many
wounds,  that  maugre  all  their  endeavour,
Albayzar  began  greatly  to  gain  ground.

Primaleon  then  left  the  soldan  Belagriz  and
Blandidon  to  take  charge  of  the  field  in  his
own  part,  and  went  with  Florendos  and  Flo-
raman  to  the  aid  of  Don  Duardos  :  but  on
the  way  he  found  his  brother-in-law  the  em-
peror Vernao,  with  Polinardo  his  brother,  sur-
rounded by  the  Turks,  and  in  sore  peril  :  for
the  king  of  Bythinia  had  slain  the  emperor's
horse,  which  falling  to  the  ground,  brake
one  of  his  master's  legs  in  tbe  fall  ;  and  he
kneeling  upon  the  other  knee,  was  still  fight-
ing valiantly,  and  Polinardo  wKo  was  on
foot  defended  him  so  bravely,  that  his  cou-
rage was  new   the  life   of  his^  brother.     A


343

sorrowful  sight  it  nas  to  behold  the  emperor
in  this  sad  condition,  who  was  so  rare  a  prince
and  such  a  worthy  knight.  Primaleon,  struck
to  the  soul  with  griet",  began  to  feel  that
Constantinople's  liour  of  ill  fortune  was  ar-
rived, and  in  spite  of  his  great  courage  and
strong  heart,  he  could  not  chuse  but  weep
aloud  ;  and  as  one  who  would  far  rather
have  died  himself  than  beliekl  such  deaths^
he  made  at  the  enemies,  and  laid  upon
them  such  mighty  blows,  that  none  dared
stand  before  him.  Florendos  and  Floraman
followed  him,  but  not  with  equal  force,  for
Florendos,  as  ye  have  heard,  had  neither
shield  nor  armour,  and  could  scarcely  sup-
port himself,  so  greatly  was  he  overlaboured.

Floraman  settled  himself  against  the  king  of
Bythinia,  and  held  a  terrible  combat  with
him  ;  in  fine,  the  king  of  Bythinia  lost  his
life,  and  Primaleon  seeing  Floraman  to  be
sore  hurt,  desired  him  to  withdraw  himself
out  of  the  battle.

V
When  the  Turks  that  were  conducted  by  the


344

king  of  Bythinia,  saw    their  captaia  slain,
they  began  to  retire,  by  which  means  Pri-
inaleon  recovered  and  mounted  Polinardo
ou  horseback  again  :  but  the  emperor  Ver-
nao  was  in  such  state  that  it  was  not  possible
to  cany  liim  out  of  the  field  ;  und  this  gave
occasion  to  risk  the  total  de,struction  of  all.
For  the  king  of  Armenia  came  upon  them
with  four  thousand  men,  and  this  great  sup-
ply  speedily   recovering  the  ground  which
the  Turks    had  lo.-t,  Primaleon  was  fain  to
alight  from  his  horse,  for  the  defence  of  his
brother-in  law,  and  in  like  manner  did  more
than  two  hundred    knights,  many  of  whom
there  ended  their  lives  like  good  and   true
friends,  among  which  were  Ascarol,  Lisbanel,
Brandamor,  Radiarte,  Bramarim,  Argonalte,
Rujeraldo,   Almadar,  and  Altaris,    most  ó^
them  being  Spaniards,  whom  the  loss  of  their
king  made  careless  of  life.     They  did  not
however  sell  their  lives  «o  cheaply  but  that
the  king  of  Armenia,  with  more  than  five
hundred  of  his  people,  perished  also.    How-
beit  all  the  .'•esistance  which  was  made  for
the  emperor   Vernao  could  not  avail,  and


345

there  he  also  took  liis  death.  Then  was  lie
taken  from  the  field  and  carried  into  the  city,
where  all  was  misery  and  lamentations.

Don  Duardos  now  engaging  Albayzav,  dealt
with  him  so  manfully,  that  Pompides,  Platir,
and  the  others,  had  time  to  breathe,  and  then
they  beat  back  the  enemy.  Albayzar  had
been  lost,  if  the  giants  who  always  accom-
panied him  had  not  saved  him.  At  this  time,
for  it  was  now  late,  the  trumpets  on  both
sides  sounded  a  retreat,  and  the  armies  sepa-
rated. Whoso  had  then  seen  Don  Duardos,
would  have  thouc^ht  him  well  deservins;  of
the  great  command  he  held  ,  for  he  withdrew
his  army  with  as  much  coolness,  and  provid-
ed for  every  thing  with  thesanie  thought  and
carefulnes,>i,  as  if  he  had  not  been  labouiing
all  that  day,  his  armour  the  while  being  all
in  pieces  and  covered  with  olood,  and  he
himself  having  many  wounds.  Belagriz  and
Piiiualeon  assisted  him  in  ordering  the  re-
treat, and  after  they  weieall  placed  in  array
the  Christians  betook  themselves  to  the  city,
and  the  lurks  leturned  to  their  camp.


346


CHAPTER  167.


«uluheu- forces  on  either  side  separated,  by

theco„se„totAlbay.„randPrima|eo„,the
pnnces  and  l<„ights  that  were  slain  in  the

battle  were  earned  thenee  to   be  interred.
B^onaltektng  of  «„,„,,_  ,,„j,^,

..d  ..,,.  charge  to  remove  the  dead  on  thei,'
Mde    winch  was  tlone  before  the  troop,  re-

ea  ed,  an    then  u„der  .hetr  own  ban„ers,
^n,etreated,„  order  to  the  city,     far  more

tl     ieTf      ;r'"'"■'"''''^^^"'-"-'«"-
them  thedead  bodtes  of  ting  An.cios  of

had  already  been  borne  in,)  king  Polcndos
Belcar,  Mayortes  the  Grand  Khan,  Bndem


347

his  son^  and  tlie  giant  Ahnoiirol  :  and  as
these  were  such  great  and  excellent  persons,
and  their  sons  and  kinsmen  were  there  pre-
sent, and  had  none  now  before  them  on
whom  to  give  vent  to  their  sorrowful  rage
and  execute  vengeance,  it  all  discharged  it-
self in  tears,  they  seeing  their  dead  friends,
whose  friend>hip  and  conversation  they  had
now  for  ever  lost.  The  body  of  each  prince
was  surrounded  by  his  children  and  friends
and  vassals,  who  went  weeping  aloud,  and
telling  of  the  great  feats  which  tlicy  had  in
their  lives  atchieved  ;  and  then  those  recol-
lections brought  afresh  to  mind  their  own
great  loss,  in  that  such  ei:cellent  knights  were
taken  from  them  ;  and  they  called  upon  them
by  their  names,  as  if  they  could  have  an-
swered, and  perceiving  how  impossible  a
thing  that  was,  brake  out  into  louder  cries
and  more  dolorous  lamentations,  calling  upon
the  whole  world  to  Join  them  in  their  sorrow.
In  this  manner,  when  night  had  closed,  they
reached  the  city,  where  they  found  the  em-
press, accompanied  with  the  queens  of  France
and  Spain,  Gridonia  her  daughter-in-law,
Basilia,  empress  of  Allemaign,  her  daughter.


348

queen  Flciida,  ]Miraguarda,  Polinarda,  Li-
onarda  of  Thrace,  Fiancelina,  Cardi-a  the
viic  of  Ahnomol,  Arlanza  the  wife  ofDramu-
ziando,  with  all  the  other  princesses  and  ladies
^vhose  dearest  friends  were  in  the  field,  bewail-
ing over  the  bodies  of  the  emperor   Vernao
kwg  Recindos  of  Spain,  and  Onistaldo  his
son.    Most  of  these  came  out  to  meet  them
^vlth  then-  hair  dishevelJcd,  for  thev  knew
their  unhappiness,  and  each  enquired  for  that
which  most  grieved  her.     AVhen  the  queen
of  France  and  Francelina  saw  their  husbands
dead  and  mangled,  and  others  their  brothers
and   their    sons  covered    with    wounds  and
blood,  it  may  well  be  beheved  that  this  was
one  of  the  most  miserable    things   in   the
world  :   and   as   women   in    sudden  passions
have    Jess     endurance,     and     think      every
thuig  ,s  to  be  expressed  by  tears  and  cries,
they   made  their  lamentation  in  such  sort
that  none  could  hear  them  without   being
moved  to  great  compassion  and  joining  in
then-  cry.     Some  tore  their  hair,  others  their
faces,    not   worthy  vi'    sue  h    handling.     In
others  the  force  of  grief  uassuch,  that  fall-
ing down  senseless,  they  were  carried  to  their


349

chambers.  Many  dames  and  ladies  broke
througli  the  ranks,  enquiring  with  pitiful
cries  for  their  husbands,  sons,  and  brothers,
and  they  who  found  them,  found  them  in
such  pUght  that  they  received  them  with
new  pain  and  with  poor  hope  of  their  re-
covery. They  who  could  learn  no  tidings
would  have  gone  wildly  into  the  iields  where
they  had  died,  and  have  died  there  also.  Don
Duardos  with  great  difficulty  prevented  this.
The  empress  of  Allemaign  and  the  queen  of
Spain  embraceil  the  bloody  bodies  of  their
Imsbands  and  bathed  them  with  tears,  and
with  the  sleeves  of  their  garments  wiped  their
wounds,  kissing  them  many  times  ;  long  time
did  they  thus  employ  themselves,  and  hardly
could  Primaleon  and  Don  Duardos  make
them  at  last  withdraw.

This  evil  occasioned  worse  ;  for  most  of  the
princes  and  knights  weregrievoti!>ly  wounded,
and  had  lost  much  blood,  and  not  being
looked  to  in  time,  this  delay  was  of  great
hurt  to  them,  and  some  died  in  consequence,
by  reason  that  their  wounds  lilled  with  wind,
and  their  weakness  waxing  more,  gave  oc-

>OL.  IV.  2  H


350

casion  to  many  deaths.  But  when  they  were
beginning  to  retire^  no  one  could  prevail  on
Cardiga,  tlie  wife  of  Almourol^  to  move  ;  she
held  her  husband  in  her  arms,  and  with  ter-
rible bowlings,  and  words  full  of  grief,  be-  i
wailed  herself  forlorn  and  wretched.  There
was  not  one  of  so  hard  heart,  seeing  her  great
misery,  and  remembering  the  manner  of  Al-
mouiol's  death,  who  could  tear  her  from  the
body;  and  at  the  request  of  Don  Duardos,
queen  Flerida,  though  well  nigh  beside  her-
self at  the  wounds  of  her  husband  and  her
sons,  came  to  her  and  consoled  her,  and  ac-
companied her  till  the  first  violence  of  her
sorrow  had  had  its  course.

That  same  hour  kino;  Tarnacs  saw  to  the
interment  of  the  dead,  for  to  have  delayed
it  would  have  been  hurtful  to  the  living,  not
allowing  them  to  provide  for  what  was  most
needful  :  the  ceremonies  of  their  obsequies
wei"e  left  for  a  more  convenient  season,  when
tkey  aiiight  be  such  as  beseemed  the  great-
ness (of  their  persons.  He  gave  order  also
for  the  cure  of  the  wounded,  and  for  keep-
ing the  city,  which  all  that  night  was  watch-


351

ed  with  great  cries  and  lamentations.  The
mighty  emperor  Pahiierin,  in  whose  ears  all
this  misery  sounded,  was  not  now  ahie  to
endure  such  sorrow,  and  nature  so  deserted
him,  that  he  lost  all  his  bodily  strength,  his
limbs  utterly  failing  him,  and  losing  all  feel-
ing. His  senses  also  clean  forsook  him  now,
and  as  his  hour  was  come,  these  being  the
first  tokens  thereof,  his  liird  (of  whom  men-
tion is  made  in  the  chronicle  of  his  feats*)
died  that  night,  uttering  before  its  death  the
three  dolorous  and  fearful  cries,  according
as  it  had  been  foretold.  And  as  ail  this  hap-
pened during  the  night,  and  the  night  itself
wa»  dark  and  2;loomv,  it  made  it  the  more
fearful.  AVhen  the  morning  came  it  brought
no  joy  with  it,  for  they  who  had  their  hus-
bands and  children  in  the  city  found  them
some  dead,  others  near  to  it.  They  w  hose
dear  ones  had  not  returned,  went  upon  the


•  Palmerin  de  Oliva,  C.  13 1.  This  bird,  which  he  had  won
in  a:i  enchanted  garden,  was  to  die  the  same  day  as  him-
self, and  announce  it  by  giving  three  such  cries  as  it  bud
done  when  it  was  caught.

'2  H  2


35  Í2

walls  and  towers,  looking  over  ilic  field,
which  was  covered  with  arms  and  dead
bodies  ;  and  knowing  that  they  whom  they
loved  were  among  them,  attempted  to  throw
themselves  oil  and  accompany  them.

Neither  did  the  enemies  pass  happier  time,
for  they  had  suffered  like  losses  ;  many  of
their  princes  being  slain,  and  three  giants,
in  whom  they  had  placed  great  confidence.
The  soldaii  of  Persia  was  in  the  utmost  dan-
ger, and  the  physicians  with  little  hope  of
his  life  ;  Albayzar  and  many  knights  wound-
ed, aijd  more  than  fifteen  thousand  of  their
people  dead  in  the  field  ;  ot"  the  Chiistians
there  were  fewer  slain,  less  than  three  thou-
sand. Ihcre  was  no  joyful  thing  in  the
whole  Turkish  camp.  Targana,  flesirous  of
the  life  of  her  husband  raaier  than  of  vic-
tory, entreated  him  to  return  and  abandon
his  enterprize,  seeing  how  doubtful  it  was,
and  be  contented  with  the  death  of  so  many
and  such  great  Christian  princes.  Armenia
wept  for  her  brother's  iife  ;  ail  was  fear  and
despeiation.  But  as  this  thing  was  to  go
on  to  the  end,  Albayzar,  after  looking  to  the


353

care  of  the  wounded  and  burying  the  dead,
by  advice  of  the  chiefs  of  his  arujy,  sent
back  Targiana  and  Armenia  into  their  own
countries,  because  that  by  their  prcience  and
womanish  tears  they  weakened  the  hearts  of
those  who  saw  them,  and  moreover  were  a
hurt  to  the  army,  inasmuch  as  the  part  which
needs  remained  for  tlieir  protection,  was
thereby  kept  tVom  the  battle.  This  parting
Targiana  thought  would  be  for  ever,  f<.)r  so
her  iicart  foreboded.  The  princess  Armenia
had  the  same  feeling,  so  that  this  was  a  new
wretchedness,  equal  to  any  of  the  -  past.
When  they  were  out  of  tbe  camp  they  turned
their  eyes  to  heboid  it  once  more^  remem-
bering how  much  they  had  left  therein  :  then
lilting  them  up  towards  Constantinople,  an
ill  and  glooujy  aspect  did  they  think  that
city  presented,  as  if  their  destroyers  were
within  its  walls.  These  imaginations  ac-
companied them  till  they  loat  sight  of  it,  and
then  continued  not  long;  for  in  women  no
sorrowful  thought  is  of  long  continuance;  no
grief  lasts  so  long,  but  that  when  the  first
force  is  spent,  it  is  forthwith  forgotten.
2  H  3


354

So  much  was  there  to  do  with  the  wounded,
both  in  the  city  and  in  the  enemies'  camp,
that  for  twenty  days  there  was  no  renewal
of  battle,  during  whicli  time  the  emperor
Palmerin  departed,  being  full  of  days,  in  the
presence  of  the  empress  Polinarda,  his  wife
and  singular  dear  friend,  with  his  daughters,
his  son,  son-in-law,  and  grandchildren  round
about  him,  and  many  other  princes,  by  whom
he  had  hcen  served  and  reverenced  during
his  life,  as  if  he  had  been  their  liege  lord  ;
thus  it  is  that  good  and  beneficent  princes
are  served  in  Ufe  and  rearretted  in  death.  Let
there  not  be  any  doubt  concerning  this,  be-
cause it  doth  not  conform  with  what  is  writ-
ten in  the  book*  of  the  chronicle  of  his
deeds,  for  the  most  ancient  and  authentic
writers  are  agreed  that  his  death  took  place
in  this  manner,  and  at  this  time.  The  loss
of  his  presence  caused  the  more  sorrow,  in-
asmuch as  it  befcl  at  such  a  season  ;  for
though  by  reason  of  his  age,  he  could  not


♦  More  accurately  with  the  book  of  Primakon,  where  his
death  is  differently  related.


355

wlih  his  strength  defend  the  people,  never-
theless it  seemed  as  if  they  were  suppor  cd
by  the  veneiablcnessof  his  royal  person  ;  and
in  troth,  till  the  last  he  had  been  honoured,
obeyed,  and  reverenced  as  if  he  had  been  in
full  vigour  of  mind  to  govern  and  command.
His  obsequies  were  performed  with  as  much
honour  as  if  time  and  fortune  had  allowed
leisure  to  prepare  them.  On  the  day  of  this
funeral  ceremony,  all  Constantinople  went
abroad  in  black  and  mourning  garments,
and  followed  him  to  the  place  of  burial  ;
and  all  the  banners  and  royal  ensigns,  and
other  rich  and  precious  marks  of  royalty
which  were  in  the  city,  were  carried  into  the
great  place  opposite  the  palace,  and  rent  in
pieces,  and  there  they  were  set  fire  to  and
consumed  to  ashes;  a  notable  thing  this,
alter  the  manner  of  the  old  princes  of  the
(îeii tiles.  Primaleon,  in  token  of  greater
grief,  ordered  all  the  battlements  of  the  city
walls  lo  be  levelled  even  with  the  wall,  and
covered  the  rest  with  black  cloth.  The  nn-
pri'ss,  against  the  will  of  many,  accompanied
iho  body  with  her  daughters  and  the  other
princesses,  and  all  the  dames  and  damsels


356

of  the  city  followed  them.  Any  one  may
judge  vsliat  a  lamentation  there  would  be.  I
shall  not  speak  of  it,  for  there  would  be  no
end  of  the  relation.  All  the  stately  edifices
in  the  city  were  pulled  down.  It  may  well
be  believed,  that  as  this  prince  was  for  virtue
and  prowess  the  most  excellent  of  all  in  his
times,  so  in  the  resentment  of  his  death
greater  excesses  were  shown  than  for  any
other.  He  was  bi.ricd  in  the  monastery  of
Saint  Clara,  which  he  had  built,  and  in  a
sepulchre  which  he  had  made  for  himself.
The  empress,  with  the  qneens  of  France  and
Spain,  and  the  wives  of  Polendos  and  Bel-
car,  and  the  empress  of  AUemaign,  being  all
widows,  remained  in  the  monastery,  and  as
they  who  had  determined  to  forsake  the
things  of  this  world,  devoted  themselves  to
those  of  God,


^57


CHAPTER  1G8.


The  emperor  Palmerin  being  dead,  and  his
obsequies  performed  with  imperial  solemnity,
and  those  of  the  emperor  of  Aliemaign  and
of  the  other  kings  as  well,  it  was  not  long
before  the  second  battle  was  fought.  For
so  soon  as  the  wounded  were  in  condition
for  new  dangers,  they  all  longed  lo  be  at  it,
and  they  determined  to  take  the  Held,  since
by  the  show  which  the  enemy  had  for  two  or
three  days  made,  it  seemed  they  were  de-
sirous of  battle,

Fir?t  of  all  they  provided  for  the  safeguard
of  the  city,  which  was  committed  to  the
charge  of  king  Tarnacs  of  Lacedemonia,
and  the  sage  Daliarte^with  five  hundred  horse-


35S

men,  and  four  thousand  foot-men  ;  the  rest
of  the  Christians  were  divided  into  six
several  bands,  as  they  iiad  been  in  the  first
battle.  The  first  was  conducted  by  Pri-"
maleon,  who  had  two  thousand  foot  and
five  hundred  liorse.  The  second,  being  of
the  same  number,  was  committed  to  king
Florainan  of  Sardinia.  The  third  to  king
Estrelante  of  Hungary,  being  of  the  same
number  also.  The  fourth,  of  two  thousand,
to  king  Albanis  of  Friia.  The  fifth,  to
Drapos  duke  of  Normandy,  being  alike  in
number.  The  sixth  was  under  the  charge  of
T)on  Duardos,  and  comprized  all  the  rest  of
the  army.  The  soldan  Belagriz  with  his
train,  had  the  charge  to  give  aid  where  he
saw  need  required.

A  notable  thing  it  was,  and  worthy  of  admi-
ration, to  behold  the  manner  in  which  these
knights  departed  from  the  city  towards  the
field.  They  were  all  in  black  armour,  in  token
of  the  grief  with  which  they  resented  the
death  of  the  emperor  and  of  the  other
princes,  and  their  shields  of  the  same  colour,
without  any  devices,  a  thing  which  not  only


359

ína(ie  a  show  of  sorrow,  tut  also  cjeated
sorrow  in  the  hearts  of  those  who  bare
sucli  mourning,  and  of  those  who  beheld  it.
And  that  there  might  be  nothing  among
them  but  what  should  bear  testimony  of
mourning,  their  horses  were  likewise  trap-
ped in  blade.  Certes,  sad  hope  was  to  be
drawn  from  a  display  so  sorrowful.  And  the
more  to  express  tlieir  inward  heaviness,  ihey
would  have  neither  drum  nor  trumpet  with
them,  nor  any  kind  of  instrument  used  iu
war,  to  stir  up  the  spirits  of  the  soldiers,  and
to  rejoice  them.  They  sought  that  day  for
every  thing  which  could  make  show  of  sad-
ness, and  rejected  all  cheerful  appearances^  as
things  unnecessary  and  out  of  season  for
their  resolve.  These  things  occasioned  sad-
ness among  themselves,  and  struck  also  a
dismay  into  the  enemy,  when  they  saw  the
whole  multitude  as  if  already  drest  for  the
grave,  with  a  sort  of  majestic  and  mortal
dignity,  all  covered  with  black,  a  colour
among  all  others  held  to  be  the  most  /dolo-
rous and  meet  for  mourning,  without  one
l)right  banner  or  gallant  device,  sutsh  as  are
wont  to  be  displayed  in  such  times,  and  on


360

such  occasions.  Their  beavers  w  ere  all  closed,
that  nothing  in  any  countenance  might  be
discerned  which  was  not  in  unison  with  their
attire  ;  and  this  made  the  spectacle  more
dolorous,  and  made  it  seem  rather  a  ghostly
than  a  human  sight.  They  marched  into
the  field  without  voice  or  sound,  silently,  so
that  the  very  silence  made  them  seem  not  to
be  earthly.  The  footmen  came  after,  attired
in  black  likewise,  and  in  like  manner  having
laid  aside  all  that  was  of  chearful  semblance.
The  hilts  of  their  weapons  were  coloured
black;  they  were  without  drums  and  fifes,
which  should  have  stirred  their  spirits,  and
modulated  their  steps;  but  bilenily  and  in
perfect  order  followed  their  leaders.  Well
might  it  be  understood,  what  unfeigned  love
and  affection  they  bare  to  the  emperor,  and
how  they  could  not  forget  what  gracious
and  friendly  entertainment  he  was  wont  to
make  to  his  very  enemies.  A  thing  which
all  princes  ought  to  have  in  regard,  and
in  remembering  the  great  virtue  of  this
famous  emperor,  to  govern  their  kingdoms
in  such  sort,  as  the  people  may  rather
know  what  a  grievous  loss  they  have  by  the


361

death  of  such  a  prince,  than  to  behave  them-
selves in  such  manner  as  their  suljects  shall
rejoice  to  be  rid  of  their  governor.  The
sight  of  their  enemies  in  this  array  ex-
cited great  admiration  in  the  Turks,  and
much  more  than  ever  did  they  stand  in  fear
of  them,  judgmg  that  they  who  came  out
to  battle,  so  unlike  living  men,  would  fight
like  men  that  did  not  desire  to  continue  such  ;
and  well  believing  that  they  who  displayed
so  great  resentment  of  the  loss  of  their
friends,  would  labour  till  death  to  take  ven-
geance and  to  accompany  them.  Albayzar,
in  whose  mind  such  thoughts  were  passing,
knew  the  danger  of  his  people,  and  the  dis-
may which  they  felt  ;  and  began  like  a  rare
and  courageous  commander  to  chear  and
hearten  them  with  chearful  words,  full  of  con-
fidence, telling  them  that  by  what  they  saw
of  their  enemies  their  hope  of  victory  ou^ht
to  be  certain  ;  Tor  like  meu  who  knew  that
defeat  must  betide  tlum,  they  came  mourning
already  for  their  own  desuuctiou  :  and  since
the  gods  had  given  lliL-m  this  day  of  ven-
geance, which  had  been  so  long  wiiiihcld,  he
bade  them  now  avail  themselves  of  favoura-
VOL.  IV.  á  I


36Û

\>\c  íbrlunc^  anti  aid  it  Ly  ilicir  strciiglli  and
courage,  that  lor  lack  llieroof  they  might
not  lose  the  guerdon  which  iurtuiic  now  pre-
sented. A\'h;it  did  the  inoiiining  with  which
lhe  walls  of  Constanlinople  were  hung  sig-
nify, but  that  the  city  already  gives  itself
tip  as  yielded  inte  the  hands  of  its  con-
querors: And  since  it  was  in  their  hands  to
Avin  all,  or  in  their  weakness  to  lose  all,  he
l)ade  them  remember  that  those  whom  they
saw  before  thrm  were  the  same  enemies
vith  w  horn  they  had  fought  in  the  former  bat-
tle, and  whose  strength  the  y  had  Iried,  f.ir
few'er  in  number  than  they  then  had  been,  and
deprived  of  the  help  of  all  those  excellent
princes  and  captains  who  had  then  been  slain,
I'inallv,  he  laid  before  them  the  renown  of
the  victory,  which  should  be  the  recom^
pence  of  all  their  travails,  and  a  sufficient
revenge  for  the  death  of  their  forefathers,
who  had  lost  their  lives  before  the  walls  of
Constantinople,  and  whose  blood  called  out
for  vengeance,  and  for  atonement,  there  to
be  taken,  before  those  walls  and  upon  those
enemies.


363

VVliciî  he  had  used  these  and  sucli  like
speeches  to  them,  they  began  to  wax  desi-
rous of  the  battle;  and  chasing  all  their  former
fears  out  of  remembrance,  they  marched  on
after  the  same  manner  as  they  did  in  the  first
l)atllo,  saving  tliat  they  were  under  the
<'harge  of  other  captains,  for  that  they  which
conducted  them  before  were  slain.  The
manner  in  which  their  horsemen  advanced
was  also  well  worthy  to  be  seen,  and  the  great
havock  which  had  l)ecn  made  among  them  ;
for  albeit  they  did  not  come  lorih  with  such
sad  show  as  thev  of  Constantinople,  vet  was
their  display  little  splendid,  there  being  no
arms  auiong  ihem  but  what  l)()rc  nuirks  of
their  enemies'  blows.  All  lUu  bravery  of
their  coat-armours  was  gone,  they  were
broken  in  many  places,  and  the  colours
stained  and  defaced  ;  their  hehneis  were
bruised  and  ballered,  their  corslets  hacked
and  hewn,  their  shields  of  slighter  rc'^islance
than  seemed  needful  lor  such  a  day's  work,
ami  iluj  devices  thereof  destroyed,  without
vestige  of  what  they  had  been  ;  the  fury  of
their  antagonists  had  demolished  uU.  All
e  I  '2


364

their  armour  was  stained  with  blood,  a  pity-
ful  tliiníí  to  see,  it'  any  one  eoilld  pity  those
■who  had  been  tlie  authors  of  his  misery.
Certes,  it  m:ii,ht  plainly  be  seen,  that  on  the
one  side  all  was  sorrow,  arfd  on  the  other
blood  and  unhappiness.  and  the  minds  of  all
wrought  up  lor  farther  evil.

The  battles  being  arrayed,  Piimaleon  on
the  part  of  the  Christians  took  the  van,
accc^mpanied,  as  knights-adventurers,  by
his  ^on-in-iaw  Palmerin,  the  knight  of  the
Savage,  Florendos,  Platir,  Pompides,  Bian-
didon,  Don  Kosuel,  Belisarte,  Dragonalte,
and  all  the  young  and  famous  knights  of  the
court.  The  giant  Drnmuziando  went  with
them,  in  whom  more  than  in  all  the  other  the
mournlu'  harness  whieh  he  wore  made  the
most  dolorons  display.

On  the  enemies'  side,  the  king  of  Etolia  led
the  foremost  battle,  wherein  was  the  most
puissant  knights  in  all  the  Turkish  army,
they  being  desirous  to  be  in  the  onset.  Among
them  was  the  giant  Framustante,  who  de-


$65

sired  iibove  all  othci-  things  to  cacounter
J)ramuzianclo,  because  of  the  hatred  which
there  was  between  them.  But  when  they  w  ere
about  to  charge  on  both  sides,  the  Clnisti-
ans  only  waiting  for  the  signal  which  the
Turks  would  sound  with  their  instruments,  a
thing  befel  which  delayed  them  for  more
than  two  houjs,  contrary  to  the  wishes  of
both  armies.

The  city  of  Constantinople,  as  you  have
heard  before,  was  committed  to  the  charge
of  king  'J'arnaes  of  Lacedemonia,  and  the
sage  Daliarte.  Now  it  is  written  in  the
Chronicles  of  those  times  from  which  this
history  hath  been  taken,  that  this  sage,  who
was  learned  in  art  magic,  discovered  by
his  art  that  the.  city  of  Constantinople  would
now  be  brought  to  its  final  destruction,  and
that  Primaleon  with  all  the  rest,  of  its  de-
lenders,  and  his  own  father,  Don  Duardos,
^vould  perish  in  that  battle  ;  and  that  though
most  of  the  Turks  would  come  to  llie  sunie
end,  and  be  slain  also,  vet  some  would  be
left,  who  bhould  get  possession  ol"  the  city  :
though  in  this  hisart  something  deceived  hint.
'1   1  ii


366

And  that  these  conquerors  might  not  liave
at  their  mercv  the  li(mours,  iivcSj  and
persons  of  so  many  rare  princesbcs,  iîigh
born  la(  ie.-»,  and  worthy  dames,  so  lately
married,  and  most  of  lliem  now  great  with
child,  as  also  that  the  fruit  which  was  to  be
expected  trom  them  might  not  be  lost,  he
with  his  art  and  knowledge  raised  by  virtue
of  enchantments  a  dark  and  obscure  cloud,
which  sha(io\ved  the  light  of  the  fiimamcnt
in  such  son,  as  not  only  the  city  was  so
wrapt  in  the  cloud,  as  it  was  not  possible  to
discern  it,  but  they  in  the  field  also  were  co-
vered with  this  thick  darkness,  so  that  nei-
ther could  ihey  see  each  other,  nor  had  tliey
the  power  lo  break  through  it;  and  they
remained  in  amazement  awhile,  not  knowing
what  this  might  hv.  Meantime,  he  still  using
his  art  magic,  gathereii  into  this  cK  i:d  the
empress  Pdinarda  with  the  other  queens
and  ladies  who  had  retired  into  the  monas-
tery of  Saint  Clara,  and  all  the  other  prin-
cesses and  ladies,  they  being  all  cast  into  a
deep  sleep,  and  m  that  manner  he  conveyed
them  that  saui  day  to  the  Perilous  Island,
whicli  Pahneriii  had  bestowed  on  him  :  and


367

he  sliadowcd  the  Isle  Hkewisc,  by  his  en-
chaniinent,  in  such  manner,  that  it  was  never
seen  more  till  time  and  his  pleasure  gave  oc-
casion. These  ladies  were  surprised  with  mar-
vellous admiration,  when  they  found  them-
selves not  in  Constantinople,  but  in  a  strange
land  ;  and  though  it  was  a  pleasant  and  de-
lightsome land,  and  the  palace  wherein  they
were  placed  was  great  and  sumptuous,  yet
they  took  possession  otit  with  greater  lamen-
tations than  they  could  have  used  in  taking
leave  of  Constantinople,  had  they  known
when  they  departed  from  it  ;  and  the  sorrow-
ful remembrances  of  what  they  had  left
there  was  a  greater  grief  to  them  tlian  any
other  loss  ;  and  well  did  they  conceive  that
this  transport  ot"  them  which  had  thus  been
wrought,  had  not  been  done  unless  some
great  evil  had  happened.  This  made  them
more  sorrowful,  lîutas  they  will  be  spoken
of  in  due  season,  the  history  returns  to  king
Taruaes  at  Constantinople,  who,  after  the
cloud  was  vanished  avvay,  and  the  day  clear
again,  st^eing  that  the  empress  and  all  the
other  ladies  were  gone,  and  Daharte  also,
conceived  such  exircme  fear  within  liimseli,


368

that  what  with  that  and  the  weakness  of  his
body,  he  died  suddenly.  In  the  city  there  was
now  none  to  take  upon  lum^-elf  the  guard
thereof,  for  all  who  wc  re  therein  gave  them-
selves u|)  for  lost  :  in  the  field  that  whieh
lortune  had  ordained  came  to  pass.


î69


CHAPTER  169.


The  dark  cloud  being  gone  out  of"  sights
whither  Daliarfe  guided  it,  the  day  began  to
wax  clear  again,  and  the  armies  could  see
each  other  drawn  np  read}'  for  the  charge.  But
as  the  Christians  were  about  to  give  the  on-
set, they  heard  a  most  lamentable  and  piti-
ful outcry,  which  made  them  stay  their
bands;  and  looking  about  to  see  the  cause
of  this,  ihey  saw  a  great  many  wom^n  and
damsels  come  forth  of  the  city,  with  their
bair  dispersed  abroad  over  tbrir  shoulders,
and  wringing  their  banns  in  very  grievous
manner.  For  they  finding  the  city  thus
left  desolate,  with  none  therein  lor  their
succour  and  defence,  came  into  the  field,
to  their  husbands,  brethren,  sons,  and  kins-
ineu  ;  seeing  they  could  promise  to  them-


370

selves  no  assurance  in  the  city,  they  came
to  them  to  look  tor  piotection,  and  die  with
iheni  in  the  field.

Don  J)uaidos  and  Piimalcon  were  so  amaz-
ed at  the  clamour  of  these  women,  that  they
caused  their  ensigns  to  stay,  and  command-
ed the  horsemen  not  to  hreak  their  array,
till  they  had  understood  the  cause  ;  greatly
blaming  the  neglect  of  king  Tarnaes  and
Daliarte  :  and  they  sent  Pom  pities  and  Pla-
tir  to  bring  them  certain  tidings.  But  when
these  two  knights  returned  and  told  them
after  what  manner  king  Tarnaes  had  died,
and  liow  the  sage  Daliarte  was  gone,  no  man
could  tell  whither;  they  began  to  think
within  themselves,  that  both  they  and  all
their  train  were  brought  to  such  extremity,
as  fortune  had  concluded  to  finish  the  me-
mory of  their  knightly  deeds  by  delivering
their  lives  to  the  sword  of  their  enemies.
They  did  likewise  persuade  themselves,  that
Daliarte  absented  himself  for  no  other  oc-
casion, but  only  because  he  perceived  their
general  destruction  was  at  hand  ;  and  in
this  respect,  they  judged  he  had  provided


371

some  refuge  for  lhe  empress  and  the  ladies^
ili!U  their  enemies  miglit  not  trium[)h  in
their  mistortunes,  to  the  greater  miácry  of
their  lords  and  husbands.  \\  hereupon  they
conehided  by  general  dcu-rmination,  to
uirhchaw  themselves  into  the  city  to  make
[)r(nlsion  for  the  defenee  thereof,  before
they  would  enter  the  battle  with  their  ene-
mies. Tor  certes,  it  was  a  pitiful  sight  to
beliold_,  how  the  women  and  children  came
to  look  for  protection  among  them,  and  how
old  men  with  grey  heads  and  white  beards,
being  >o  wealc  and  feebk;  with  age  that  they
were  fain  to  su[)port  themselves  with  their
Slave-;,  desired  that  they  might  rather  enter
the  battle,  and  there  end  their  lives,  than
Jive  to  see  this  last  snceour  perish,  and  thua
be  miserably  butchered  with  the  women.

Great  was  the  sorrow  of  Don  Duardos,  Pri-
maleon,  and  all  the  other  princes,  ilnding
the  palace  in  such  a  dcsolale  state,  neiilier
the  empress,  the  princesses,  nor  any  of  the
other  ladies  there  ;  this  vexed  their  minds
with  inexpressible  grief.  They  went  into
their  accustomed  chamber^-,  antl  not  Hading


them  there  to  whom  ihey  were  most  affcc-
tioiiate,  their  very  souls  were  ready  to  forsake
their  bodies  ;  for  the  \'oung  princes  enjoying
their  sweet  ladies  so  short  a  time,  for  whose
sakes  they  had  suffered  so  many  bitter  brunts,
they  ihought  themselves  not  able  to  live,  be-
ing deprived  of  their  comi)any,  whom  they
honoured  with  most  pure  and  unfeigned  af-
fection. And  now  their  pains  were  great-
er than  ever  they  had  been  before,  and  this
mishap  more  grievous  to  them  than  all
the  dangers  past,  because  their  ladies  were
the  rewards  of  their  knightly  victories  ;  but
having  thus  strangely  lost  them,  they  were
out  of  hope  to  enjoy  the  sight  of  Lhcm  any
more,  wherefore  they  seemed  as  men  depriv-
ed of  their  senses,  looking  ghastly  and  icar-
fully  one  upon  another,  knowing  not  which
way  to  comfort  or  rcdiCis  their  present  hea-
viness.

In  this  case  the  Christian  princes  remained
for  the  space  of  three  days,  without  otier-
ing  their  enemies  battle  ;  during  which  time
Primaleon  made  conveyance  of  the  aged
men,  with  tne  women  and   childrcii,  in    ilje


373

night  time,  to  divers  of  Iiis  castles  and  for-
tresses near  adjoining  ;  and  then  the  city  be-
ing rid  ot"  these  embarrassments,  grief  pass-
ing into  rage,  he  caused  the  walls  of  the
city  to  be  beaten  flat  to  the  ground,  and  al!
the  sumptuous  duellings  whic  h  stood  within  ;
■which  was  thought  good  by  the  advice  of
every  one  to  be  so  done,  and  that  for  two
especial  causes.  The  first,  that  it  would  more
animate  and  embolden  the  Christians  in  the
lime  of  battle,  seeing  themselves  despoiled  of
the  place  wherein  ihcy  might  else  have  re-
posed their  assurance  of  safety.  The  other,
that  the  enemies  should  not  enjoy  their  plea-
sant and  stately  homes,  neither  vaunt  how
they  had  destroyed  Constantinople,  if  so  be
fortune  allotted  them  the  victory.

This  destruction  of  Constantino^jlc  availed
also  in  another  way  :  for  the  inhabitants  of
tlje  city,  seeing  it  so  spoiled  even  to  the  very
first  ioundation  thereof,  conceived  such  ha-
tred against  the  Turks,  as  gave  them  new
strength  and  courage,  and  they  went  out  to
battle  more  for  hatred  and  the  strong  thirst
of  vengeance,  than  for  any  thought  ot  vic-
VOL.  IV,  2  K


374

tory.  \n  tliis  niood  tiu;y  took  the  fuld  once
Miore,  beiii!^  arravctl  in  tiicsunie  oiclcr  as  be-
fore, and  liiiviiiii;  increased  lhe  battles  witli
all  those  soldiers  wiio  had  then  been  left  for
the  defence  of  the  city.

Albayzar,  whom  the  destruction  of  Constan-
tinople had  stricken  with  dismay,  as  kjiovving
well  the  intent  of  his  enemies  therein,  coin-
nianded  his  captains  to  place  their  inca  in
array,  bade  the  trumpets  sound,  and  lhe
king  of  Etolia  to  give  the  onset  with  the
first  division,  which  was  under  liis  command.
Primaleon  prepared  himself  to  receive  him,
and  S'^''"S  ''"^  l^orse  the  spurs,  he  prevailed
so  fortunately  in  the  encounter,  that  he  made
the  king  of  Etolia  measure  his  length  on  the
ground;  but  he  was  quickly  succoured  by  his
men,  and  remounted.  Palmerin  of  England
ran  against  prince  Arjelao,  and  met  him  with
such  puissance  as  his  lance  pierced  cicaa
through  his  body, so  that  he  fell  to  ihc  gîO'.ind
stark  dead  ;  the  like  did  the  knight  of  t!ie
Savage  jNIan  to  a  valiant  knight  named  ili-
cardasso,  who  was  esteemed  a  sing.iiar  dp-
tain  among.it  the  Turks  ;  Floreados^  Piaiiíj


Gr.iciano,  lîeroldo,  and  the  otlier  famous
knights,  encountered  eacli  with  him  whom
fortune  had  opposeil  to  him,  and  all  had  the
vunf.ige  over  their  enemies.  Of  the  others
many  were  smote  down  on  hoth  sides.  Fra-
innstanle  and  Dramnziando  failing  in  their
encoanier,  passed  by  each  other  :  and  though
the  jfress  was  so  great  that  they  could  not
turn  for  another  career,  as  they  wished,  yet
the  strong  desire  they  had  to  pursue  their
battle  to  tiie  end,  and  see  who  had  the  van-
tage, made  them  think  of  nothing  else  ;  so
letting  go  their  s})ears,  because  amid  so  great
a  throng  they  could  not  make  use  of  them,
they  dre;Y  their  swords  and  began  their  com-
bat.

The  Christians  behaved  themselves  so  wor-
tlwy  at  this  fust  encounter,  that  the  king  of
Eiolia,  though  his  men  were  twice  so  many
iu  number  as  they  with  Primaleon,  and
thougli  he  and  many  otliers  did  wonders  in
the  van,  being  not  able  to  endure  the  prowess
of  Primaleon,  Palmerin,  and  the  others,  was
fain  to  fall  back  u|ion  the  second  battle,
which  was  concUicted  by  the  king  of  Caspia.

o    ,•    ()
■*•    '^     -w


376

He  advanced  with  ihcin,  and  charged  soliol-
ly  a-i  to  bring  many  to  llie  earth;  Primaleon
again  arraying  his  men,  resisted  him  so
bravely,  that  he  held  the  matter  in  suspense,
not  losino:  a  foot  of  «iiound.  \Vhoso  had
seen  tlie  great  Pahnerin  of  England  at  that
hour,  might  well  have  seen  that  the  remem-
brance of  Polinarda  was  working  in  him,
and  that  in  the  desire  of  seeing  her  once  more
he  thought  his  single  arm  could  overthrow
the  whole  host  of  enemies.  Florendos  also,
and  he  of  the  Savage,  and  prince  Beroldo,
and  Graciano  and  the  others,  made  such  ha-
vock  among  ihem,  that  the  Held  was  dyed
with  the  work  of  their  hands.  The  great
Primaleon,  not  being  the  one  that  gained
least  honour  that  day,  did  his  endeavour  so
bravely,  that  the  Turks  for  their  last  remedy
were  fain  to  charge  with  their  third  battle,
of  which  the  soldan  of  Persia  was  captain  ;
and  in  sooth  he  had  made  a  great  slaughter
of  tbe  Christians,  if  it  had  not  been  for  Flo-
raman,  who  came  up  to  their  support.
Palmerin,who  hated  this  soldan  in  his  heart
because  of  his  proposal  to  marry  his  lady
Polinarda,  encountered  him  and  bore  him  to


«j/  /

tbe  ground.  Tliis  brought  the  whole  brunt
of  ihe  l)aitle  that  way;  for  the  Turks  labour-
ed earnestly  to  mount  the  soitlan  airain,  and
Priinaleon  to  aid  Floraman,  who  was  likc-
ivise  cast  beside  his  horse.  And  b}'  reason
of  the  2;reat  eai^erness  ot"  the  Christians  to
help  Floraman,  they  had  forgotten  Diamu-
ziaudo,  who  in  another  part  of  the  field  was
still  battling  with  Framustante,  both  being
now  on  foot,  for  their  horses  were  no  longer
able  to  carry  them.  Both  were  wovuuied,
though  the  wounds  were  nothing  great,  and
botii  being  wearied,  fought  with  little  vi-
gour; nevertheless  J)rauiu/iando  a|)[}cared
to  have  the  better  wind.  But  this  would
little  have  availed  him  if  he  of  the  Savage
had  not  come  up,  for  Framustante,  with  tlie
help  of  Grantor,  a  knig'jt  of  great  prowess,
would  now  have  slain  him.  F'ortunc  how-
ever, who  had  reserved  him  for  farther  ex-
ploits, would  so  have  it  that  the  famous
knight  of  the  Savage,  his  great  Iriend,  came
that  way, and  seeing  hiui  in  that  |)eril,  brake
way  through  the  enemies,  and  came  u[)  to
Grantor  :  and  though  he  found  stout  resis-
tance in  him,  laid  on  sueh  heavy  load  of
'2   K  3


378

blows,  whlc'li  so  bewiltleied  liim  that  he  could
not  help  himself,  till  in  iiiie  he  fell  at  his
enemy's  feet  lor  pure  weariness,  and  tiiere
expired,  no  succour  being  able  to  save  him.
By  this  time  so  many  Turks  (locked  to  that
place,  that  both  he  and  Dramuziando  would
have  been  in  great  danger,  if  king  Estrelante
of  Hungary  had  not  succoured  them  with  the
third  battle.  And  then  peradventure  Fra-
mustante  would  have  been  slain,  if  Albaj'-
zar,  who  had  alway  his  eyes  upon  him,
had  not  ordered  all  the  remaining  battles  to
charge.  Don  Duardo?  seeing  the  peril  of
his  friends,  did  the  like.  Then  was  there  so
great  an  uproar,  as  if  the  whole  world  were
eníía2;ed  in  battle.

He  of  the  Savage,  being  mounted,  seeing
Albayzar  coming  with  his  lance  charged  in
his  rest,  took  a  spear,  and  gave  his  horse
the  spur,  to  meet  him.  Albayzar,  who  knew
him  by  his  shield,  came  against  him,  for
they  twain  hated  each  other  mortally  on
account  of  Targiana,  which,  as  ye  have
heard  heretofore,  was  the  principal  cause  of
the   coming   of  the  Turks    to   Constantin-


379

ople.  Neither  of  tbeni  missed  bis  encounter;
Albayzar  was  fain  to  catch  hold  about  the
neck  of  his  horse  to  shun  the  fall  ;  but  the
other's  horse  was  so  weary  with  travail,  that
■what  with  that  and  the  force  of  the  shock,  he
fell  to  the  ground.     He  of  the  Savage,  how-
ever, leapt  out  of  the  saddle  quickly,  so  that
he  sustained  no  harm.     7\lbayzar  recovered
his  seat,  and  then  w^th  the  help  of  his  men
endeavoured  to  surround  him,  and  get  him
in   the  midst  of  them.     But  Dramuziando
and  the  knight  of  the  Savage,  being  both  a-
fijot,    so    bestirred    themselves    with    their
swords,  smiting  and  slaying  all  before  them,
that   none    dared    come    nigh    them  ;    yet
must  they  needs  have  perished,  if  tlie  soldan
Belagriz  had  not  arrived   there   with   four
thousand  horse,  reserved  to  carry   succour
wherever  it  was  most  needed  ;  and  thrusting
in   upon   the   Turks  with    great    puissance,
they  rescued  Dramuziando,  and  brought  \úm
forth  of  the  army  to  rest  himself  awhile  ;  and
they   luounied  Florian  on  horseback  again,
in  spite  of  the  enemy.  I'Vamustantc  also,  on
the  other  side,  was  removed  from  the  field,
because  pf  the  great  need  he  had  to  lake  rest.


380

At  this  time,  the  greatest  hurly-burly  was
where  Primaleon  commanded  ;  for  Ptdmerin
was  on  foot,  and  nirappling  with  the  soldaii
of  Persia,  and  l*olinardo  with  Fcrabroca;
^Thich  caused  tlie  knights  on  all  sides  to
hasten  to  this  (Conflict.  The  king  of  Etolia,
accompanied  with  five  hundred  knighls  on
foot,  came  to  helj)  the  soldan  of  I*ersia;  but
Bcroldo,  remembering  the  death  of  king
Recindos  his  father,  joined  in  fight  with
him.  Don  Duardos  came  thither  to  assist
his  friends,  and  so  did  Albayzar  on  the  be-
half of  the  soldan  of  Persia,  l)ringing  with
liim  many  knights;  and  four  giants,  wiio
were  fresh, entered  the  field,  whose  presence
did  much  terrify  the  Christians,  so  that  many
of  them  durst  not  abide  the  iight  with  such
monsters.

Yet  could  not  all  these  knights  and  giants
avail  so  much  bht  th.it  Palincrin  of  England
by  fine  force  of  arms  slew  the  soldan  of
Persia,  making  him  yield  up  the  ghost
under  his  hands,  he  himself  remaining  in
such  condition  that  he  was  still  able  to  show
his  strength  elsewhere:  whereat  the  Turks


581

were   dismayed,  for  next   to   Albayzar  he
^vas   the  chief  person   in   the  army.     The
grief  which  they  resented  for  his  death  greatly
increased  their   rage.     But  the  joy  for  this
victory   of   Pahncrin   over    the   soldan   was
greatly   abated  by  the  deatli   of  Polinardo,
Avho  doing  battle  with  reiabroca,a  knight  of
great  account,  and  not   being  so  well  suc-
coured   as    his    antagonist,    ended  his   life,
covered   with    wounds  ;  yet   sold    he    it   so
dearly,  that   Ferabroca  himself,    and    many
others,   bore  him  company.     The  death  of
Polinardo  was  a  new  grief  to  his  friends  and
companions,  in  that  the  emj)cror  Vernao  his
brother  having  been  killed  in  the  first  battle,
the  empress  Basilia,  seeing  her  lord  and  hus-
band gone,  reposed  all  her  ho{)e  and  comfort
on  him.    Plorendos,  w  hose  gric  f  could  not  be
expressed  for  the  death  of  his  kinsman  Poli-
nardo, because  they  had  been  nourished  all
their  youth  together  in  the  emjieror's  court,
a  thing  which  greatly  increi.se'h  friendship,
to  revenge  the  death  of  his  dear  friend  and
companion,  ran  fiercely  amongst  the  thickest
of  his  enemies.     The  first  he  met  ^^  ithal  was
the  giant  Pandollb,  who  holding  a  mighty


mace  in  Iiis  liaiifl,  a<lvanccd  himself  against
liiin.  Tlicii  begin  a  fierce  and  terrible
combat  Ijciwecn  ihoin,  so  that  within  a
Avhile,  the  i>;iant  I'aiidolFo  railed  and  blas-
phemed a<;;iinst  his  gods  horribi}',  that  one
knight  should  be  able  so  long  to  withstand
him,  he  being  wont  to  vanquish  every  one
thai  entered  figiit  with  him,  by  reason  oi' his
marvellous  strength.  Florendos  supported
liimself  in  this  combat  more  by  his  skill  and
activity  than  by  an}'  thing  else.  At  this
time  the  battle  was  so  hot  on  all  sides,  that
none  could  give  eye  to  another,  every  one
having  enow  to  do  in  looking  to  Inmself.
For  this  reason,  Pandolio  being  íeeblv
seconded,  Florendos  got  the  better  of  hnn
in  such  sort  that  he  brought  him  down  and
slew  him,  he  himself  being  so  marked  by  his
hands  that  he  could  scant  support  himself.

Beroldo  of  Spain,  who  was  fighting  hand  to
liand  with  the  king  of  Etolia,  demeaned  him-
self so  valiantly,  that  maugre  all  the  resis-
tance that  king  could  make,  he  slew  him
there  outright.  But  as  Albayzar  now  came
lip  with  the  force  of  a  great  multitude,  nei-


3S3

tlier  Don  Dnartîos,  Pi  imalcon,  iiur  llio  olhcr
princes,  could  oppose  resistiiiice  enough  to
have  saved  liini  from  lhe  liiiy  of  the  enemy.
Lut  there  he  must  have  died,  periornjini^'  ac-
tions wortliy  of  himself,  antl  of  the  son  of
such  a  father,  if  the  soldan  Bclagriz  with
his  body  ot  lielpcrs  had  not  come  up;  and
they  bore  him  out  of  the  Held,  but  in  such
condition  that  he  seemed  rather  a  dead  man,
than  one  that  had  any  life  left  in  him  ;  and
in  this  order  lie  was  brought  to  Pasencio,
the  emperor's  chief  chamberlain,  who  had
the  charge  given  hinx  of  the  wounded  [)cr-
sons,  because  he  was  very  skilful  tlierein,
and  being  a  man  of  great  age,  did  not  enter
the  iight.  'Jhe  opinion  of  prince  Beroldo's
death  was  such  grief  to  his  friends,  as  they
rather  desired  to  bear  him  company,  than
to  live  at\er  such  losses  :  for  this  renewed  in
tlicm  the  remembrance  of  the  death  of  king
liecindos  of  Spain,  his  ftither,  of  the  em[)eror
^  ernao,and  the  other  princes, all  which  made
victory  ^o  sad,  that  there  was  none  who  de-
slreil  ii  ;  lor  though  it  should  thus  hardly  be
gained  at  last,  ill  could  it  l)e  enjoyed  wliçu
such  dear  friends  were  lost.


584

The  knight  of  the  Savage  Man  seeing  tlic
great  slaughter  that  Alha\zar  made  of  his
friends,  pricked  through  to  the  place  where
he  was,  and  came  unto  him  wilii  these  words  :
A'owis  the  time,  Albayzar,  which  alloweth  us
the  opportunity  to  satisfy  our  long  desired
revenge  of  each  other  ;  and  because  we  two
are  the  occasions  of  all  this  trouble,  I  pray
let  this  quarrel  be  ended  between  thee  and
me,  and  let  not  those  who  are  innocent  in
this  matter  lose  their  lives  for  our  offences.

I  am  so  glad,  said  Albayzar,  to  meet  with
thee,  that  1  desire  no  other  good  and  no
other  victory;  and  having  once  conquered
thee,  I  care  not  how  soon  my  own  life  be  lost.
With  this  bitter  will  on  both  sides  they  be-
gan mortally  to  smite  at  each  other  ;  this
combat  however  did  not  endure  long,  fur  the
giant  Altropo  came  up  in  aid  of  Albayzar,
and  began  to  lay  at  him  of  the  Savage  with  a
mace,  with  the  which  he  had  done  great  hurt
that  day.  Albayzar  seeing  them  engaged,
an^,  that  the  Turks  were  losing  ground  in
that  part  of  the  field  where  Don  Duardos
fought,  went  to  support  them  in  person,  as


385

ho  ever  did  where  there  was  most  need.
A\  iih  his  coining  they  recovered  then' ground,
for  he  was  accompanied  by  excellent  knights,
and  moreover  his  presence  animated  every
thiiiiï.  He  of"  the  Savai^e  remained  some
■while  in  battle  with  Altropo,  and  as  he  was
somewhat  weary  with  the  great  endeavours
which  he  had  made  all  that  day,  and  remem-
bered liow  needful  it  was  that  he  should  save
himself  for  farther  work,  he  availed  himself
of  all  his  skill  and  slight,  avoiding  deliverly
the  blows  of  his  enemy,  till  at  last  he  laid
liim  at  his  feet.  Withal,  he  himself  was  left
in  such  plight,  that  full  willingly  he  would
have  gone  forth  of  the  battle  to  rest  himself
awhile,  if  the  king  of  Parthia  would  have
given  him  leave  ;  w  ho  bringing  succour  to
tliat  part,  came  forth  with  a  great  body  of
knights,  and  compassed  him  round  about.
This  was  the  hour  in  which  he  of  the  Savage
displayed  alibis  worth  ;  for  seeing  that  death
surrounded  him  on  all  sides,  he  was  resolved
to  sell  his  life  at  its  full  price.  And  in  this
desperation  he  fought  in  such  a  manner  that
none  dared  come  nigh  him,  and  they  stood
in  such  fear  of  him  that  they  now  attacked

VOL.  IV.  2  L


886

liiin  with  missile  weapons,  incaninu;  so  to
overpower  him.  -Any  one  who  hjul  set-n
this  knight  in  former  times,  and  knowu
his  deeds  and  enstoms,  andbhould  now  have
beheld  him  in  this  state,  ill  eon  Id  W\>  heart
have  endured  the  sight,  witliout  shedding
tears  :  tor  in  him  there  was  all  valour  and
all  strength,  and  all  other  graces  and  good
manners  which  man  could  have  :  and  no
one  who  saw  them  thus  about  to  perish,
and  him  in  the  last  extremity  of  lile,  would
have  desired  to  live  himself,  seeing  him  pe-
rish. The  news  reached  PrimaK;on,  who
laving  aside  all  other  considerations,  made
that  way  with  some  few  who  followed  him.
Palmerin  went  with  him  :  the  labour  of  the
<]ay  had  not  yet  made  him  appear  wearied  ;
and  now  seeing  his  brother  on  loot,  wound-
ed in  many  places,  compassed  round  about
l\ith  enemies,  and  well  nigh  buried  with
weapons,  he  brake  his  way  through  them,
like  a  man  who  was  come  to  take  vengeance.
On  the  other  side,  many  knights  eame  uj),
and  among  them  the  giant  ^Niolcarco,  who
was  of  terrible  stature  and  marvellous
strength.     These  so  stifily  icsisted  the  fury


387

of  Pi imalcon,  Palmciiii^  and  tlic  others,  that
hctbre  tlicy  could  get  liiin  of"  the  Savage
out  of  the  (ield,  many  were  they  on  both
sides  who  tool<  their  death.  Then  on  tlie
part  of  the  Turks,  the  king  of  Parthia  was
slain^  and  Liiymeno  liis  son,  and  Antistio
his  brothel,  with  many  other  notable  knights;
and  of  the  Christians,  Tenebror  and  Pran-
cian,  whieli  was  great  sorrow  and  great
loss,  tiiey  l)eing  excellent  in  arms,  and  of
that  royal  lineage.

Now  beLian  the  fight  to  be  carried  on  with
groans  and  sobs  and  dolorous  lamentations;
and  tliese  were  the  more  increased  in  the
part  where  Don  Duardos  fought,  because  it
was  said  tliat  they  w^ere  killing  lilandidon.
'\^Mlen  this  news  reached  the  soldan  Belagriz
his  father,  not  able  to  endure  the  grievous
passion  which  he  resented,  lie  entered  the
battle,  crying  out  with  aloud  voice  upon  his
son,  for  he  liad  no  other,  and  loved  him  j)ass-
ing  well,  as  in  truth  liis  great  prowess  and
cliivalroMs  thewcs  deserved.  So  breaking
way  through  the  enemies  in  the  force  of  this
fury,  wiliiout  care  or  forethought,  he  came
2  L  2


388

to  tlie  place  where  his  son  was  ;  and  seeing
him  stretched  on  the  field  and  covered  with
wounds,  and  that  there  was  yet  hreath  in  iiiin,
he  threw  hiniselttVoni  his  horse,  meaning  to
die  beside  him.  This  w  as  a  lamentable  thing  ;
for  Blandidon,  whose  senses  had  not  yet
wholly  forsaken  him,  hearing  the  voice  of
the  soldan  his  father,  who  was  calling  upon
him  111  great  anguisii,  opened  his  eyes  a
little,  and  strove  to  lift  up  his  head  to  speak
unto  him  ;  but  his  feebleness  not  permitting
this,  he  laid  himself  down  again,  and  in  this
state  was  borne  off  the  field  and  delivered  to
Pasencio.  Then  was  the  soldan  so  utterly
mastered  by  exceeding  grief,  seeing  what  his
son  had  done,  and  thinking  he  was  dead,
that  being  full  of  this  strong  passion,  he
neither  sj)ake,  nor  had  power  to  speak,  and
his  heart  was  so  overchariied,  that  í-iviíisr him
no  time  to  breathe,  it  burst;  and  he  died
there-right  :  yei  making  such  proof  of  his
prowess,  that  he  carried  with  him  some  of
those  with  whom  he  combated.  These  tid-
ings came  to  Primaleon  and  Don  Duardos,
and  each  resented  it  greath',  for  in  the  sol-
dan they  lost  a  main  pillar  in  this  danger.


38.0

Jlispco])]c,  like  truc  and  loyal  friends  and
vassals,  by  fine  force  doing  won»lers  in  arms,
and  at  the  cost  of  their  blood,  won  his  body
and  carried  it  from  the  ficM,  meaning  to
give  it  bnrial  answera'ole  to  his  rank.  i\nd
leaving  some  few  in  guard  of  it,  tliey  return
ed  to  llje  fight,  where  fighting  manfully,
without  fear,  and  to  revenge  the  death  of
rl.eir  lord,  they  did  great  fleeds  in  arms,  and
linally  died  that  day  in  company  with  the
rest.

The  great  Palmerin  of  England  seeing  his
brother  carried  out  of  the  field,  and  not
knowing  in  what  slate  he  was,  being  full  of
animer  and  abhorriu'j;  lilc,  did  .such  tliin<j;s
that  he  hiew  the  giant  Molearco,  and  still
remained  in  condition  to  go  forward  ;  and
so  greatly  did  he  signalize  himself  among
the  Cluisiians,  that  it  seemed  as  if  he  alone
supported  the  whole  weight  of  battle.  At
this  time  a  great  cry  ran  through  the  troops:
it  was  iur  this  cause,  that  riorendos  ;uid  Pla-
tir  were  on  foot  and  surrounded  bv  the  ene-
my, and  riorendos  fighting  with  the  giant
I'asiblrato,  and  being  succoured  by  I'latir,
2  L  3


390

slew  him.     But  Albayzar,  who  never  failed
that  ilay  wherever  lie   was  needed,  repaired
thilliei-,  and  had  brouifhi  ihcni  to  sueh  state,
thatilthey  had  not  by  their  surpassing  hardi-
hood l)orne   up,  tiiey  must  then  have  ended
their  Hves  before  Primaleon  could  have  suc-
coured them.     Witli  his  lielp  I'lorendos  was
remounted  ;  Platir  had  a  wound  in  one  leg,
so  that  he  fought  upon  his   knees,  and  by
reason  of  this  could  not  be  holpcn.     Kevcr-
theless,  as  he  was  so  great  a  person  and  so
excellent  in  arms,  every  one  rejoiced  to  ven-
ture his  own  life  for  the  sake  of  saving  him,
and   by  main  strength  he  was  carried  away
and  delivered  to  Pasencio  ;  but  Germam  of
Orleans  and  Luymanes  of  Burgundy  were  left
upon  the  field,  both  excellent  good  knights
and  of  great  rank  :  on  the  other  part,  the
king  of  Bamba  was  slain   with   his  two  bre-
thren ;  so   that  if  the  Christians  fell,  their
enemies  perished  also.     Primaleon,  though
these  deaths   struck   him  to  the  heart,  bore
up  and  mastered  his  grief  with  a  manly  heart,
that  all  might  not  be  lost  ;  and  making  the
others  remount,  turned  again  to  order  the
battle.


391

And  now  on  the  part  of  the  Christians  the
giant  Dramuziantlo  and   he  of  the  Savage
came  again   into  tlie  field,  being  refreshed  ;
and   on    the    other   part,   Framustante  and
the  king  of  Caspia,     With  the   coming  of
these,    and    of    many  others   \v!io    accom-
panied them  on  both  sides,  the  battle   was
again  renewed.     The  day  past  on,  and  mens
strength    was  failing  ;  for   oftentimes  when
many  knights  withdrew  from  the  fight  to  re-
cover strength  and  take  breath,  they  could
not  return,  by  reason  of  the  blood  which  they
had  lost,  and  because  they  were  so  foredone
with  toil  that  they  could  not  move,  for  which
reason   they  fell  down  and  died.     The  cap-
tains, though  they  well  knew  how  profital3le
it  would  have  been  to  sound  retreat,  fought
ill  such  loathing  of  life,  that  none  of  them
wished  to  give  himself  any  respite  from  death.
Tlie  field  l)ej,an  now  to   be  so  covered  v.itli
dead,  that   tlie  living    stumbled   over  them
and  fell,  and   some  were  so  we.ik  (hat  they
could  not  ri>e,  and  thus  tiled  under  the  lior-
sc.>'  feet,  rather  than  by  the  hands  of  the  ene-
my.    Not  oidy  the  common  order  of  horse-
men died  in  this  manner,  but  even  some  of


392

îliC  icnownctl  ones;  for  on  the  f'liri.-li;ins
>u[e  duke  Drapos  of  Normandy  took  his
•îc-cith,  and  kin<í  l)r;iL:onaItc  of  Navarro,
;  ii.'l  Albanis  of  Frisa,  kin;^  of  J)cniiiark  ;  vet
i;(  lore  they  died  they  wroiiuht  urreat  shuiG;h-
*er  ti[)i)n  lhe  Turks;  for  the  kiiii^  of  Caspia
Vr  :;s  slain,  and  many  signal  knights  with  him.
All  was  now  in  eonfusion  ;  none  cared  either
f  :•  himself  or  for  others,  all  lighting  with
t.:c  wish  of  death.

1  here  vcre  now  few  horsemen  in  the  field  ;
t'îe  loot  had  not  yet  charged,  having  by
oi\'er  of  the  eomnianders  remained  entire
fur  the  support  of  the  horse,  if  it  should  be
ii-cdful  ;  but  their  leaders  seeing  that  the
1;  >rse  were  now  utterly  broken,  and  that
there  was  none  lo  command,  not  being  able
to  bear  the  sight  of  so  great  feîaughter,  by
(.  nmon  consent  charged  with  such  a  shock
i..i  showed  the  deadly  mind  whieh  they  bare.
It  was  a  marvellous  thing  to  behold  this
ciisct  ;  such  was  the  rage  and  hatred  on
Iv.ih  sides,  that  there  was  no  room  for  re-
straint nor  caution,  and  in  short  time  the
i'.eid  was  drenched  with  human  blood.    This


S93

battle  being  on  foot,  and  none  trying  ncr
desiring  to  save  his  life,  they  v.  ere  soon
destroyed;  and  in  this  part  the  gr^iat  supe-
riority of  number  overpowered  the  valour  of
the  fewer;  for  as  the  Turks  were  more  thaa
three  times  as  many  as  the  Christians,  by
force  of  weapons  they  slew  tliem  all.  It  was
a  notable  thing,  that  among  so  many  there
was  not  one  who  sought  to  escape,  nor  took
to  flight  ;  life  was  so  hateful  to  them,  that
they  desired  to  be  rid  of  it,  raher  than
endure  so  great  sorrow,  lew  lurks  sur-
vived this  battle  of  the  foot  ;  for  though  they
were  so  many  more  in  number  than  the
Christians,  the  victory  cost  them  so  dear,
that  they  well  nigh  all  pcrishefl.  Some  were
left,  but  they  were  so  wounded,  and  lost  so
much  blood,  that  they  died  for  lack  of  help, —
and  thus  the  foot  were  destroyed,  not  bemg
able  to  afford  any  help  to  the  horse.

The  giant  Framuslantc  breaking  through
the  Christians,  met  Dramuziando  wiio  was
seeking  him  ;  and  not  contented  now  to  wage
battle  with  the  sword,  they  grai>|)led  man  to
man,  striving  by  main  strength  eacii  to  over-


394

t!ivo«:  the  otlicr.  I!ith(  r  iIk  n  came  succour
c:i  both  sides;  but  as  riorcndos  and  Poin-
l<\ócs  had  had  their  horses  killed  fighting  in
i!ie  oiher  wing,  aud  were  now  on  l\n>i,  it
was  necessary  to  leave  ihesc  giants,  and
cirry  aid  to  them  ;  Albayzar,  who  also  saw
i:-:it  it  was  needful  to  repair  thither,  went
'.  t  wav  wilh  tho-e  who  always  accom-
]•  ;iied  him, — but  tiie  greater  part  ol  that
CwUipany  had  by  this  time  bi'cn  slain.  Thus
.  re  Dramuziando  and  Framustante  left  to
lixaiselves,  to  carry  on  their  battle  at  will  to
itv  end.  .A  terrible  battle  it  was,  and  of  no
!  :;g  continuance;  foras  their  armour  was
Í  !.:t  ihrough  in  many  places,  the  ruthless
blows  made  way  into  the  flesh.  Dranui-
ziimdo  was  greatly  tormented  with  many
òeadlv  wounds,  but  Framustante  with  worse
rVom  his  hand  :  and  that  giant  knowing  now
i!;.it  his  death  was  nigh,  and  hoping  not  to
lv':".ve  any  conqueror  to  boast  of  it,  grappled
r.  iiirhim  anew  ;  but  Framustante  being  now
ir.e  weaker,  fell  under  him  and  yielded  up
"iie  ghost  in  his  hands.  Dramuziando  was
i'jh  in  such  plight,  that  not  being  able  to
support  himself  he  sate  down  upon  the  body


Á


S9S

of  Framustante.    Some  Christians  clefenil.vl
him   from  the  'i'ui'ks  wlio  woiiKl   clic   lut.,
slain  him,  and  with  this  help  !ic  had  tiiri  •  ;  •
tai<c  hrciith  and  rcliiiii  to  tlie  iiu;Ut;  hui   ;
«•onditiuii    in    which  he  was,   dibauled   Í:
iVom  making  mucdi  exertion.     At  the  n.'
of  rramustante's  death  a  nephewof  his  c;;   .  •
U|)  with  his  comrades,  and  surrounded  i).    -
liiii/iando,    to    take    vengeance   upon     h  :    .
A\  ell    (lid    Dramnziando    perceive  that    i    ^
hour  was  come,  and  he  ca-t  his  eyes  aro;;     ',
and  sav.  none  ot'  his  friends  near  him,  Ï'):  .
(le.iiied  to    take  leave  of  them,  or  at   I
of  J^ou  Diiardos,  a'.id  to  let  him  see  hov,-  I,
died:  and  so  great!}'  did   he  love   him    ;;  :  .
his  sons,  thai    to   leave  them  gave   him    :
great  pain  as  death    itself;  and   he   ■wi-'',     ,
also  to  commend  iiis  wife  Arlanza  to  ti:;  '
care,  ami  the  finit  which  should  be  bon:
her,  for  she  was  great  with  child,     rinl
none  ncir  him  to  whom  he  could  say  tii
things,  he  began  in  his  despair  to  disphiv  ii
strength,  laying  on  such  mortal  strok',  s  li.
in  short  lime  lie  made  much  slaughter,  an'  :
a  hea[)  of  dead  before  him  ;  and  the  cut , .:
were  so  dismayed,  that  they  threw  sp»j:i:


396

him  from  a  distance,  as  if  he  had  been  a
bull.  JNIeantime  an  English  knight  carried
■word  to  Don  Diiardos  of  Dramuziando's  state,
and  he  hastened  thither,  and  of  all  the  mi-
series which  lie  had  seen,  none  had  seemed
to  him  so  great  as  this.  He  beheld  Dramu-
ziando  covered  with  wounds  and  blood,  and
at  his  feet  Framustanie  lay  dead,  and  a  lieap
of  other  knights,  and  he  was  still  doing  won-
ders, and  surrounded  with  so  many  enemies
that  none  could  succour  him.  But  Uon
Duardos  remembering  his  great  virtue  and
courage,  alighted  and  made  way  in,  and
placed  himself  at  his  side.  Dramuziando
seeing  Don  Duardos  beside  him,  and  the
love  with  which  he  was  ready  to  keep  him
company  and  die  with  him,  his  heart  was
overcome,  and  with  tears,  to  which  he  was
httle  accustomed,  he  besought  him  to  save
his  own  life,  seeing  that  for  him  there  was
no  remedy,  and  asked  him  to  remember  his
wife  Arlanza,  and  that  which  should  be  born
of  her,  as  the  child  of  his  true  friend  Dramu-
ziando. Having  said  this,  such  weakness
came  over  him  that  he  sate  down  again  upon
Framustante.      Don    Duardos,    unable    to


S97

bear  this  great  sorrow,  could  not  speak  a  word
to  comt'oit  him  lor  weeping  ;  all  he  could
do  was  to  defend  him,  with  the  help  of  Ro-
lamonte,  Don  Kosiram  de  la  Brunda,  and
odiers  w  ho  liad  now  come  up.  Drauiuziando
took  oH"  Ids  helmet  to  take  ureath,  and  with
the  air  recovered  a  litile  ;  but  what  did  it
avail — for  the  ()lood  of  his  body  was  all  spent,
and  he  could  not  uphold  himself;  and  in  this
short  space  ol  time  he  saw  Roramonte  and
Don  Rosi  ram  fall  before  Don  Duardos  ;  and
then  resolving  not  to  behold  any  greater
evils,  towhicli  he  could  now  afford  no  reme-
dy, with  the  rage  of  death,  neither  putting
on  his  helmet,  nor  remembering  that  it  was
off,  he  rushed  again  at  the  enemy.  But
Don  Duardos,  who  could  n<^i  bear  to  see  hioi
die,  took  him  by  force  out  of  the  press,  and
delivered  him  to  Pasencio,  whose  virtue  and
good  care  gave  life  to  many  a  one  that  day.
Dramuziando  fainted  under  his  hands  by
reason  of  his  great  loss  of  blood.

Don  Duardos  judging  him  to  be  dead,  thrust
himself  into  the  haitle,  where  the  knight  of
ihc  Savage  helped  him  to  a  horse;  he  seeing
VOL.    IV.  '2  M


SDH

his  father  in  this  state  felt  less  the  loss  of  Dra-
jnuziaiulo.  Incontinently  they  went  to  that
part  where  Florendos  and  Pompidcs  were
lighting;  on  the  way  they  found  king  Estrc-
lanle,  pierced  with  mortal  wounds,  on  foot,
and  with  few  companions,  and  so  wearied
■with  defending  himself  and  slaughtering  the
enemy,  that  before  they  could  come  up  to
help  him  he  fell  among  the  Turks,  dead.  If
I  were  to  tell  you  the  great  grief  which  the
death  of  every  prince  occasioned  to  his
iiiends,  another  new  history  would  be  need-
ed for  each,  and  all  would  be  taken  up  with
tears  and  sorrow.  From  thence  passing  on
through  the  battle  they  found  Florendos  re-
mounted by  the  help  of  Palmerin  of  England^
and  of  his  father  Primaleon,  and  also  of
prince  Floraman,  who  that  day  performed
such  signal  feats  as  if  he  had  believed  the
■victory  over  the  enemies,  and  the  future
comfort  of  his  own  life  had  depended  upon
them.  But  Pompides  fighting  as  he  was  ever
wont  to  do,  in  that  place  where  the  Turks  had
surrounded  him  would  have  ended  his  days,
if  they  had  not  borne  him  from  the  field,  not
without  great  difficulty.     PiimalcoH;  Don


599

Duardos,  Palmcrin  of  England,  the  knight
of  the  Savage^  and  some  other  worthies,  now
thought  less  of  fighting  than  of  encouraging
those  who  were  left,  who  seemed  to  be  sup-
ported only  by  their  presence.  Albayzar  al-
so did  the  same  with  the  few  in  whom  he  had
faith  and  confidence^  for  on  his  part  all  hope
and  pleasure  were  as  much  lost  as  on  the
other  ;  they  fought  only  to  ilic,  and  only  de-
sired that  their  own  lives  might  be  paid  for
■with  tho^e  of  the  enemy.  Then  Albayzar
called  to  mind  tlie  advice  of  Targiana,  and
the  grief  with  which  she  had  parted  from  him,
and  tliat  mingled  with  the  sad  remembrance
which  he  bore  of  her,  and  he  was  exceeding
sorrowful.

At  this  hour  there  befel  a  thing  full  pitiful  :
they  who  by  reason  of  their  feebleness  re-
mained in  the  city,  before  they  departed
from  it  to  the  places  which  Primalcon  had
provided  for  their  security,  seeing  the  ficlci
hfa[)ed  wit!»  dead,  and  the  living  fighting
with  such  desperation  that  Uiey  wished  to  die
also,  began  to  lay  hand  on  all  things  in  the
cit  y,  that  if  any  of  the  enemies  should  be  left;
2  M  2


400

there  might  be  no  spoil  for  them  ;  and  pihng
them  in  the  great  place,  set  H  re  to  them.
Isot  content  with  this,  they  set  fire  to  all  the
houses  which  had  been  iet't  standing,  áo  that
in  short  time  they  were  consumed  to  aíihes.
The  smoke  ascended  to  heaven,  the  roaring
of  the  flame  was  heard  afar  off,  and  the  crash
of  walls  in  their  dow nfall,  which  had  been
built  to  stand  forever,  was  terrible.  All  this
was  done  to  the  end  that  no  guerdon  or  re-
ward of  victory  might  be  left  for  the  enemies.
They  who  were  in  the  battle  seeing  these
flames  and  this  desolation,  and  having
their  ears  deafened  by  the  earth-shaking  lall
of  buildings,  paused  awhile  from  fight  to
look  upon  this  great  destruction  ;  and  then
the  wrath  of  the  Christians  being  kindled
aficsh,  they  turned  again  to  the  conflict.
A  thing  it  was  worthy  to  be  seen  and  still
more  to  be  lamented,  what  most  of  these
knighls  then  did  :  for  as  they  thought  them-
selves devoted  to  death,  and  were  fighting
with  that  desire,  they  took  leave  of  each
other  with  many  tears  and  groans,  as  men
who  had  a  long  journey  to  go,  the  return
from  which  was  full  doubtful.  Don  Duardos,


1


401

^vho  was  now  an  old  nian^  and  grcntly  wea-
ried with  what  he  had  that  day  done,  turn-
ed his  eyes  upon  his  sons  Pahncrin  and  Flo-
rian,  calHng  to  mind  their  prowess,  and  how
near  to  their  end  they  and  their  courage
Avere  ;  and  with  tliis  tlie  love  of  Flcrida  came
upon  him,  and  thcgricf  with  which  she  would
be  left,  finding  both  father  and  sons  gone  ;
his  heart  could  not  bear  these  thoughts.  He
went  after  them  to  help  them  in  their  need,
seeing  that  they  alway  sought  the  place
of  most  danger.  Primaleon  had  the  like
thonglits,  and  his  hardy  and  invincible  heart
was  in  like  maimer  overcome  with  sorrow  at
that  hour  ;  he  remembered  how  much  had
been  lost  in  that  batllc,  liow  many  princes
and  excellent  knights  ;  and  among  them  he
saw  his  son  Watir  borne  from  the  field,  dead,
as  lie  supposed,  and  Tiorcndos,  though  still
fighting,  in  little  better  plight  ;  and  unable
to  endure  these  things,  he  turned  to  battle,
all  bathed  in  tears  ;  and  hating  life,  thrust
into  the  thickest  of  the  press.  There  they
slew  his  horse,  and  he  did  wonders  on  loot-
The  first  v.ho  alighted  to  su[)port  him  wm
'2  -M  3


402

his  son  Florendos,  and  presently  Palmerin,
who  OÍ"  all  the  Ciiristians  was  the  one  that
made  greatest  havock  among  the  enemy,  for
by  his  hand  he  slew  two  giants,  besides  other
famous  knights,  succouring  his  friends,  and
saving  them  when  in  most  danger,  with  great
expence  of  his  own  blood.  He  and  iloren-
dos  and  Primaleon  and  Floraman  began  to
smite  and  slay,  none  daring  to  keep  the  field
against  them.  Albayzar  came  up,  sorely
handled  and  weary,  but  on  a  fresh  horse,
with  which  he  easily  made  way.  The  knight
of  the  Savage  spurred  against  hiu)  ;  iiis  hoise
was  so  foredone  with  toil  tliat  he  could  not
longer  carry  him,  and  he  grappled  with  AU
bayznr,  and  keeping  fast  hold,  both  came  to
the  ground;  Don  Duardos alighted  and  help-
ed his  son,  and  all  of  Albayzar's  side  who
were  near  crowded  to  his  support.  Here  if
appeared  that  all  whom  Fortune  had  spared
as  vet,  were  now  to  be  consumed.  He  of
the  Savage,  remembering  that  all  this  evil
had  arisen  from  him,  and  that  Albayzar  was
the  instrument,  determined  to  see  if  he  could
bring  him  to  the  same  state  as   he  rest  :  and


403

letting  go  his  hold,  began  anew  to  let  drive
at  liiiii.  Albayzar  with  tlic  same  détermina-
tion warded  and  striiek  ;  For  l.e  had  the  same
invincible  eumage  and  dcatlly  resolution  with
the  vvhieh  he  had  come  ilmlicr,  being  still
the  samCj  save  only  in  the  griet"  he  resented
lor  the  destruction  of  his  people.  None
could  now  separate  them,  for  all  they  ^vho
came  up  had  enough  to  do  to  defend  them-
selves. And  being  in  this  press,  where  the
Turks  could  receive  no  I'arther  succour,  they
were  overpowered  by  the  strength  of  the
Christians,  so  that  in  short  time  they  were
all  slain,  and  the  field  covered  with  their
dead  bodies,  lie  of  the  Savage  behaved
himself  so  well  in  arms,  that  by  fine  force  he
brought  Albayzar  to  the  last  extremity  of
life  :  in  such  sort  did  he  battle  with  him,
that  no  succour  being  of  any  avail,  he  laid
him  dead  at  his  feet,  and  with  him  all  the
famous  knights  ol"  the  army  had  their  end,
among  w  liom  the  ieats  of  Albayzar  were
greater  than  those  of  any  other,  for  by  his
valour  lie  supported  the  battle  :  and  well
did  he  appear  worthy  of  hie  great  command.


404

clefendingliiinselfandliis  friends  and  vassals,
as  long  as  his  strength  lasted  ;  in  fine,  he  died
Aviih  tlieni  as  their  eompanion.

Albayzar  being  dead,  siieb  knights  as  were
left  neither  fortook  his  body  nor  the  field,
as  is  wont  to  be  the  case  in  most  battles,
when  the  commanders  are  slain,  but  desiring
to  follow  him  in  death  as  they  had  done  in
hfe,  many  of  them  attacked  him  of  the  Sa-
vage, who  had  now  neither  shield  nor  soinul
piece  of  armour  upon  his  whole  body,  and
what  was  worse,  his  strength  so  enfeebled
that  he  could  scant  hold  his  sword  ;  but  the
succour  of  those  who  now  bore  down  every
thing  before  them,  arrived  in  time  to  help
him.,  and  they  finally  cleared  the  field.  The
knight  of  the  Savage  was  carried  ofí"  it  and
delivered  to  Pasencio,  who  received  him  as
one  dead.  Don  Duardos,  not  being  able
either  with  his  courage  or  great  discretion
to  endure  this  sight,  lamented  over  him  with
■words  of  sorrowful  lamentation  and  woman-
ish excess,  like  one  who  in  that  hour  was
beside  himself,  and  called  upon  Flerida,  as


405

if  she  could  have  brought  any  help  in  this
great  misery.     Then  rising  with  the  last  de-
spair, and  seeing  as  it  were  ali  the  world  dead,
he  longed  to  hear  the  m  company.     Palmerin
his  son,   wlio    1  ould  as  little    bear  to  behold
beiore  his  eves  this  prodigious  destruction,
had  the  same   desire  ;  but  Polinarda   came
to  mind,  a'.id  that  thought  made  him  some-
what satisfied  with  life  that  he  might  again
see  her  and  serve  lier  ;  and  then  again  remem-
bering  all  tnat  had  chanced,  he  abandoned
himself  lo  c;'es[)air  as  ono  who  distrusted  every
thing.    T'lorendos,  iMoraman,  and  Primaleon
grieved  also  tiiat  there  w.is  none  to  slay  them,
Pasencio   removed  all   tiie    wounded   which
had  been    delivered  mto  his  care  to  a  castle
situated  between  tne  Turkish  (amp  and  the
city,  where  he  lai.ouicu  ai'   lie  could   with
chirurgeons  who  searched  their  wounds,  and
applied  all  neecimi  u  ;íi(  (iies,  tliai  iiiv  y  should
not  peri>h  tur  laci.  oi  lici^y.     Jiui  tht  wound-
ed were  ^o   niaiiv,  and   the  desiic  (,i    life   in
them  so  litlc,  thai  their  dtsjtair   ueu    «ugh
did  as  mucii  hurt  as  loss  oi  blood.

Well  may  it  be  believed  that  ilii.s   was    the


40G

most  notable  baille  in  ibe  world,  full  of
dealh  and  despair,  in  wbich  bolh  sides  fouglit
MÍ1I1  equal  haired  of  life,  a  thing  never  seen
in  any  other  that  hath  at  any  time  befallen.
This  was  the  end  of  Albayzar,  nor  is  sueh  an
end  to  be  wondered  at,  foreursed  intentions
for  the  most  part  bring  on  sueh  issue.  On
the  pari  of  the  Christians  the  victory  was  so
dearly  bought,  and  won  with  so  little  Joy,  that
there  was  no  stir  whatever  to  spoil  the  tents,
though  the  spoil  was  above  all  price.  Not
even  the  desire  of  gain,  which  at  such  times
is  wont  to  make  cowards  adventure  them-
selves to  great  danger,  had  power  enough  to
make  any  one  lay  hands  on  gold .  jewelry,  and
other  like  things  of  great  costliness  and  show.
Every  thing  yielded  to  the  present  sorrows-
fulness,  grief  for  the  loss  of  their  friends,  and
the  desire  of  their  wives  and  children,  which
among  men  puts  all  other  things  in  forget-
fulness.

The  common  hinds  and  boors  of  the  country,
who  collected  after  this  unhappy  battle,  came
to  ransack  the  Turks'  tents;  and  because  they
bad  more  knowledge  of  lhe  gold  than  of  the


407

infinite  riches  of  the  precious  stones  and
jeweis,  they  took  their  fill  of  the  worst,  leav-
ing those  things  behind  them  of  greater  es-
timation: such  being  the  brntioliness  of
the  people,  in  that  they  had  no  better  know-
led  <ie.


40S


CHAPTER   170.


When  tills  unhappy  victory  was  over  neitli^j
party  had  much  lo  boast  of,  for  on  ihe  side
of  tlie  Turks  their  whole  force  was  con.>uined,
and  on  that  of  the  Christians  many  princes,
chiefs,  and  famous  knights  ;  so  that  there
was  not  kingdom,  province,  nor  country  in
the  whole  world,  to  which  this  great  evil  did
not  extend,  many  being  bereft  of  their  kingS;,
and  others  of  a  multitude  of  knigli. s  and  peij-
ple;  for  which  cause  there  was  no  joy  m  any
part,  but  all  was  misery,  and  trouble,  and
sadness.  Wherever  this  news  spre.id,  the
air  was  filled  with  cries  and  lanieniatiinis
which  reached  to  heaven,  some  bewailing
the  loss  of  their  chiefs,  others  the  death  of
iheir  sons,,  kiuszr.en,  and  friends.    Tiie  maidi


409

and   matrons    li=aving    their    houses,    went
through  the  streets  and  puhhc  phiees,  tear-
ing their  hair  and  their  iaces,  and  lament-
ing loudl}'^  alJ  without  order  ;  for  in  so  great
misery  what  order  eould  be  observed?     In
Franco,    Sjjain,   and   other    kingdoms,    the
whole   business  was  to  celebrate   obsequies
after  the  manner  of  the  several  countries.
In  the  principal  cities,  the  battlements  of  the
walls  were  covered  with  mourning  and  black
cloths»,  and  all  the  banners  and  royal  ensigns
rent,    thai  being   a  custom  equally  among
Moors  and    Christians.     On  ihc  day  of  the
battle,  as  soon  as  it  was  over,  Pasencio,   in
order  that  the  ill  fortune  of  that  day  might
not  complete  the  destruction  of  all  that  were
left,    removed    Primaleon,     Don    Uuardos,
Palmerin,  the  knight  of  the  Savage,  Flora-
man,  and  others,  ordering  beds  to  be  provid-
ed for  them,  and  such  things  as  were  needful
for  their  recovery,  which  seemed  doubtful,
both  i>y  reason  of  their  wounds,  and  ot  their
hatred   of  liie.     'Ihc   second   day   after  the
battle,  the  peasantry  being  siathererl  togeiher
by  some  who  had  most  spirit  among  tliem,
made  sometliing  Ulce  the  appearance  of  an

VOL.    IV.  2  N


410

aimy,  with  which  lhe}'  took  the  field,  spoil-
ed the  tents  ot"  the  enemies,  and  slew  some
of  the  multitude  who  were  not  yet  dead,
hatred  neither  allowing  them  to  show  mert y,
nor  the  enemy  to  ask  It;  and  they  came  to
guard  the  place  where  the  wounded,  princes
were,  fearing  that  else  they  might  hy  some
ill  fortune  he  destroyed.

On  the  third  day  Daliartc  arrived,  where  find-
ing that  his  art  which  had  announced  the  to-
tal destruction  of  Constantinople  and  of  all
its  defenders,  had  something  deceived  him,
he  was  something  contented  to  see  that  the
principal  ones  still  survived,  who  might  yet
restore  all  that  was  lost  ;  but  the  contentment
■was  not  perfect  while  he  saw  their  recovery  so
douutful.  Incontinently  [he  examined  their
wounds  himself.  ]Most  of  the  princes  were
in  such  condition  that  tiicy  did  not  know
him.

Beroldo,  Platir,  and  Dramuziando,  were  en-
tirely bereft  of  their  natural  reason  ;  Don
Duardos  and  the  knight  of  tae  Savage  al-
Biost  in  tlie  same  slate.;  Priuialeou  also  weil


411

nigh  gone.  Dalinrte  plainly  perceived  that
their  victory  had  been  obtained  over  despe-
T«ie  men,  \Yhich  is  never  so  cheap  as  to  be
von  without  loss  on  the  conquerors'  part.
He  saw  also  tiiat  the  despair  of  these  prince?,
and  the  remembrance  of  what  they  had  lost,
occasioned  as  much  danger  to  their  lives  as
the  wounds  themselves  :  and  for  this  reason
the  first  remedy  which  he  applied  was  a  cer-
tain ointment,  the  virtue  whereof  was  such
as  to  cast  thorn  into  a  deep  sleep,  and  there-
by takeaway  the  thought  of  what  so  grievous-
ly afflicted  them,

On  the  fifth  dav  Ar2;entao,  the  Q-ovemor  of
the  Profound  Isle,  whom  Daliarte  had  com-
manded to  come,  arrived  in  the  port  of  Con-
stantinople, with  four  gallies,  hung  with
t)lack  :  the  people  received  him  Aviih  new
lamentations.  Daliarte  with  the  men  of  these
gallies  went  to  the  field,  where  searching
smong  the  dead  he  found  many  Christian
princes  whom  he  wished  to  carry  to  his  own
island,  and  there  give  them  burial,  with  those
who  were  already  in  the  city,  Vernao,  Ar-
jkedos,  lieciudus,  Belagriz,  and  the  others,
o  M  o

•if     i.^      w


412

They  could  scarcely  remove  them  for  excecù-
ing  sorrow.  And  though  the  air  had  sfujie-
what  preserved  them,  and  thcid^y  somewhat
J;ept  off  corruption,  yet  it'  Dahurte  and  his
people  had  not  come  properly  provided,  they
could  not  have  borne  it.  Three  days  were
they  busied  in  tliis  search,  tor  among  so
great  a  multitude,  the  bodies  were  not  easily
found  :  and  durinii;  this  time,  the  women  and
old  men  whom  Pnmaleon  had  sent  from  the
city,  came  to  the  field  to  look  tor  their  hus-
bands, and  sons,  and  brothers,  that  they  might
give  them  burial.  Such  lamentation  did  they
make  over  them  when  they  found  them,  that
Daliarte  could  not  bear  to  hear  it.

Thar  SFime  day  another  thing  happened,
which  occ  isioned  fVe<h  dismay  :  six  other
gailics,  cov3red  with  the  same  sad  symbols
as  the  oihers,  entered  the  port,  and  finding
tli^  Christians'  vessels,  would  have  forced
their  w<iy  by  battle.  Dai'arte  prevented  this,
knowing  that  Targiana  and  the  princess  Ar-
menia came  in  them,  for  the  botlies  of  Al-
bayzar  and  of  the  soldan  of  Persia.  Having
made  themselves  known,  by  consent  of  those


413

of  the  land,  tlicy  landed  with  certain  da?ne3
and  damsels  clad  in  black,  and  having  every
thing  about  them  of  the  same  colour.  "When
Targiana  found  the  bodj'of  Albayzar  pierced
vith  wounds,  sht  threw  herself  upon  it  and
held  it  in  her  arms,  lamenting  over  it,  not  re-
garding the  state  of  thebody,  by  reason  of  the
greatness  of  her  love  and  grief.  Armenia
did  the  same  to  her  brother  the  soldan  of  Per-
sia. Targiana  was  well  known  in  that  land*
and  being  generally  v.ell  beloved  for  her
good  conditions,  there  was  not  one  among
the  Chri>tians  who  couM  refrain  from  tears,
seeing  her  in  such  sorrow.  Having  embark-
ed the  bodies  of  Albayzar  and  the  soldan,
Targiana  and  Armenia  wont  on  board,  and
rowed  away,  itjvoking  plagues  and  curses  up-
on Constantinople.  The  l;odies  of  these  prin-
ces were  embalmed  and  filled  with  precious
spices  which  Targiana  had  brought  with  her.
They  arrived  at  a  city  v.hich  was  a  sea  port,
where  the  Great  Turk  received  them,  and
made  sumptuous  obsequies;  but  these  are  not
desfribed,  being  the  works  ot  the  enemies.
Of  Tar^i;i:ia  it  is  written,  that  among  other
uords  wliich    slic  cxchringed   with   Daliarte,


414

she  learnt  from  him  that  her  friends  were
living  and  under  liis  protection,  and  thai  she
showed  great  desire  to  see  them  again,  and
bade  him  commend  her  to  each  ot  them  se-
parateh'  ;  and  then  took  her  leave.  Targiana
remained  a  widow  all  the  rest  of  her  lite,
for  the  love  which  she  had  borne  Alba3'zar
was  such,  that  she  never  would  consent  to
marry  again  ;  so  that  neither  the  entreaties
of  her  father  while  he  lived  availed  any  thing,
nor  of  her  vassals  after  his  death,  ni)r  the
force  of  certain  neighbouring  princes  who
wooed  her,  and  for  that  reason  made  war
upon  her.

She  had  a  daughter  by  Albayzar  whom  he
named  Alchediana  after  his  mother,  and  at
his  death  he  left  her  great  with  a  son,  whom
Targiana  named  Albayzar,  in  memory  of  his
father.  He  was  afterwards  a  mighty  prince,
and  succeeded  to  the  states  of  the  Turk  his
Grandfather,  and  was  moreover  soldan  of
Babylon.  He  proved  a  valiant  man,  and  fa-
mous in  arms,  a  great  innamorato,  and  some-
thing voluptuous,  cruel,  and  a  great  enemy
to  the  Christians,  as  one  who  had  been  bred


415

up  in  hatred  of  them,  the  death  of  his  fa-
ther being  daily  before  his  eyes  ;  and  he  bore
the  like  hatred  against  the  sons  of  Palmerin
and  of  tlie  Icniglit  of  the  Savage,  and  tiic
otlicr  princes.  There  were  great  wars  and
notabie  battles  between  them,  as  may  be  seen
in  tlie  chroniele  of  the  second  Don  Duardos,
son  of  Palmerin  of  England.

Armenia  the  heiress  of  the  Persian  state,
after  the  death  of  her  brother,  married  by
her  vassals'  choice  a  young  prince,  her  kins-
man, who  was  worth}'  of  her  and  this  great
rank.  She  had  sons  by  him,  of  whom  the
eldest  was  called  Behaazem,  a  warrior  of
singular  prowess,  and  the  great  friend  of  the
second  Aibayzar,  whose  sister,  Alchediana,
he  married.  They  twain  were  alike  in  their
will  and  deeds,  and  great  feats  are  recorded
of  them  in  the  Chronicles  of  England,  sucli
as  well  deserve  to  be  held  in  remembrance,
even  though  they  were  done  by  enemies.


4\G


CHAPTER   171.


Targiana  and  her  gallies  being  departed,  the
saire  Diiiiarte  went  into  the  city,  and  as-
seinbled  together  ail  the  people  that  could
be  found.  And  as  he  now  despaired  of  the
lives  of  Primaleon  and  Florendos  his  son,  for
their  wounds  gave  no  good  hope,  he  ad-
dressed the  people,  desiring  thera  to  take
their  loss  as  patiently  as  they  criuld,  and
not  to  dismay  themselves  :  but  that  they
shouhl  provide  for  the  re-edifs'ing  their  cit\',
not  only  to  secure  themselves  from  the  dan-
ger of  their  enemies,  but  to  witness  to  the
world,  that  fortune  had  not  the  power  to
root  out  Cjtiite  the  name  of  the  noble  city
of  Constantinople,    as   she    had   suuverled


417

the  memory  of  so  many  other  iamous  and
renowned  cities.

Beside,  the}'  should  call  home  again  thos«
citizens,  who,  l)y  reason  of  age  and  dehihty,
had  taken  themselves  to  the  near  adjoining
fortresses,  ana  by  a  general  voice  chusc
them  ii  governor,  for  otherwise  the^  should
not  contain  themselves  within  bounds  of
assurance.  And  therefore,  quoth  he,  chuse
you  a  governor,  lest  peradventure  the
emperor  Primaleon,  and  prince  Florendos
his  son,  should  hnish  their  lives  by  the
hurts  they  have  received  in  the  battle,  and
the  young  pi  nice  Irimaleon,  son  of  flo-
rendos, remain  inheritor  of  the  empire.
But  elect  iiim  for  a  certain  time  only,  and
at  the  e.ip.iaiion  thereof  chuse  another,
or  re-eiect  the  same  if  his  deeds  sliall  have
been  sucn  as  to  descivt  it.  And  tliis  being
the  aianner,  no  man  vsillso  demean  him-
self as  to  lose  so  great  a  clmrge,  and  remain
inlainv^us,  as  Having  been  found  unworthy
of  It.  After  some  time,  when  prince  Prima-
leon sliall  beoi  sutlicient  age  to  take  upon  him
the  command,  he  shall  come  and  assume  the


418

sceptre  of  his  estates.  Let  it  not  grieve  you
that  lie  sliould  be  bred  up  away  from  you;
this  must  be  doîie  lor  t\. o  reasons.  First,
because  it"  his  father  and  grandfather  die
he  will  be  Icfc  destitute  of  friends  and  kins-
men, and  any  powerful  vassal  who  should
cluise  to  tyrannize  over  the  land,  might  do
with  him  what  he  pleased  ;  as  might  the
Turks  also  if  they  should  return  unto  this
city.  The  other  reason  is,  that  where  he
now  is  he  will  be  bred  up  in  all  security,  and
in  the  company  of  other  nolde  princes,  with
whom  he  shall  exercise  knightly  arms,  and
learn  the  rules  of  discretion  and  viire.e,
wherewith  it  is  necessary  a  prince  shtJidd
be  adorned,  and  whereby  he  mav  be  uortliy
to  pos-^ess  the  name  and  douiinion  of  his
forefathers.  Moreover,  while  otiiers  re-
member that  they  have  their  natural  lord
living  who  will  one  day  come  and  look  to
their  actions,  they  will  live  with  such  respect
to  this,  tha*"  the  jjcop'e  sliall  have  less  rea>oa
to  complain.  AH  this  I  pray  you  rem«'ml>er
as  the  v"ssai.s  and  fri'-nds  of  yonr  prince.
And  if,  as  I  have  said,  it  shouîl  please  («od
that  tlie  emperor  Primalcoa  should  at  liiis


419

time  end  his  days,  I  will  visit  3'ou  whenever
it  is  nccdiul  lor  the  state  of  the  coimtry.

Much  did  they  tluink  him  for  this  advice,
tlioiigh  they  were  not  a  little  aggrieved,  that
there  was  no  greater  assurance  of  the  em-
peror Primaleon's  hie  :  and  alter  nuuiy  times
asking  that  they  might  have  their  prince,
orsee  !iim,  which  he  for  good  reasons  denied,
they  requested  of  him,  that  he  v/ould  tell
them  in  what  place  he  was  nourished,  that
they  might  come  sometimes  to  visit  him  as
their  lord  and  sovereign.

Neither  may  this  he,  replied  Baliarte,  till
time  permits  :  the  place  where  your  prince
is  nouriiihcd  is  lhe  Perilous  isle,  which
some  lime  belonged  to  the  sage  I  rganda
but  ai  tliis  time  is  mine,  for  that  my  brothei*
Pahnerin  of  England,  who  conquered  it  with
his  sword  ond  great  loss  of  his  blood,  bestow^
cd  it  upon  me.

There  being  now  nothing  more  to  say  or
do;  he  ti.ok  ill  •  body  of  the  old  ciiihcror
Avhicli  was  embalmed  anil  in  the  mouaolcry


4€0

of  Saint  Clara,  and  in  company  with  the
other  dead,  put  it  on  board  a  galley.  Pri-
maleon,  Don  Uuardos,  a:id  iheir  sons,  Be-
roldo,  Graciano,  Floranian,  and  B!andi('on,
who  were  all  lying  as  dead  persons,  being
bereft  of  their  senses  by  virtue  of  the  oint-
ment, were  laid  in  another  galley,  where
their  wounds  were  viaited  very  diligently  as
their  great  peril  required.

Then  the  gallies  departing  from  the  city,  the
people  began  to  lament  exceedingly,  think-
ing it  a  grievous  thing  tliat  they  might  not
possess  even  tlie  bones  of  their  princes.
Daharte  sailing  witti  win  !  at  will,  came
within  sigiit  of  the  Perilous  Isle,  where  so
soon  as  che  galhes  were  see  i,  tidings  were
carried  to  the  empress  Poiinarda,  and  the
other  princesses,  who  went  on  foot  to  the
port  to  meet  them,  feeling  as  little  wearied
as  thoua,h  the  way  had  been  shorter,  and
they  accustomed  to  greater  travail.  But
where  the  heart  is  concerned  it  is  unweari-
able  ;  for  as  ye  have  heard,  when  Palmeriu
won  this  island  he  found  the  way  from  the
port   so  diiiicult,  that  he   was  fain  to  stop


421

many  times,    and  rest    himself.      Daliarie
came    with  such    signs   of   sorrow,   as    re-
newed  the  memory  of  the  past  evils  ;  there
was    no  wind  that  day,  the  black  sails  were
stretched  out,  and  in  the  midst  of  each  was
death  painted  with  a  sepulchre  behind  him  :
the  oars  were  black,  and  all  the  ropes  and
every  thing  else    in  the  gallics  of  the   same
dolorous  colour.      They   who    were   at   the
oars   were  in  the  same  sad  livery,  and  they
came  on   rowing  in  silence,    like    specties
rather  than  men.    When  they  came  to  land,
and  lhe  empress  Polinarda  saw  the  body  of
the  emperor  Palmerin,  her  husband,  taken
out,  overcome  with  grief  and  Vvcakness,  she
fainted.     Daliarte  ordered  all  the  biers  to  be
landed  on   which  the  dead  and    the  living
were  carried,  with  little  difference  between
them  :    he    having   so    ordered    it   for    the
greater   security    of  their    lives,    of  which
however    he    had    little    hope.      So    being
borne    as  gently  as    might   be   upon   mens
shoulders,  they  began  their  way.     Kehind
the   biers  went   the  empress,   accompanied
with  Gridonia,  the   empress  of  AUemaign,
the  queen  of  Trance,  and  Fleridaher  daugh-

AOL.  IV.  2     o


4Cí2

ter,  lhe  (]iiccn  of  S[«aiii,  and  tlic  ollicr
queens  and  princesses,  tíUuig  tlíc  air  wiili
sliricks  and  lamentations,  and  tearing  their
hair,  in  such  excess  of  passion  that  none
coukl  prevent  them:  they  who  carried  liie
biers  were  moved  to  sucli  com  passion  that
they  could  scant  proceed.  'I  his  griel  was
general  in  them;  for  though  Flerida,  Cîrido-
iiia,  Miraguarda,  Lionarda,  the  princess
Polinarda,  and  other  of  the  j>rincesscs,  were
consoled  with  the  assurar.ce  that  there  was
still  some  hope  of  their  husbands  lives,  yet
grief  and  love,  and  what  the}'  saw  before
them,  would  riot  let  them  give  credit  to
this,  nor  tcni[!er  their  passion,  tliinking
that  these  words  were  only  feigned  eon->o-
lations,  necessary  at  such  a  time.

Having  reached  the  place  where  the  perron
was,  whereof  ye  have  heard,  and  which  was
the  half  way,  they  who  carried  the  biers
halted  to  take  rest,  and  then  those  ladies  hav-
ing time  to  satisfy  their  desire,  each  went  to
the  bier  ^^  hereon  that  which  most  grieved  her
was  laid,  and  with  tears  washed  the  wounds  and
the  blocd  with  which  some  of  them  were  still


423

covered,  and  covered  them  \YÍtli  their  bright
and  beantilul  tresses,  and  with  the  sleeve
of  their  garments  wiped  them,  as  if  those
remedies  had  brouglit  some  relief"  to  their
affliction; — l)iit  this  was  not  permitted  to
Flcrida,  nor  to  those  wliose  husbands  might
have  received  hurl  by  being  disturbed.  And
from  time  to  time  they  lifted  up  their  faces,
Avhich  were  bathed  in  tears,  one  calling  to
the  other,  as  if  looking  for  consolation  ; —
but  all  stood  in  need  of  it,  and  none  could
bestow  it  on  another:  and  in  that  despair
tliey  fell  again  upon  the  biers.  Daliartc,  when
he  found  that  no  words  which  he  could
use  were  of  any  elfect  to  turn  them  from
their  intent,  full  of  the  same  grief  himself,
sate  himself  down  upon  a  stone,  waiting
till  they  should  be  weary  of  weeping,  and
their  passion  liiid  an  interval,  and  allow
thciu  to  proceed  on  their  way.  And  there
tiiinking  on  this  great  loss  and  great  mi-
sery, and  wiîh  what  reason  the  deaili  of  so
mail)  and  such  men  might  be  lamented,  his
heart  could  not  bear  it,  and  he  threw  himself
on  his  f  ice  upon  the  stone  :  for  he  could
not  bear  to  see  iierida  tear  her  face,  look-

e.  o  '2


424

ing  up  to  heiivcn,  and  uttering  shrieks
which  rang  through  the  whole  Isle,  and
flinging  to  lhe  hier  of  Don  Duardos  andla-
jnenting  all  their  misfortunes,  and  accusing
time  and  fortune  that  they  had  left  her  to  so
many  miseries,  and  bereft  her  of  all  she  held
dear,  Polinarda  and  the  queen  of  Thrace,
her  daughter-in-law,  accompanied  her  with
the  like  lamentations.  In  another  part,
Gridonia  and  JSIiraguarda  were  bewailing
in  the  same  manner,  and  all  the  other
queens,  princesses,  and  ladies,  for  there
was  not  one  among  them  all  who  had  not
great  part  in  this  great  destruction.  Ar-
lanza  and  Cardiga,  the  wives  of  Dramuzi-
ando  and  Almourol,  filled  the  whole  moun-
tain with  their  dismal  cries.  Thus  they  con-
tinued till  their  passion  abated  from  exhaus-
tion, and  Argentao  found  opportunity  to
bid  the  bearers  proceed  ;  for  Daliarte  was
so  overcome  by  the  misery  before  his  eyes,
that  he  had  no  thought  to  do  anything.

So  they  took  up  the  biers  and  proceeded
in  the  same  order  as  before  till  they  had
reached   the   summit  of  the  island.     Great


4C5

was  the  prudence  of  Daliarte  in  making
those  who  were  not  dead  appeal  so,  or  else
it  was  the  disposition  of  fortune  to  prevent
farrlier  ill,  for  had  they  come  in  their  senses,
and  seen  this  dolorous  welcoming,  their  bo-
dies lacking  blood  and  strength,  grief  might
liave  (Ftstroyefl  them.  I  may  be  excused
from  relating  all  the  delays  which  took  place
and  all  the  swoonin<;s  and  manifestations  of
sorrow,  i'ov  it  is  not  well  to  fill  up  ail  with
misery  :  every  one  may  conceive  what  would
he  the  state  of  these  ladies,  vtho  had  lost  hus-
band>,  sons,  kin;?,donis  an  I  stares,  and  were
now  in  ari  island,  without  neighbourhood  and
■without  ho|)e  of  any  good  fortune.  One  con-
tcnlment  only  tluy  felt  amid  their  grief;
the  love  which  they  had  borne  their  hus-
bands was  so  deeply  rooted,  that  they  re-
joiced to  remain  with  them  even  when  dead.

Eut  it  was  the  will  of  fortune  that  this  slunild
not  be  the  chief  remedy  for  many  of  them  ;
lor  al'ier  tiu^y  liad  reached  the  castle,  the
dead  were  carried  to  the  temple  and  ilw^y
whw  Wire  iiot  dead  were  looked  to  wiih  such
tlillgence,  that  in  few  days  they  began  to
2  o  3


42G

show  some  hope  of  rcrovery.  This  certain-
ty Duliarte  kept  to  iHiiiielf,  not  cluising  to
coininLinieate  it  to  those  piincesscs,  Icaring
that  they  would  prevail  by  their  impor-
tunity and  visit  their  husbands,  and  thereby
peradventure  undo  the  work  oF  the  reme-
dies. After  some  time  longer,  Prnna-
leon  was  the  first  who  recovered  strength
enough  to  be  visited  ;  then  Pahnerin  of  Eng-
land, and  the  others  afterwards.  Dramu-
ziando  and  the  knight  of  the  Savage  often
foil  back  into  greater  danger,  and  were
longer  rocoveriníí  :  but  when  thev  were  all
at  length  sale, joy  then  began  to  appear  anew,
and  the  clouds  of  sorrow  to  pass  away.  The
dead,  greatly  as  tliey  were  lamented,  began,
according  to  the  course  of  nature,  to  be  for-
gotten, and  the  recovery  of  the  living  was
regarded  with  such  joy,  that  none  thought
of  the  past.  The  empress,  though  she  re-
membered her  husband  with  whom  she  had
seen  so  much  greatness,  so  many  triumphs,
and  sueli  sovereign  command,  yet  caliin''-  to
mind  the  great  age  at  which  he  had  depart-
ed, which  was  not  till  he  had  become  decrepid,
healed  this  grief,  as  women  heal  all  things,  by


427

beholding  her  son  alive,  and  her  daughters,
and  her  grandchildren  ;  for  with  this  most
women  forget  their  husbands, — and  many
with  less  than  this.


42S


CHAPTER  TUE  LAST.


It  is  written  in  tlie  General  Chronicle  of
EnglxTnd,  from  which  this  history  is  tiiken,
that  though  those  ladies  wiiuse  husbands
and  sons  survived,  put  all  past  losses  in  Ibr-
getfuincss.  It  was  not  so  witli  these  survivors;
contrariwise  ihe  chronicle  saith,  that  Don
Duardos  and  Primaleon  always  resented  such
great  sorrow  for  the  death  of  their  friends,
that  never  after  were  they  joyitil,  so  long  as
they  lived.  The  others  Leing  young  men
newly  married,  though  they  felt  these  mis-
fortunes, nevertheless  it  was  not  with  the
same  excess  as  these  tAvo,  for  the  love  of
their  wives,  for  whom  they  had  laboured  so
long,  whom  they  had  obtained  so  lately,  and
loved  so  well,  gave  occasion  to  some  con-


429

tentinent  and  man}'  paslime?.  Joannes  de
Esbrec  who  composed  the  chronicle  of
those  times,  Jay  mes  Bi  ut,  and  Anrico
Frustro,  (authentic  writers,)  affirm  that
Primaleon,  Don  Duardos,  and  all  the  others
remained  in  the  island  till  the  dead  were
interred,  in  which  there  was  some  delay  ;
the  reason  was,  that  the  sage  Daliarte  wished
to  build  a  new  temple  lor  this  purpose,  the
which,  with  the  help  of  Argentao,  was  in  short
time  edified,  and  as  sumptuously  ornamented
as  beseemed  the  occasion.  It  had  appur-
tenances of  marvellous  grandeur,  which
were  made  more  leisurely  ;  but  that  part
which  was  tirst  edified  Daliarte  called  the
Sepulchre  of  the  Princes,  by  which  name  the
Island  was  afterwards  known.  In  the  highest
and  most  honourable  place  the  emperor  Pal-
merin  was  pfticed,  being  embalmed,  seated
upon  a  full  rich  seat,  answerable  to  his  dig-
nity; his  beard  was  long  and  white,  and
his  appearance  grave  and  alVable,  such  as
it  was  wont  to  be  while  he  lived;  on  his  right
hand  was  the  emperor  V'ernao  his  >on  in  law  :
on  his  left  Arnedos  and  Recindos  king-;  of
Spain  and  France  ;  below  them    Estreiante


430

King  of  Iluiignry,  Diagonalto  of  Navarre,
Alljunis  of  i*"ri>ci,  Poliiiardo,  J)rapos  of  ÎSor-
niandy,  ami  lîricar,  aiul  tlie  ntliors  in   like
manner,  according  lo  t'lcir  ijrcccdcncy  :  ail
tiie^c  were  pi  xed.  in  niches  of  the  wail,  and
the  eni;;tvur  at  tiie  head  tiieic<jf  ;  with  tlie
giant    Aliiiouroi    behind    liim,    holchng    his
mace  in  his  hands,  as   Uh   gtiard.     At  the
entrance  of  the  gate^  in  a  high  and  fitting
situation,   was  the  soldaii  Belagiiz,  between
king  í  arnacs  his  brother  in  law,  and  ]\Iay-
ortes    the    Gra  id    Khan.      Each    of   these
])rinee3  and  knights  had  his  shield  hmig  up
above   hiui,   with    the   colours   and   dcMces
^vllich  he  liad  chiefly  used  in  his  life-lime,
and   Ilia  name  written   on  me   rim  thereof.
Their  oh-ejjUics    were    pcTi'orined    with    all
the    solemnity    and    ceremony    which    was
possible,  and  it  may  be  beUeved^wiih  notable
gnef.

This  being  finished  the  prnccs  resolved  to  go
in  person  and  visit  their  kingdoms  and  lord-
ships, wliere  thiir  vassals  expected  them,
heing  now  ceriihed  of  their  recovery  ;  for
I)aliarte,  to  prevent  tumidts  and  dissenti  ai-í


431

liad  this  notified  every  where.  Daharle  made
them  a  spceeh  full  oi"  good  advice  and  preg-
nant reasons,  touching   the  manner   which
they  ouglit  to  observe  in  the  government  of
their  kin2;doms;  and  requesting  them  more-
over, since  those  princesses  whom  they  had
newly  married,  some  had    brought  children
with  them   when  they  arrived  at  the  island,
others  had  arrived  great  wiih  i;liild,and  had
now  childed,  that  they  would  think  it  good
lo  let  ihtir  sons  be  brought  up  the;e,  to  the
end   that  alterwards,  wliat  with  the  remem-
brance   of  tlieir   breeding  lip,  and  the  love
whi(;h  they  would  thus  feel,  they  might  ever
after  coiitinue  in  the  same  friendship  as  rheir
iaihers,   and   each   vviili   the    lavour   of  his
friends  safely  and  peaceably  possess  his  do-
minions.     Moreover,    he  would    labour    to
train  them  in  all  good  and  virtuous  thev.cs,
beseeming  their  persons.     There  were  con-
sultations among  tiicse  princes  before  they
replied    lo   Daliarte  :    they    who   asked    the
advice  of  their    wives,  being  overcoine   by
their  tears,  could  ill  consent  to  be  sepa  late
from  tlic  com[)any  of  their  children  ;  in  Hne
however,    being   convinced    by    the  aulho-


432

rity  of  Diiliartc^  and  the  great  profit  wliicli
must  needs  result  to  those  who  should  be
brought  up  by  so  wise  a  man,  they  consented
to  leave  their  children  in  the  Island  under
his  care,  till  they  were  of  age  to  bear  arms.
They  say  that  Aliraguarda,  when  she  came
from  Constantinople,  brought  a  son  with  her
who  was  called  Priuialeon,  like  his  grand-
father, and  came  pregnant  wirh  Gridonia.
The  empress  Basilia  had  two  sons  ;  the  one
was  called  Trineo,  the  second  Vernao,
after  his  father,  being  born  after  his  death.
Of  Clarisia,  the  wife  of  Graciano,  Arnedos
'.vas  born  :  of  Onistaldo,  the  wife  of  Beroldo,
Rccindos  :  Belcar  left  the  second  Belcar,
and  Francian  left  Polendos,  who  was  king  of
Thcssaly.  Palmerin,  surnamed  of  Lacede-
monia,  was  born  of  Platir  and  Sidela  ;  of
Armisia  and  Pompides,  Doriel,  w'ho  after
his  father's  death  reigned  in  Scotland.  Of
Leonida  and  Frisol,  Drapos  king  of  Nor-
mandy :  of  Arnalta  a  daughter,  who  was
called  Floranda  :  Germam  of  Orleans  left
Ardiman  of  F'ranee,  who  proved  an  excel-
lent knight.  Tlie  great  Palmerin  begat  the
second  Don  Daardos,  who  afterwards  reign-


4í>3

ta  in  England;  as  brave  as  his  father,  anã.
as  great  an  innamorato,  but  less  fortunate
in  love,  as  is  shown  in  the  chronicle  of  his
feats.  Joannes  de  Esbrec  allinns,  that  after
Paliuerin  and  Polinarda  left  the  island  and
returned  to  England  with  his  father  and  mo-
ther, they  had  a  daughter  whom  they  called
rierida.  Jaymes  dc  Biut  and  Anrico
Frustro  speak  only  of  the  second  Don
Duardos,  who  was  left  in  the  Island  :  it
seems  that  Joannes  de  Esbrec  is  the  more
accurate,  he  being  of  the  greatest  authority
in  all  these  things.  And  in  the  chronicle
of  the  second  Don  Duardos,  which  pro-
ceedeth  from  this  and  is  not  yet  translated,
mucli  mention  is  made  of  this  Flerida.  Of
the  knight  of  the  Savage  and  the  queen  of
Thrace,  Vasperaldo  was  born  ;  who  also  was
left  in  the  Island,  and  was  like  his  fiither  in
arms,  and  in  love  a  little  more  constant.
Torneio,  a  JMaccdonian  author,  says  that
after  some  years  they  had  a  daughter  named
Carmclia,  after  her  ynother's  grandmother,
whose  beauty  was  so  admirable  as  to  occa-
sion some  envy  in  Valeriza  of  Spain,  and  in
Flerida  her  cousin,  from   which   many   ad-

VOL.  IV.  2  P


434

ventures,  or  misadventures  arose,  which
are  trcaieil  of  at  huge  in  the  chronicle  of
the  second  Don  Duardos,  he  liaving  been
her  servant,  and  httle  favoured  by  her.  Of
Almourol  and  Cardiga  the  second  Almourol
was  born,  to  whom  his  mother  gave  that
name,  by  reason  of  the  love  she  bare  his  fa-
ther, and  that  the  sou  was  born  after  his
death.  From  Dramiiziando  and  Arlanza,
Pavorante  the  Strong,  who  remained  in  the
Island  ;  afterwards  they  had  a  daughter
named  Lastriza,  who  married  the  second
Almourol.  All  these  princes,  who  were  born
in  the  Island,  remained  in  it,  and  were
brought  up  under  the  discipline  of  Daliarte,
till  they  were  of  an  age  to  receive  knight-
hood, when  he  knighted  some  of  them  with
his  own  hand.

The  empress  Polinarda,  the  empress  Basilia,
ami  the  queens  of  France  and  Spain,  and
Thessaly,  and  all  the  other  j)rincesses  and
ladies  whose  husbands  were  buried  there,
abode  in  that  island  ail  the  days  of  their  life,
for  they  would  not  returii  to  tiieir  kingdoms,
where  they  could  not  longer  et\joy  that  con-


435

tentnient  with  wliich  they  harl  formerly  pos-
sessed them:  only  Arnalta  queen  of  Navarre,
taking  her  daughter  with  her,  went  to  her
own  dominions,  and  this  daughter  alterwards,
by  reason  of  her  great  beauty,  w'as  sued  to  by
many.  Cardiga  the  wife  of  Ahnourol,  by
Beroldo's  desire,  returned  to  Spain,  where  she
possessed  the  castles  of  Ahnourol  and  C;ir-
diga,  which  were  so  called  iVom  her  and  her
husband.  To  Dramuziando  the  island  was
given  which  had  been  his  wife's  father's  :  he
making  such  terms  with  Argentao,  as  fully
contented  him.  Selviam,  Armcîo,  and  Ho-
borantc,  remained  in  lhe  island,  to  be  fos-
terers of  these  young  princes,  under  Daliarte's
direction  ;  each  one  had  especial  charge  of
the  one  that  must  concerned  him  ;  but  Al-
mourol  was  commended  to  their  joint  care,
he  seeming  to  be  the  most  destitute  of  all.

When  Primaleon,  Don  Duardos,  and  the
other  princes  Icit  the  Isle,  their  departure  was
not  taken  without  tears,  which  renewed  the
remembrance  of  former  sorrows.  On  reach-
ing their  kingdoms  some  of  them  had  much
to  do  in  putting  them  in  order.     Primaleon


436

had  niosl  to  do  in  re-buiidiiig  Constantin-
ople. He  was  received  by  his  vassals  as  one
sent  from  heaven  ;  but  at  his  entrance  he
would  permit  no  feasts  nor  public  rejoicings.

In  process  of  time  his  court  recovered  all
its  greatness,  and  was  frequented,  as  in  old
times,  with  knights  both  of  that  and  of  other
countries;  but  after  Valeriza  in  Spain,  Car-
melia  in  Thrace,  and  Flerida  in  England,  be-
gan to  astonish  the  world  with  their  beauty,
then  things  were  changed,  and  in  each  of
these  kingdoms  there  was  a  great  court.  At
one  time  all  came  to  visit  the  emperor  Pri-
maleon  in  Constantinople,  whereby  the
greatness  and  majesiy  of  that  court  was
made  to  exceed  whatever  it  had  been  be-
fore ;  but  then  so  many  disasters  and  ad-
ventures succeeded,  that  Palmerin  of  Eng-
land, Florendos,  he  of  the  Savage,  and  all
the  others  of  their  time,  returned  to  seek  ad-
ventures with  as  much  danger  of  their  persons
as  in  the  days  of  their  youth.  Their  sons,
when  they  left  the  Island  of  the  Sepulchre
of  Princes,  and  were  knighted,  some  of  them
by  Daliarte's  hand,  they  astonished  the  world


437

with  theii'  exploits.  The  second  Don  Duar-
dos  was  the  flower  of  them  all  :  whoso  is  cu-
rious to  sec  the  prowess  of  these  kniglits,  let
him  read  the  chronicle  of  this  Don  Duardos,
and  in  it  he  shall  see  novelties  and  wonders,
which  he  may  also  see  in  the  chronicles  of
Palmerin  of  England  and  of  tlie  knight  of
the  Savage  ;  of  Pompides,  and  of  king  Flo-
raman  of  Sardinia;  and  of  the  second  Al-
bayzar,  son  of  Albayzar  the  great  soldan  of
Babylon,  who  died  in  this  great  war,  the
history  whereof  ye  have  heard  ;  and  of  Be-
liaazem  soldan  of  Persia  ;  for  their  feats  dis-
mayed the  whole  world.  In  these  books  also
would  be  found  many  memorable  things  of
the  great  sage  Daliarte,  who  going  about  to
succour  his  Iriends  and  kinsmen  with  his  in-
dustry, skill,  and  valour,  being  an  old  man,
was  slain  with  many  wounds  upon  a  bridge  in
Ireland,  forwliich  cause  nothing  more  is  re-
lated of  those  c|ueens  and  princesses  who  re-
mained in  the  Island  of  the  Sepulchre  of
Princes  ;  for  whenever  he  left  it  he  enchanted
it  in  such  manner  that  it  became  invisible,  and
at  his  death  he  had  no  time  to  disenchant  it,
wherefore  it  is  believed  that  it  is  at  this  day


438

in  the  state  in  which  he  left  it.  This  would
be  a  notable  thing  to  see,  if  any  one  in  our
time  should  by  his  knowledge  be  able  to  dis-
enchant it,  and  see  if  the  emperor  Pahneiin
de  Oliva  be  still  there,  with  the  other  kings,
princes,  and  knights,  who  were  there  deposit-
ed after  the  manner  which  ye  have  heard,
and  the  queens  and  princesses  also  who  re-
mained alive,  accompanying  the  empress,
who  may  well  be  envied  ;  for  friendship  so
rare,  and  actions  so  famous,  arc  worthy  of
great  praise,  and  to  be  greatly  envied.


THE    END.


fV.  Pople,  Printer,
2Î,  Old  Boswell  Court,  Strand.


ERRORS.


Vol.  I.


Page  5-2,  Line  16,  for  Dttred  read  Ditreo

54, 11,  for  Bt:tziigri  read  Bela^rii

6o, 9,  strike  out  jd/w

2-27, 19,  strike*  out  eternal  commendation.

934, 4,  tor  to  read  of

253, 4,  for  hollow  read  hollous

269,  last  line,  tor  ought  not  read  oii^-'ti  vam

303,  Note,  line  4,  tor  vasmi  read  russii

329,  line  20,  for  Their  rciid  Ihcsc

345, 18,  for  be  read  /;f

334,  last  line,  ior found  read  f cared

Vol.  II.

Page  65,  Line  6,  for  ithore  read  tt/icse

76, 10,  tor  resist  read  resent

132, g,  for  as  that  read  as  i;i  that

209,  — —  19,  after  secth  i/oit,  strike  out  the  comma

307, 11,  for  bad  carhuiel  read  had  a  carhaaet

34  Î, •  -21 ,  !or  City  read  i/ic  cittf

40»,  last  line,  for  this  read  t/iee,

Vol.  III.

Pag;e  20,  Line  12,  strike  out  u/iitA
(33,  ■  7,  for  cviiV  lead  ti'uw.


nORKS  BY  ROBERT  SOUTJIEY.


1.  Joan  of  Arc,  in  two  Vols.     Third  Edition.
Price  12s.

2.  Poems,  Vol.  I.  Fifth  Edition.     Price  5s.  f)d.
Vol.  n.  Third  Edition.   Price  5s.  6d.

3.  TiiAL.YBA  THE  Destuoyer,  2  Vols.    PHce
14s.

4.  Amadis  of  Gaul,  4  Vols.     Price  ll.  is.

5.  Metrical  Tales.     Price  5s.  6d.

6.  Specimens  of  the  Later  English  Poets,
3  Vols.     Price  11.  lis.  6"d.


In  the  Press,

The  Chronicle  of  theCid,  PiOdrigo  Diaz
OE  BiVAU,  from  the  Spanish,  with  an  historical
introduction,  Notes,  &c.


I


^^.^                  ^c  .  ^..^.-rr-
:.■•    et  ce*     ■    -'C,;  C^    -   *■:»

k      «      '    -     •'■     •  -c     <%^::4l  •   ■  <.    t

»"     "L     •  -  ,c<.     cc-T'     .íí:    f


<r«^   <«L


•H  f^      •

u  m  m

0)  CL,     «)

<a  o    •

il.  a  >


University  of  Toronto
Library


DO  NOT

REMOVE

THE

CARD

FROM

THIS

POCKET


Acme  Library  Card  Pocket
LOWE-MARTIN  CO.  LIMITED


.  ••  j»x  MM.  r.>flf«


•,■.•■  •'._■.■■   .v.-  .  -V;  ■         ■•Jit'-  •../=?,      ;    !«;-»ViA*Vl'i..
